
CAUGHT IN THE NET

By Emile Gaboriau




CHAPTER I.

PUTTING ON THE SCREW.

The cold on the 8th of February, 186-, was more intense than the
Parisians had experienced during the whole of the severe winter
which had preceded it, for at twelve o’clock on that day Chevalier’s
thermometer, so well known by the denizens of Paris, registered three
degrees below zero. The sky was overcast and full of threatening signs
of snow, while the moisture on the pavement and roads had frozen hard,
rendering traffic of all kinds exceedingly hazardous. The whole great
city wore an air of dreariness and desolation, for even when a thin
crust of ice covers the waters of the Seine, the mind involuntarily
turns to those who have neither food, shelter, nor fuel.

This bitterly cold day actually made the landlady of the Hotel de Perou,
though she was a hard, grasping woman of Auvergne, give a thought to the
condition of her lodgers, and one quite different from her usual idea of
obtaining the maximum of rent for the minimum of accommodation.

“The cold,” remarked she to her husband, who was busily engaged in
replenishing the stove with fuel, “is enough to frighten the wits out of
a Polar bear. In this kind of weather I always feel very anxious, for
it was during a winter like this that one of our lodgers hung himself, a
trick which cost us fifty francs, in good, honest money, besides giving
us a bad name in the neighborhood. The fact is, one never knows what
lodgers are capable of doing. You should go up to the top floor, and see
how they are getting on there.”

“Pooh, pooh!” replied her husband, M. Loupins; “they will do well
enough.”

“Is that really your opinion?”

“I know that I am right. Daddy Tantaine went out as soon as it was
light, and a short time afterward Paul Violaine came down. There is no
one upstairs now but little Rose, and I expect that she has been wise
enough to stick to her bed.”

“Ah!” answered the landlady rather spitefully. “I have made up my mind
regarding that young lady some time ago; she is a sight too pretty for
this house, and so I tell you.”

The Hotel de Perou stands in the Rue de la Hachette, not twenty steps
from the Place de Petit Pont; and no more cruelly sarcastic title could
ever have been conferred on a building. The extreme shabbiness of the
exterior of the house, the narrow, muddy street in which it stood,
the dingy windows covered with mud, and repaired with every variety of
patch,--all seemed to cry out to the passers by: “This is the chosen
abode of misery and destitution.”

The observer might have fancied it a robbers’ den, but he would have
been wrong; for the inhabitants were fairly honest. The Hotel de Perou
was one of those refuges, growing scarcer and more scarce every day,
where unhappy men and women, who had been worsted in the battle of life,
could find a shelter in return for the change remaining from the last
five-franc piece. They treat it as the shipwrecked mariner uses the rock
upon which he climbs from the whirl of the angry waters, and breathes
a deep sigh of relief as he collects his forces for a fresh effort.
However wretched existence may be, a protracted sojourn in such a
shelter as the Hotel de Perou would be out of the question. The chambers
in every floor of the house are divided into small slips by partitions,
covered with canvas and paper, and pleasantly termed rooms by M.
Loupins. The partitions were in a terrible condition, rickety and
unstable, and the paper with which they were covered torn and hanging
down in tatters; but the state of the attics was even more deplorable,
the ceilings of which were so low that the occupants had to stoop
continually, while the dormer windows admitted but a small amount of
light. A bedstead, with a straw mattress, a rickety table, and two
broken chairs, formed the sole furniture of these rooms. Miserable
as these dormitories were, the landlady asked and obtained twenty-two
francs for them by the month, as there was a fireplace in each, which
she always pointed out to intending tenants.

The young woman whom M. Loupins alluded to by the name of Rose was
seated in one of these dreary dens on this bitter winter’s day. Rose was
an exquisitely beautiful girl about eighteen years of age. She was very
fair; her long lashes partially concealed a pair of steely blue eyes,
and to a certain extent relieved their hard expression. Her ripe, red
lips, which seemed formed for love and kisses, permitted a glimpse of
a row of pearly teeth. Her bright waving hair grew low down upon her
forehead, and such of it as had escaped from the bondage of a cheap
comb, with which it was fastened, hung in wild luxuriance over her
exquisitely shaped neck and shoulders. She had thrown over her ragged
print gown the patched coverlet of the bed, and, crouched upon
the tattered hearthrug before the hearth, upon which a few sticks
smouldered, giving out hardly a particle of heat, she was telling her
fortune with a dirty pack of cards, endeavoring to console herself for
the privations of the day by the promise of future prosperity. She had
spread those arbiters of her destiny in a half circle before her, and
divided them into threes, each of which had a peculiar meaning, and her
breast rose and fell as she turned them up and read upon their faces
good fortune or ill-luck. Absorbed in this task, she paid but little
attention to the icy chilliness of the atmosphere, which made her
fingers stiff, and dyed her white hands purple.

“One, two, three,” she murmured in a low voice. “A fair man, that’s
sure to be Paul. One, two, three, money to the house. One, two, three,
troubles and vexations. One, two, three, the nine of spades; ah, dear!
more hardships and misery,--always that wretched card turning up with
its sad story!”

Rose seemed utterly downcast at the sight of the little piece of painted
cardboard, as though she had received certain intelligence of a
coming misfortune. She soon, however, recovered herself, and was again
shuffling the pack,--cut it, taking care to do so with her left hand,
spread them out before her, and again commenced counting: one, two,
three. This time the cards appeared to be more propitious, and held out
promises of success for the future.

“I am loved,” read she, as she gazed anxiously upon them,--“very much
loved! Here is rejoicing, and a letter from a dark man! See, here he
is,--the knave of clubs. Always the same,” she continued; “I cannot
strive against fate.”

Then, rising to her feet, she drew from a crack in the wall, which
formed a safe hiding-place for her secrets, a soiled and crumpled
letter, and, unfolding it, she read for perhaps the hundredth time these
words:--

“MADEMOISELLE,--

“To see you is to love you. I give you my word of honor that this is
true. The wretched hovel where your charms are hidden is no fit
abode for you. A home, worthy in every way to receive you, is at
your service--Rue de Douai. It has been taken in your name, as I am
straightforward in these matters. Think of my proposal, and make what
inquiries you like concerning me. I have not yet attained my majority,
but shall do so in five months and three days, when I shall inherit my
mother’s fortune. My father is wealthy, but old and infirm. From four to
six in the afternoon of the next few days I will be in a carriage at the
corner of the Place de Petit Pont.

“GASTON DE GANDELU.”


The cynical insolence of the letter, together with its entire want of
form, was a perfect example of the style affected by those loiterers
about town, known to the Parisians as “mashers;” and yet Rose did not
appear at all disgusted by the reception of such an unworthily worded
proposal, but, on the contrary, rather pleased by its contents. “If I
only dared,” mused she, with a sigh,--“ah, if I only dared!” For a time
she sat deeply immersed in thought, with her face buried in her hands,
until she was aroused from her meditations by the sound of an active and
youthful step upon the creaking stairs. “He has come back,” she gasped;
and with the agile movement of a cat she again concealed the letter
in its hiding-place, and she had scarcely done so, when Paul Violaine
entered the miserable room. He was a young man of twenty-three, of
slender figure, but admirably proportioned. His face was a perfect oval,
and his complexion of just that slight olive tint which betrays the
native of the south of France. A slight, silky moustache concealed his
upper lip, and gave his features that air of manliness in which they
would have otherwise been deficient. His curly chestnut hair fell
gracefully over a brow upon which an expression of pride was visible,
and enhanced the peculiar, restless glance of his large dark eyes. His
physical beauty, which was fully equal to that of Rose, was increased by
an aristocratic air, popularly believed to be only found in the scions
of noble families. The landlady, in her moments of good humor, used to
assert her belief that her lodger was a disguised prince; but if this
were the case, he was certainly one that had been overtaken by poverty.
His dress, to which the closest attention had been paid, revealed the
state of destitution in which he was,--not the destitution which openly
asks for alms, but the hidden poverty which shuns communication and
blushes at a single glance of pity. In this almost Arctic winter he wore
clothes rendered thin by the constant friction of the clothes brush,
over which was a light overcoat about as thick as the web of a spider.
His shoes were well blacked, but their condition told the piteous tale
of long walks in search of employment, or of that good luck which seems
to evade its pursuer.

Paul was holding a roll of manuscript in his hand, and as he entered
the room he threw it on the bed with a despairing gesture. “A failure
again!” exclaimed he, in accents of the utmost depression. “Nothing else
but failures!”

The young woman rose hastily to her feet; she appeared to have forgotten
the cards completely; the smile of satisfaction faded from her face and
her features, and an expression of utter weariness took its place.

“What! no success?” she cried, affecting a surprise which was evidently
assumed. “No success, after all your promises when you left me this
morning?”

“This morning, Rose, a ray of hope had penetrated my heart; but I have
been deceived, or rather I deceived myself, and I took my ardent desires
for so many promises which were certain to be fulfilled. The people that
I have been to have not even the kindness to say ‘No’ plain and flat;
they listen to all you have to say, and as soon as your back is turned
they forget your existence. The coin that passes around in this
infernal town is indeed nothing but idle words, and that is all that
poverty-stricken talent can expect.”

A silence of some duration ensued, and Paul was too much absorbed in
his own thoughts to notice the look of contempt with which Rose was
regarding him. His helpless resignation to adverse circumstances
appeared to have turned her to stone.

“A nice position we are in!” said she at last. “What do you think will
become of us?”

“Alas! I do not know.”

“Nor I. Yesterday Madame Loupins came to me and asked for the eleven
francs we owe here; and told me plainly that if within three days we did
not settle our account, she would turn us out; and I know enough of her
to be sure that she will keep her word. The detestable old hag would do
anything for the pleasure of seeing me on the streets.”

“Alone and friendless in the world,” muttered Paul, paying but little
attention to the young girl’s words, “without a creature or a relative
to care for you, or to lend you a helping hand.”

“We have not a copper in the world,” continued Rose with cruel
persistency; “I have sold everything that I had, to preserve the rags
that I am wearing. Not a scrap of wood remains, and we have not tasted
food since yesterday morning.”

To these words, which were uttered in a tone of the most bitter
reproach, the young man made no reply, but clasped his icily cold hands
against his forehead, as though in utter despair.

“Yes, that is a true picture of our position,” resumed Rose coldly,
her accents growing more and more contemptuous. “And I tell you that
something must be done at once, some means discovered, I care not what,
to relieve us from our present miserable state.”

Paul tore off his overcoat, and held it toward her.

“Take it, and pawn it,” exclaimed he; but the girl made no move.

“Is that all that you have to propose?” asked she, in the same glacial
tone.

“They will lend you three francs upon it, and with that we can get bread
and fuel.”

“And after that is gone?”

“After that--oh, we will think of our next step, and shall have time to
hit upon some plan. Time, a little time, is all that I require, Rose, to
break asunder the bonds which seem to fetter me. Some day success must
crown my efforts; and with success, Rose, dear, will come affluence, but
in the meantime we must learn to wait.”

“And where are the means to enable us to wait?”

“No matter; they will come. Only do what I tell you, and who can say
what to-morrow----”

Paul was still too much absorbed in his own thoughts to notice the
expression upon the young girl’s face; for had he done so, he would at
once have perceived that she was not in the humor to permit the matter
to be shelved in this manner.

“To-morrow!” she broke in sarcastically. “To-morrow,--always the same
pitiful cry. For months past we seem to have lived upon the word. Look
you here, Paul, you are no longer a child, and ought to be able to look
things straight in the face. What can I get on that threadbare coat of
yours? Perhaps three francs at the outside. How many days will that
last us? We will say three. And then, what then? Besides, can you not
understand that your dress is too shabby for you to make an impression
on the people you go to see? Well-dressed applicants only have
attention, and to obtain money, you must appear not to need it; and,
pray, what will people think of you if you have no overcoat? Without one
you will look ridiculous, and can hardly venture into the streets.”

“Hush!” cried Paul, “for pity’s sake, hush! for your words only prove to
me more plainly that you are like the rest of the world, and that want
of success is a pernicious crime in your eyes. You once had confidence
in me, and then you spoke in a very different strain.”

“Once indeed! but then I did not know--”

“No, Rose, it was not what you were then ignorant of; but it was that in
those days you loved me.

“Great heavens! I ask you, have I left one stone unturned? Have I
not gone from publisher to publisher to sell those songs of my own
composing--those songs that you sing so well? I have endeavored to get
pupils. What fresh efforts can I try? What would _you_ do, were you in
my place? Tell me, I beg you.”

And as Paul spoke, he grew more and more excited, while Rose still
maintained her manner of exasperating coolness.

“I know not,” she replied, after a brief pause; “but if I were a man, I
do not think I would permit the woman, for whom I pretended that I had
the most sincere affection, to be in want of the actual necessities of
life. I would strain every effort to obtain them.”

“I have no trade; I am no mechanic,” broke in Paul passionately.

“Then I would learn one. Pray how much does a man earn who climbs the
ladder with a bricklayer’s hod upon his shoulders? It may be hard work,
I know, but surely the business is not difficult to learn. You have, or
say you have, great musical talents. I say nothing about them; but had
I any vocal powers and if there was not a morsel to eat in the house,
I would go and sing in the taverns or even in the public streets, and
would earn money, and care little for the means by which I made it.”

“When you say those things, you seem to forget that I am an honest man.”

“One would really suppose that I had suggested some questionable act to
you. Your reply, Paul, plainly proves to me that you are one of those
who, for want of determination, fall, helpless, by the wayside in the
journey of life. They flaunt their rags and tatters in the eyes of the
world, and with saddened hearts and empty stomachs utter the boast,
‘I am an honest man.’ Do you think that, in order to be rich, you must
perforce be a rogue? This is simple imbecility.”

She uttered this tirade in clear and vibrant accents, and her eyes
gleamed with the fire of savage resolution. Her nature was one of those
cruel and energetic ones, which lead a woman to hurl a man from the
brink of the abyss to which she had conducted him, and to forget him
before he has ever reached the bottom.

This torrent of sarcasm brought out Paul’s real nature. His face
flushed, and rage began to gain the mastery over him. “Can you not
work?” he asked. “Why do you not do something instead of talking so
much?”

“That is not at all the same thing,” answered she coolly. “I was not
made for work.”

Paul made a threatening gesture. “You wretch!” exclaimed he.

“You are wrong,” she replied. “I am not a wretch; I am simply hungry.”

There seemed every prospect of an angry scene, when a slight sound
attracted the attention of the disputants, and, turning round, they saw
an old man standing upon the threshold of their open door. He was tall,
but stooped a good deal. He had high, thick brows, and a red nose; a
long, thick, grizzly beard covered the rest of his countenance. He wore
a pair of spectacles with colored glasses, which, to a great extent,
concealed the expression of his face. His whole attire indicated extreme
poverty. He wore a greasy coat, much frayed and torn at the pockets, and
which had carried away with it marks of all the walls against which it
had been rubbed when he had indulged a little too freely in the cheerful
glass. He seemed to belong to that class who consider it a work of
supererogation to disrobe before going to bed, and who just turn in on
such spot as the fancy of the moment may dictate. Paul and Rose both
recognized the old man from having continually met him when ascending
or descending the staircase, and knew that he rented the back attic, and
was called Daddy Tantaine. In an instant the idea flashed across Paul’s
mind that the dilapidated state of the partition permitted every word
spoken in one attic to be overheard in the other, and this did not tend
to soothe his exasperated feelings.

“What do you want here, sir?” asked he angrily. “And, pray, who gave you
permission to enter my room without leave?”

The old man did not seem at all put out by the threatening language of
his questioner. “I should be telling a fib,” answered he calmly, “if I
were to tell you that, being in my own room and hearing you quarrelling,
I did not hear every word of what you have been saying.”

“Sir!”

“Stop a bit, and don’t be in such a hurry, my young friend. You seem
disposed to quarrel, and, on my faith, I am not surprised; for when
there is no corn in the manger, the best tempered horse will bite and
kick.”

He uttered these words in the most soothing accents, and appeared
utterly unconscious of having committed any breach of etiquette in
entering the room.

“Well, sir,” said Paul, a flush of shame passing across his face, “you
see now how poverty can drag a man down. Are you satisfied?”

“Come, come, my young friend,” answered Daddy Tantaine, “you should not
get angry; and if I did step in without any notice, it was because, as a
neighbor, I find I might venture on such a liberty; for when I heard how
embarrassed you were, I said to myself, ‘Tantaine, perhaps you can help
this pretty pair out of the scrape they have got into.’”

The promise of assistance from a person who had not certainly the
outward appearance of a capitalist seemed so ludicrous to Rose that she
could not restrain a smile, for she fancied that if their old neighbor
was to present them with half his fortune, it might possibly amount to
twenty centimes or thereabouts.

Paul had formed a somewhat similar idea, but he was a little touched by
this act of friendliness on the part of a man who doubtless knew that
money lent under similar circumstances was but seldom returned.

“Ah, sir!” said he, and this time he spoke in softer accents, “what can
you possibly do for us?”

“Who can say?”

“You can see how hard we are pushed. We are in want of almost
everything. Have we not reached the _acme_ of misery?”

The old man raised his hand to heaven, as if to seek for aid from above.

“You have indeed come to a terrible pass,” murmured he; “but all is not
yet lost. The pearl which lies in the depths of the ocean is not lost
for ever; for may not some skillful diver bring it to the surface? A
fisherman may not be able to do much with it, but he knows something of
its value, and hands it over to the dealer in precious stones.”

He intensified his speech by a little significant laugh, the meaning
of which was lost upon the two young people who, though their evil
instincts led them to be greedy and covetous, were yet unskilled in the
world’s ways.

“I should,” remarked Paul, “be a fool if I did not accept the offer of
your kind assistance.”

“There, then, that is right; and now the first thing to do is to have a
really good feed. You must get in some wood too, for it is frightfully
cold. My old bones are half frozen; and afterward we will talk of a
fresh rig out for you both.”

“Yes,” remarked Rose with a faint sigh; “but to do all that, we want a
lot of money.”

“Well, how do you know that I can’t find it?”

Daddy Tantaine unbuttoned his great coat with grave deliberation, and
drew from an inner pocket a small scrap of paper which had been fastened
to the lining by a pin. This he unfolded with the greatest of care and
laid upon the table.

“A banknote for five hundred francs!” exclaimed Rose, with extreme
surprise. Paul did not utter a word. Had he seen the woodwork of the
chair upon which he was leaning burst into flower and leaf, he could not
have looked more surprised. Who could have expected to find such a sum
concealed beneath the old man’s tatters, and how could he have obtained
so much money? The idea that some robbery had been committed at once
occurred to both the young people, and they exchanged a meaning glance,
which, however, did not escape the observation of their visitor.

“Pooh, pooh!” said he, without appearing in the slightest degree
annoyed. “You must not give way to evil thoughts or suspicions. It is
a fact that banknotes for five hundred francs don’t often grow out of
a ragged pocket like mine. But I got this fellow honestly,--that I can
guarantee.”

Rose paid no attention to his words; indeed, she took no interest in
them. The note was there, and that was enough for her. She took it up
and smoothed it out as though the crisp paper communicated a pleasant
sensation to her fingers.

“I must tell you,” resumed Daddy Tantaine, “that I am employed by a
sheriff’s officer, and that, in addition, I do a little bill collecting
for various persons. By these means I have often comparatively large
sums in my possession, and I can lend you five hundred francs for a
short time without any inconvenience to myself.”

Paul’s necessities and conscience were fighting a hard battle, and
he remained silent, as a person generally does before arriving at a
momentous decision.

At length he broke the silence. “No,” said he, “your offer is one that I
cannot accept, for I feel--”

“This is no time, my dear Paul, to talk of feelings,” interrupted Rose;
“besides, can you not see that our refusal to accept the loan annoys
this worthy gentleman?”

“The young lady is quite right,” returned Daddy Tantaine. “Come, let
us say that the matter is settled. Go out and get in something to eat,
sharp, for it has struck four some time ago.”

At these words, Rose started, and a scarlet flush spread over her
cheek. “Four o’clock,” repeated she, thinking of her letter; but after a
moment’s reflection she stepped up to the cracked mirror, and arranging
her tattered skirts, took up the banknote and left the room.

“She is a rare beauty,” remarked Daddy Tantaine with the air of one who
was an authority in such matters, “and as clever as they make them.
Ah! if she had only some one to give her a hint, she might rise to any
height.”

Paul’s ideas were in such a wild state of confusion, that he could
make no reply; and, now that he was no longer held in thrall by Rose’s
presence, he began to be terrified at what had taken place, for he
imagined that he caught a sinister expression in the old man’s face
which made him very suspicious of the wisdom of the course he had been
persuaded to pursue. Was there ever such an unheard-of event as an old
man of such a poverty-stricken appearance showering banknotes upon the
heads of perfect strangers? There was certainly something mysterious
in the affair, and Paul made up his mind that he would do his utmost to
avoid being compromised.

“I have thought the matter over,” said he resolutely; “and it is
impossible for me to accept the loan of a sum which it would be
difficult for me to repay.”

“My dear young friend, that is not the way to talk. If you do not have a
good opinion of yourself, all the world will judge you according to your
own estimation. Your inexperience has, up to this time, been the sole
cause of your failure. Poverty soon changes a boy into a man as straw
ripens fruit; but the first thing you must do is to put all confidence
in me. You can repay the five hundred francs at your convenience, but I
must have six per cent. for my money and your note of hand.”

“But really--,” began Paul.

“I am looking at the matter in a purely business light, so we can drop
sentiment.”

Paul had so little experience in the ways of the world, that the mere
fact of giving his acceptance for the money borrowed put him at once
at his ease, though he knew well that his name was not a very valuable
addition to the slip of paper.

Daddy Tantaine, after a short search through his pockets, discovered
a bill stamp, and, placing it on the table, said, “Write as I shall
dictate:--

‘On the 8th of June, 188-, I promise to pay to M. Tantaine or order the
sum of five hundred francs for value received, such sum to bear interest
at the rate of six per cent. per annum.

‘Frs. 500.

‘PAUL VIOLAINE.’”


The young man had just completed his signature when Rose made her
appearance, bearing a plentiful stock of provisions in her arms. Her
eyes had a strange radiance in them, which Paul, however, did not
notice, as he was engaged in watching the old man, who, after carefully
inspecting the document, secured it in one of the pockets of his ragged
coat.

“You will, of course, understand, sir,” remarked Paul, “that there is
not much chance of my being able to save sufficient to meet this bill in
four months, so that the date is a mere form.”

A smile of benevolence passed over Daddy Tantaine’s features. “And
suppose,” said he, “that I, the lender, was to put the borrower in a
position to repay the advance before a month had passed?”

“Ah! but that is not possible.”

“I do not say, my young friend, that I could do this myself; but I have
a good friend whose hand reaches a long way. If I had only listened to
his advice when I was younger, you would not have caught me to-day in
the Hotel de Perou. Shall I introduce you to him?”

“Am I a perfect fool, to throw away such a chance?”

“Good! I shall see him this evening, and will mention your name to him.
Call on him at noon to-morrow, and if he takes a fancy to you,--decides
to push you, your future is assured, and you will have no doubts as to
getting on.”

He took out a card from his pocket and handed it to Paul, adding, “The
name of my friend is Mascarin.”

Meanwhile Rose, with a true Parisian’s handiness, had contrived to
restore order from chaos, and had arranged the table, with its one or
two pieces of broken crockery, with scraps of brown paper instead of
plates. A fresh supply of wood crackled bravely on the hearth, and two
candles, one of which was placed in a chipped bottle, and the other in a
tarnished candlestick belonging to the porter of the hotel. In the eyes
of both the young people the spectacle was a truly delightful one, and
Paul’s heart swelled with triumph. The business had been satisfactorily
concluded, and all his misgivings were at an end.

“Come, let us gather round the festive board,” said he joyously. “This
is breakfast and dinner in one. Rose, be seated; and you, my dear
friend, will surely share with us the repast we owe to you?”

With many protestations of regret, however, Daddy Tantaine pleaded an
important engagement at the other end of Paris. “And,” added he, “it is
absolutely necessary that I should see Mascarin this evening, for I must
try my best to make him look on you with a favorable eye.”

Rose was very glad when the old man took his departure, for his
ugliness, the shabbiness of his dress, and his general aspect of dirt,
drove away all the feelings of gratitude she ought to have evinced, and
inspired in her loathing and repugnance; and she fancied that his eyes,
though veiled by his colored glasses, could detect the minutest secrets
of her heart; but still this did not prevent her putting on a sweet
smile and entreating him to remain.

But Daddy Tantaine was resolute; and after impressing upon Paul the
necessity of punctuality, he went away, repeating, as he passed through
the door, “May good appetite be present at your little feast, my dears.”

As soon, however, as the door was closed he bent down and listened. The
young people were as merry as larks, and their laughter filled the
bare attic of the Hotel de Perou. Why should not Paul have been in good
spirits? He had in his pocket the address of the man who was to make his
fortune, and on the chimney-piece was the balance of the banknote, which
seemed to him an inexhaustible sum. Rose, too, was delighted, and could
not refrain from jeering at their benefactor, whom she stigmatized as
“an old idiot.”

“Laugh while you can, my dears!” muttered Daddy Tantaine; “for this may
be the last time you will do so.”

With these words he crept down the dark staircase, which was only
lighted up on Sundays, owing to the high price of gas, and, peeping
through the glass door of the porter’s lodge, saw Madame Loupins engaged
in cooking; and, with the timid knock of a man who has learned his
lesson in poverty’s grammar, he entered.

“Here is my rent, madame,” said he, placing on the table ten francs
and twenty centimes. Then, as the woman was scribbling a receipt, he
launched into a statement of his own affairs, and told her that he had
come into a little property which would enable him to live in comfort
during his few remaining years on earth; and--evidently fearing that
his well-known poverty might cause Madame Loupins to discredit his
assertions--drew out his pocketbook and exhibited several banknotes.
This exhibition of wealth so surprised the landlady, that when the old
man left she insisted on lighting him to the door. He turned eastward as
soon as he had left the house, and, glancing at the names of the shops,
entered a grocer’s establishment at the corner of the Rue de Petit Pont.
This grocer, thanks to a certain cheap wine, manufactured for him by a
chemist at Bercy, had achieved a certain notoriety in that quarter. He
was very stout and pompous, a widower, and a sergeant in the National
Guard. His name was Melusin. In all poor districts five o’clock is a
busy hour for the shopkeepers, for the workmen are returning from their
labors, and their wives are busy in their preparations for their evening
meal. M. Melusin was so busily engaged, giving orders and seeing that
they were executed, that he did not even notice the entrance of Daddy
Tantaine; but had he done so, he would not have put himself out for so
poorly dressed a customer. But the old man had left behind him in the
Hotel de Perou every sign of humility and servility, and, making his way
to the least crowded portion of the shop, he called out in imperative
accents, “M. Melusin!”

Very much surprised, the grocer ceased his avocation and hastened to
obey the summons. “How the deuce does the man know me?” muttered he,
forgetting that his name was over the door in gilt letters fully six
inches long.

“Sir,” said Daddy Tantaine, without giving the grocer time to speak,
“did not a young woman come here about half an hour ago and change a
note for five hundred francs?”

“Most certainly,” answered M. Melusin; “but how did you know that? Ah,
I have it!” he added, striking his forehead; “there has been a robbery,
and you are in pursuit of the criminal. I must confess that the girl
looked so poor, that I guessed there was something wrong. I saw her
fingers tremble.”

“Pardon me,” returned Daddy Tantaine. “I have said nothing about a
robbery. I only wished to ask you if you would know the girl again?”

“Perfectly--a really splendid girl, with hair that you do not see every
day. I have reason to believe that she lives in the Rue Hachette. The
police are not very popular with the shopkeeping class; but the latter,
desirous of keeping down crime, generally afford plenty of information,
and in the interests of virtue will even risk losing customers, who go
off in a huff at not being attended to while they are talking to the
officers of justice. Shall I,” continued the grocer, “send one of the
errand boys to the nearest police station?”

“No, thank you,” replied Daddy Tantaine. “I should prefer your keeping
the matter quiet until I communicate with you once more.”

“Yes, yes, I see; a false step just now would put them on their guard.”

“Just so. Now, will you let me have the number of the note, if you
still have it? I wish you also to make a note of the date as well as the
number.”

“Yes, yes, I see,” returned the grocer. “You may require my books as
corroborative evidence; that is often the way. Excuse me; I will be back
directly.”

All that Daddy Tantaine had desired was executed with the greatest
rapidity, and he and the grocer parted on the best terms, and the
tradesman watched his visitor’s departure, perfectly satisfied that he
had been assisting a police officer who had deemed it fit to assume a
disguise. Daddy Tantaine cared little what he thought, and, gaining the
Place de Petit Pont, stopped and gazed around as if he was waiting for
some one. Twice he walked round it in vain; but in his third circuit he
came to a halt with an exclamation of satisfaction, for he had seen the
person of whom he had been in search, who was a detestable looking
youth of about eighteen years of age, though so thin and stunted that he
hardly appeared to be fifteen.

The lad was leaning against the wall of the Quay St. Michel, openly
asking alms, but keeping a sharp lookout for the police. At the first
glance it was easy to detect in him the hideous outgrowth of the great
city, the regular young rough of Paris, who, at eight years of age,
smokes the butt ends of cigars picked up at the tavern doors and
gets tipsy on coarse spirits. He had a thin crop of sandy hair, his
complexion was dull and colorless, and a sneer curled the corners of
his mouth, which had a thick, hanging underlip, and his eyes had an
expression in them of revolting cynicism. His dress was tattered and
dirty, and he had rolled up the sleeve of his right arm, exhibiting a
deformed limb, sufficiently repulsive to excite the pity of the passers
by. He was repeating a monotonous whine, in which the words “poor
workman, arm destroyed by machinery, aged mother to support,” occurred
continually.

Daddy Tantaine walked straight up to the youth, and with a sound cuff
sent his hat flying.

The lad turned sharply round, evidently in a terrible rage; but,
recognizing his assailant, shrank back, and muttered to himself,
“Landed!” In an instant he restored his arm to its originally healthy
condition, and, picking up his cap, replaced it on his head, and humbly
waited for fresh orders.

“Is this the way you execute your errands?” asked Daddy Tantaine,
snarling.

“What errands? I have heard of none!”

“Never you mind that. Did not M. Mascarin, on my recommendation, put you
in the way of earning your livelihood? and did you not promise to give
up begging?”

“Beg pardon, guv’nor, I meant to be on the square, but I didn’t like to
waste time while I was a-waiting. I don’t like a-being idle and I have
copped seven browns.”

“Toto Chupin,” said the old man, with great severity, “you will
certainly come to a bad end. But come, give your report. What have you
seen?”

During this conversation they were walking slowly along the quay, and
had passed the Hotel Dieu.

“Well, guv’nor,” replied the young rogue, “I just saw what you said I
should. At four sharp, a carriage drove into the Place, and pulled
up bang opposite the wigmaker’s. Dash me, if it weren’t a swell
turnout!--horse, coachman, and all, in real slap-up style. It waited so
long that I thought it had taken root there.”

“Come, get on! Was there any one inside?”

“I should think there was! I twigged him at once, by the description
you gave me. I never see a cove togged out as he was,--tall hat, light
sit-down-upons, and a short coat--wasn’t it cut short! but in really
bang-up style. To be certain, I went right up to him, for it was getting
dark, and had a good look at him. He had got out of the trap, and was
marching up and down the pavement, with an unlighted cigar stuck in his
mouth. I took a match, and said, ‘Have a light, my noble swell?’ and
hanged if he didn’t give me ten centimes! My! ain’t he ugly!--short,
shrivelled up, and knock-kneed, with a glass in his eye, and altogether
precious like a monkey.”

Daddy Tantaine began to grow impatient with all this rigmarole. “Come,
tell me what took place,” said he angrily.

“Precious little. The young swell didn’t seem to care about dirtying his
trotter-cases; he kept slashing about with his cane, and staring at
all the gals. What an ass that masher is! Wouldn’t I have liked to have
punched his head! If you ever want to hide him, daddy, please think of
yours truly. He wouldn’t stand up to me for five minutes.”

“Go on, my lad; go on.”

“Well, we had waited half an hour, when all at once a woman came sharp
round the corner, and stops before the masher. Wasn’t she a fine gal!
and hadn’t she a pair of sparklers! but she had awfully seedy togs on.
But they spoke in whispers.”

“So you did not hear what they said?”

“Do you take me for a flat? The gal said, ‘Do you
understand?--to-morrow.’ Then the swell chap, says he, ‘Do you promise?’
and the gal, she answers back, ‘Yes, at noon.’ Then they parted. She
went off to the Rue Hachette, and the masher tumbled into his wheelbox.
The jarvey cracked his whip, and off they went in a brace of shakes. Now
hand over them five francs.”

Daddy Tantaine did not seem surprised at this request, and he gave over
the money to the young loafer, with the words, “When I promise, I pay
down on the nail; but remember Toto Chupin, you’ll come to grief one
day. Good-night. Our ways lie in different directions.”

The old man, however, lingered until he had seen the lad go off toward
the Jardin des Plantes, and then, turning round, went back by the way
he had come. “I have not lost my day,” murmured he. “All the
improbabilities have turned out certainties, and matters are going
straight. Won’t Flavia be awfully pleased?”



CHAPTER II.

A REGISTRY OFFICE.

The establishment of the influential friend of Daddy Tantaine was
situated in the Rue Montorgeuil, not far from the Passage de la Reine
Hortense. M. B. Mascarin has a registry office for the engagement of
both male and female servants. Two boards fastened upon each side of the
door announce the hours of opening and closing, and give a list of those
whose names are on the books; they further inform the public that the
establishment was founded in 1844, and is still in the same hands. It
was the long existence of M. Mascarin in a business which is usually
very short-lived that had obtained for him a great amount of confidence,
not only in the quarter in which he resided, but throughout the whole
of Paris. Employers say that he sends them the best of servants, and
the domestics in their turn assert that he only despatches them to good
places. But M. Mascarin has still further claims on the public esteem;
for it was he who, in 1845, founded and carried out a project which had
for its aim and end the securing of a shelter for servants out of place.
The better to carry out this, Mascarin took a partner, and gave him
the charge of a furnished house close to the office. Worthy as these
projects were, Mascarin contrived to draw considerable profit from them,
and was the owner of the house before which, in the noon of the day
following the events we have described, Paul Violaine might have been
seen standing. The five hundred francs of old Tantaine, or at any rate a
portion of them, had been well spent, and his clothes did credit to his
own taste and the skill of his tailor. Indeed, in his fine feathers he
looked so handsome, that many women turned to gaze after him. He however
took but little notice of this, for he was too full of anxiety, having
grave doubts as to the power of the man whom Tantaine had asserted
could, if he liked, make his fortune. “A registry office!” muttered he
scornfully. “Is he going to propose a berth of a hundred francs a month
to me?” He was much agitated at the thoughts of the impending interview,
and, before entering the house, gazed upon its exterior with great
interest. The house much resembled its neighbors. The entrances to the
Registry Office and the Servants’ Home were in the courtyard, at the
arched entrance to which stood a vendor of roast chestnuts.

“There is no use in remaining here,” said Paul. Summoning, therefore,
all his resolution, he crossed the courtyard, and, ascending a flight of
stairs, paused before a door upon which “OFFICE” was written. “Come in!”
 responded at once to his knock. He pushed open the door, and entered
a room, which closely resembled all other similar offices. There were
seats all round the room, polished by frequent use. At the end was a
sort of compartment shut in by a green baize curtain, jestingly termed
“the Confessional” by the frequenters of the office. Between the windows
was a tin plate, with the words, “All fees to be paid in advance,” in
large letters upon it. In one corner a gentleman was seated at a writing
table, who, as he made entries in a ledger, was talking to a woman who
stood beside him.

“M. Mascarin?” asked Paul hesitatingly.

“What do you want with him?” asked the man, without looking up from his
work. “Do you wish to enter your name? We have now vacancies for three
bookkeepers, a cashier, a confidential clerk--six other good situations.
Can you give good references?”

These words seemed to be uttered by rote.

“I beg your pardon,” returned Paul; “but I should like to see M.
Mascarin. One of his friends sent me here.”

This statement evidently impressed the official, and he replied almost
politely, “M. Mascarin is much occupied at present, sir; but he will
soon be disengaged. Pray be seated.”

Paul sat down on a bench, and examined the man who had just spoken
with some curiosity. M. Mascarin’s partner was a tall and athletic man,
evidently enjoying the best of health, and wearing a large moustache
elaborately waxed and pointed. His whole appearance betokened the old
soldier. He had, so he asserted, served in the cavalry, and it was
there that he had acquired the _soubriquet_ by which he was
known--Beaumarchef, his original name being David. He was about
forty-five, but was still considered a very good-looking fellow. The
entries that he was making in the ledger did not prevent him from
keeping up a conversation with the woman standing by him. The woman,
who seemed to be a cross between a cook and a market-woman, might be
described as a thoroughly jovial soul. She seasoned her conversation
with pinches of snuff, and spoke with a strong Alsatian brogue.

“Now, look here,” said Beaumarchef; “do you really mean to say that you
want a place?”

“I do that.”

“You said that six months ago. We got you a splendid one, and three days
afterward you chucked up the whole concern.”

“And why shouldn’t I? There was no need to work then; but now it is
another pair of shoes, for I have spent nearly all I had saved.”

Beaumarchef laid down his pen, and eyed her curiously for a second or
two; then he said,--

“You’ve been making a fool of yourself somehow, I expect.”

She half turned away her head, and began to complain of the hardness
of the terms and of the meanness of the mistresses, who, instead of
allowing their cooks to do the marketing, did it themselves, and so
cheated their servants out of their commissions.

Beaumarchef nodded, just as he had done half an hour before to a lady
who had complained bitterly of the misconduct of her servants. He was
compelled by his position to sympathize with both sides.

The woman had now finished her tirade, and drawing the amount of the fee
from a well-filled purse, placed it on the table, saying,--

“Please, M. Beaumarchef, register my name as Caroline Scheumal, and get
me a real good place. It must be a cook, you understand, and I want to
do the marketing without the missus dodging around.”

“Well, I’ll do my best.”

“Try and find me a wealthy widower, or a young woman married to a very
old fellow. Now, do look round; I’ll drop in again to-morrow;” and with
a farewell pinch of snuff, she left the office.

Paul listened to this conversation with feelings of anger and
humiliation, and in his heart cursed old Tantaine for having introduced
him into such company. He was seeking for some plausible excuse for
withdrawal, when the door at the end of the room was thrown open, and
two men came in, talking as they did so. The one was young and well
dressed, with an easy, swaggering manner, which ignorant people mistake
for good breeding. He had a many-colored rosette at his buttonhole,
showing that he was the knight of more than one foreign order. The other
was an elderly man, with an unmistakable legal air about him. He was
dressed in a quilted dressing-gown, fur-lined shoes, and had on his head
an embroidered cap, most likely the work of the hands of some one dear
to him. He wore a white cravat, and his sight compelled him to use
colored glasses.

“Then, my dear sir,” said the younger man, “I may venture to entertain
hopes?”

“Remember, Marquis,” returned the other, “that if I were acting alone,
what you require would be at once at your disposal. Unfortunately, I
have others to consult.”

“I place myself entirely in your hands,” replied the Marquis.

The appearance of the fashionably dressed young man reconciled Paul to
the place in which he was.

“A Marquis!” he murmured; “and the other swell-looking fellow must be M.
Mascarin.”

Paul was about to step forward, when Beaumarchef respectfully accosted
the last comer,--

“Who do you think, sir,” said he, “I have just seen?”

“Tell me quickly,” was the impatient reply.

“Caroline Schimmel; you know who I mean.”

“What! the woman who was in the service of the Duchess of Champdoce?”

“Exactly so.”

M. Mascarin uttered an exclamation of delight.

“Where is she living now?”

Beaumarchef was utterly overwhelmed by this simple question. For the
first time in his life he had omitted to take a client’s address. This
omission made Mascarin so angry that he forgot all his good manners, and
broke out with an oath that would have shamed a London cabman,--

“How could you be such an infernal fool? We have been hunting for this
woman for five months. You knew this as well as I did, and yet, when
chance brings her to you, you let her slip through your fingers and
vanish again.”

“She’ll be back again, sir; never fear. She won’t fling away the money
that she had paid for fees.”

“And what do you think that she cares for ten sous or ten francs? She’ll
be back when she thinks she will; but a woman who drinks and is off her
head nearly all the year round----”

Inspired by a sudden thought, Beaumarchef made a clutch at his hat.

“She has only just gone,” said he; “I can easily overtake her.”

But Mascarin arrested his progress.

“You are not a good bloodhound. Take Toto Chupin with you; he is outside
with his chestnuts, and is as fly as they make them. If you catch her
up, don’t say a word, but follow her up, and see where she goes. I want
to know her whole daily life. Remember that no item, however unimportant
it may seem, is not of consequence.”

Beaumarchef disappeared in an instant, and Mascarin continued to
grumble.

“What a fool!” he murmured. “If I could only do everything myself. I
worried my life out for months, trying to find the clue to the mystery
which this woman holds, and now she has again escaped me.”

Paul, who saw that his presence was not remarked, coughed to draw
attention to it. In an instant Mascarin turned quickly round.

“Excuse me,” said Paul; but the set smile had already resumed its place
upon Mascarin’s countenance.

“You are,” remarked he, civilly, “Paul Violaine, are you not?”

The young man bowed in assent.

“Forgive my absence for an instant. I will be back directly,” said
Mascarin.

He passed through the door, and in another instant Paul heard his name
called.

Compared to the outer chamber, Mascarin’s office was quite a luxurious
apartment, for the windows were bright, the paper on the walls fresh,
and the floor carpeted. But few of the visitors to the office could
boast of having been admitted into this sanctum; for generally business
was conducted at Beaumarchef’s table in the outer room. Paul, however,
who was unacquainted with the prevailing rule, was not aware of the
distinction with which he had been received. Mascarin, on his visitor’s
entrance, was comfortably seated in an armchair before the fire, with
his elbow on his desk--and what a spectacle did that desk present! It
was a perfect world in itself, and indicated that its proprietor was a
man of many trades. It was piled with books and documents, while a great
deal of the space was occupied by square pieces of cardboard, upon each
of which was a name in large letters, while underneath was writing in
very minute characters.

With a benevolent gesture, Mascarin pointed to an armchair, and in
encouraging tones said, “And now let us talk.”

It was plain to Paul that Mascarin was not acting, but that the kind and
patriarchal expression upon his face was natural to it, and the young
man felt that he could safely intrust his whole future to him.

“I have heard,” commenced Mascarin, “that your means of livelihood are
very precarious, or rather that you have none, and are ready to take
the first one that offers you a means of subsistence. That, at least, is
what I hear from my poor friend Tantaine.”

“He has explained my case exactly.”

“Good; only before proceeding to the future, let us speak of the past.”

Paul gave a start, which Mascarin noticed, for he added,--

“You will excuse the freedom I am taking; but it is absolutely necessary
that I should know to what I am binding myself. Tantaine tells me that
you are a charming young man, strictly honest, and well educated; and
now that I have had the pleasure of meeting you, I am sure that he is
right; but I can only deal with proofs, and must be quite certain before
I act on your behalf with third parties.”

“I have nothing to conceal, sir, and am ready to answer any questions,”
 responded Paul.

A slight smile, which Paul did not detect, played round the corners of
Mascarin’s mouth, and, with a gesture, with which all who knew him were
familiar, he pushed back his glasses on his nose.

“I thank you,” answered he; “it is not so easy as you may suppose to
hide anything from me.” He took one of the packets of pasteboard slips
form his desk, and shuffling them like a pack of cards, continued, “Your
name is Marie Paul Violaine. You were born at Poitiers, in the Rue
des Vignes, on the 5th of January, 1843, and are therefore in your
twenty-fourth year.”

“That is quite correct, sir.”

“You are an illegitimate child?”

The first question had surprised Paul; the second absolutely astounded
him.

“Quite true, sir,” replied he, not attempting to hide his surprise; “but
I had no idea that M. Tantaine was so well informed; the partition which
divided our rooms must have been thinner than I thought.”

Mascarin took no notice of this remark, but continued to shuffle and
examine his pieces of cardboard. Had Paul caught a clear glimpse of
these, he would have seen his initials in the corner of each.

“Your mother,” went on Mascarin, “kept, for the last fifteen years of
her life, a little haberdasher’s shop.”

“Just so.”

“But a business of that description in a town like Poitiers, does not
bring in very remunerative results, and luckily she received for your
support and education a sum of one thousand francs per year.”

This time Paul started from his seat, for he was sure that Tantaine
could not have learned this secret at the Hotel de Perou.

“Merciful powers, sir!” cried he; “who could have told you a thing that
has never passed my lips since my arrival in Paris, and of which even
Rose is entirely ignorant?”

Mascarin raised his shoulders.

“You can easily comprehend,” remarked he, “that a man in my line of
business has to learn many things. If I did not take the greatest
precautions, I should be deceived daily, and so lead others into error.”

Paul had not been more than an hour in the office, but the directions
given to Beaumarchef had already taught him how many of these events
were arranged.

“Though I may be curious,” went on Mascarin, “I am the symbol of
discretion; so answer me frankly: How did your mother receive this
annuity?”

“Through a Parisian solicitor.”

“Do you know him?”

“Not at all,” answered Paul, who had begun to grow uneasy under this
questioning, for a kind of vague apprehension was aroused in his mind,
and he could not see the utility of any of these interrogations. There
was, however, nothing in Mascarin’s manner to justify the misgivings
of the young man, for he appeared to ask all these questions in quite a
matter-of-course way, as if they were purely affairs of business.

After a protracted silence, Mascarin resumed,--

“I am half inclined to believe that the solicitor sent the money on his
own account.”

“No, sir,” answered Paul. “I am sure you are mistaken.”

“Why are you so certain?”

“Because my mother, who was the incarnation of truth, often assured me
that my father died before my birth. Poor mother! I loved and respected
her too much to question her on these matters. One day, however,
impelled by an unworthy feeling of curiosity, I dared to ask her the
name of our protector. She burst into tears, and then I felt how mean
and cruel I had been. I never learned his name but I know that he was
not my father.”

Mascarin affected not to notice the emotion of his young client.

“Did the allowance cease at your mother’s death?” continued he.

“No; it was stopped when I came of age. My mother told me that this
would be the case; but it seems only yesterday that she spoke to me of
it. It was on my birthday, and she had prepared a little treat for my
supper; for in spite of the affliction my birth had caused her, she
loved me fondly. Poor mother! ‘Paul,’ said she, ‘at your birth a genuine
friend promised to help me to bring up and educate you, and he kept his
word. But you are now twenty-one, and must expect nothing more from him.
My son, you are a man now, and I have only you to look to. Work and earn
an honest livelihood----’”

Paul could proceed no farther, for his emotions choked him.

“My mother died suddenly some ten months after this
conversation--without time to communicate anything to me, and I was left
perfectly alone in the world; and were I to die to-morrow, there would
not be a soul to follow me to my grave.”

Mascarin put on a sympathetic look.

“Not quite so bad as that, my young friend; I trust that you have one
now.”

Mascarin rose from his seat, and for a few minutes paced up and down the
room, and then halted, with his arms folded, before the young man.

“You have heard me,” said he, “and I will not put any further questions
which it will but pain you to reply to, for I only wished to take your
measure, and to judge of your truth from your replies. You will ask why?
Ah, that is a question I cannot answer to-day, but you shall know later
on. Be assured, however, that I know everything about you, but I cannot
tell you by what means. Say it has all happened by chance. Chance has
broad shoulders, and can bear a great deal.”

This ambiguous speech caused a thrill of terror to pass through Paul,
which was plainly visible on his expressive features.

“Are you alarmed?” asked Mascarin, readjusting his spectacles.

“I am much surprised, sir,” stammered Paul.

“Come, come! what can a man in your circumstances have to fear? There
is no use racking your brain; you will find out all you want quickly
enough, and had best make up your mind to place yourself in my hands
without reserve, for my sole desire is to be of service to you.”

These words were uttered in the most benevolent manner; and as he
resumed his seat, he added,--

“Now let us talk of myself. Your mother, whom you justly say was a
thoroughly good woman, pinched herself in order to keep you at college
at Poitiers. You entered a solicitor’s office at eighteen, I think?”

“Yes, sir.”

“But your mother’s desire was to see you established at Loudon or
Cevray. Perhaps she hoped that her wealthy friend would aid you still
further. Unluckily, however, you had no inclination for the law.”

Paul smiled, but Mascarin went on with some little severity.

“I repeat, unfortunately; and I think that by this time you have gone
through enough to be of my opinion. What did you do instead of studying
law? You did--what? You wasted your time over music, and composed songs,
and, I know, an opera, and thought yourself a perfect genius.”

Paul had listened up to this time with patience, but at this sarcasm
he endeavored to protest; but it was in vain, for Mascarin went on
pitilessly,--

“One day you abandoned the study of the law, and told your mother
that until you had made your name as a musical composer you would give
lessons on the piano; but you could obtain no pupils, and--well, just
look in the glass yourself, and say if you think that your age and
appearance would justify parents in intrusting their daughters to your
tuition?”

Mascarin stopped for a moment and consulted his notes afresh.

“Your departure from Poitiers,” he went on, “was your last act of folly.
The very day after your poor mother’s death you collected together all
her scanty savings, and took the train to Paris.”

“Then, sir, I had hoped----”

“What, to arrive at fortune by the road of talent? Foolish boy! Every
year a thousand poor wretches have been thus intoxicated by their
provincial celebrity, and have started for Paris, buoyed up by similar
hopes. Do you know the end of them? At the end of ten years--I give them
no longer--nine out of ten die of starvation and disappointment, and the
other joins the criminal army.”

Paul had often repeated this to himself, and could, therefore, make no
reply.

“But,” went on Mascarin, “you did not leave Poitiers alone; you carried
off with you a young girl named Rose Pigoreau.”

“Pray, let me explain.”

“It would be useless. The fact speaks for itself. In six months your
little store had disappeared; then came poverty and starvation, and at
last, in the Hotel de Perou, your thoughts turned to suicide, and you
were only saved by my old friend Tantaine.”

Paul felt his temper rising, for these plain truths were hard to bear;
but fear lest he should lose his protector kept him silent.

“I admit everything, sir,” said he calmly. “I was a fool, and almost
mad, but experience has taught me a bitter lesson. I am here to-day,
and this fact should tell you that I have given up all my vain
hallucinations.”

“Will you give up Rose Pigoreau?”

As this abrupt question was put to him, Paul turned pale with anger.

“I love Rose,” answered he coldly; “she believes in me, and has shared
my troubles with courage, and one day she shall be my wife.”

Raising his velvet cap from his head, Mascarin bowed with an ironical
air, saying, “Is that so? Then I beg a thousand pardons. It is urgent
that you should have immediate employment. Pray, what can you do? Not
much of anything, I fancy;--like most college bred boys, you can do a
little of everything, and nothing well. Had I a son, and an enormous
income, I would have him taught a trade.”

Paul bit his lip; but he knew the portrait was a true one.

“And now,” continued Mascarin, “I have come to your aid, and what do you
say to a situation with a salary of twelve thousand francs?”

This sum was so much greater than Paul had dared to hope, that he
believed Mascarin was amusing himself at his expense.

“It is not kind of you to laugh at me, under the present circumstances,”
 remarked he.

Mascarin was not laughing at him; but it was fully half an hour before
he could prove this to Paul.

“You would like more proof of what I say,” said he, after a long
conversation. “Very well, then; shall I advance your first month’s
salary?” And as he spoke, he took a thousand-franc note from his desk,
and offered it to Paul. The young man rejected the note; but the force
of the argument struck him; and he asked if he was capable of carrying
out the duties which such a salary doubtless demanded.

“Were I not certain of your abilities, I should not offer it to you,”
 replied Mascarin. “I am in a hurry now, or I would explain the whole
affair; but I must defer doing so until to-morrow, when please come at
the same hour as you did to-day.”

Even in his state of surprise and stupefaction, Paul felt that this was
a signal for him to depart.

“A moment more,” said Mascarin. “You understand that you can no longer
remain at the Hotel de Perou? Try and find a room in this neighborhood;
and when you have done so, leave the address at the office. Good-bye, my
young friend, until to-morrow, and learn to bear good fortune.”

For a few minutes Mascarin stood at the door of the office watching
Paul, who departed almost staggering beneath the burden of so many
conflicting emotions; and when he saw him disappear round the corner, he
ran to a glazed door which led to his bed chamber, and in a loud whisper
called, “Come in, Hortebise. He has gone.”

A man obeyed the summons at once, and hurriedly drew up a chair to the
fire. “My feet are almost frozen,” exclaimed he; “I should not know
it if any one was to chop them off. Your room, my dear Baptiste, is a
perfect refrigerator. Another time, please, have a fire lighted in it.”

This speech, however, did not disturb Mascarin’s line of thought. “Did
you hear all?” asked he.

“I saw and heard all that you did.”

“And what do you think of the lad?”

“I think that Daddy Tantaine is a man of observation and powerful will,
and that he will mould this child between his fingers like wax.”



CHAPTER III.

THE OPINION OF DR. HORTEBISE.

Dr. Hortebise, who had addressed Mascarin so familiarly by his Christian
name of Baptiste, was about fifty-six years of age, but he carried his
years so well, that he always passed for forty-nine. He had a heavy pair
of red, sensual-looking lips, his hair was untinted by gray, and his
eyes still lustrous. A man who moved in the best society, eloquent in
manner, a brilliant conversationalist, and vivid in his perceptions, he
concealed under the veil of good-humored sarcasm the utmost cynicism of
mind. He was very popular and much sought after. He had but few faults,
but quite a catalogue of appalling vices. Under this Epicurean exterior
lurked, it was reported, the man of talent and the celebrated physician.
He was not a hard-working man, simply because he achieved the same
results without toil or labor. He had recently taken to homoeopathy, and
started a medical journal, which he named _The Globule_, which died at
its fifth number. His conversation made all society laugh, and he joined
in the ridicule, thus showing the sincerity of his views, for he
was never able to take the round of life seriously. To-day, however,
Mascarin, well as he knew his friend, seemed piqued at his air of
levity.

“When I asked you to come here to-day,” said he, “and when I begged you
to conceal yourself in my bedroom--”

“Where I was half frozen,” broke in Hortebise.

“It was,” went on Mascarin, “because I desired your advice. We have
started on a serious undertaking,--an undertaking full of peril both to
you and to myself.”

“Pooh! I have perfect confidence in you,--whatever you do is done well,
and you are not the man to fling away your trump cards.”

“True; but I may lose the game, after all, and then----”

The doctor merely shook a large gold locket that depended from his watch
chain.

This movement seemed to annoy Mascarin a great deal. “Why do you flash
that trinket at me?” asked he. “We have known each other for five and
twenty years,--what do you mean to imply? Do you mean that the locket
contains the likeness of some one that you intend to make use of later
on? I think that you might render such a step unnecessary by giving me
your present advice and attention.”

Hortebise threw himself back in his chair with an expression of
resignation. “If you want advice,” remarked he, “why not apply to our
worthy friend Catenac?--he knows something of business, as he is a
lawyer.”

The name of Catenac seemed to irritate Mascarin so much, that calm, and
self-contained as he usually was, he pulled off his cap and dashed it on
his desk.

“Are you speaking seriously?” said he angrily.

“Why should I not be in earnest?”

Mascarin removed his glasses, as though without them he could the more
easily peer into the depths of the soul of the man before him.

“Because,” replied he slowly, “both you and I distrust Catenac. When did
you see him last?”

“More than three months ago.”

“True, and I allow that he seems to be acting fairly toward his old
associates; but you will admit that, in keeping away thus, his conduct
is without excuse, for he has made his fortune; and though he pretends
to be poor, he is certainly a man of wealth.”

“Do you really think so?”

“Were he here, I would force him to acknowledge that he is worth a
million, at least.”

“A million!” exclaimed the doctor, with sudden animation.

“Yes, certainly. You and I, Hortebise, have indulged our every whim, and
have spent gold like water, while our friend garnered his harvest and
stored it away. But poor Catenac has no expensive tastes, nor does he
care for women or the pleasures of the table. While we indulged in every
pleasure, he lent out his money at usurious interest. But, stop,--how
much do you spend per annum?”

“That is a hard question to answer; but, say, forty thousand francs.”

“More, a great deal more; but calculate what a capital sum that would
amount to during the twenty years we have done business together.”

The doctor was not clever at figures; he made several vain attempts to
solve the problem, and at last gave it up in despair. “Forty and forty,”
 muttered he, tapping the tips of his fingers, “are eighty, then forty--”

“Call it eight hundred thousand francs,” broke in Mascarin. “Say I drew
the same amount as you did. We have spent ours, and Catenac has saved
his, and grown rich; hence my distrust. Our interests are no longer
identical. He certainly comes here every month, but it is only to claim
his share; he consents to take his share of the profits, but shirks the
risks. It is fully ten years since he brought in any business. I don’t
trust him at all. He always declines to join in any scheme that we
propose, and sees danger in everything.”

“He would not betray us, however.”

Mascarin took a few moments for reflection. “I think,” said he, “that
Catenac is afraid of us. He knows that the ruin of me would entail the
destruction of the other two. This is our only safeguard; but if he
dare not injure us openly, he is quite capable of working against us in
secret. Do you remember what he said the last time he was here? That we
ought to close our business and retire. How should _we_ live? for he is
rich and we are poor. What on earth are you doing, Hortebise?” he added,
for the physician, who had the reputation of being worth an enormous
amount, had taken out his purse, and was going over the contents.

“I have scarcely three hundred and twenty-seven francs!” answered he
with a laugh. “What is the state of your finances?”

Mascarin made a grimace. “I am not so well off as you; and besides,” he
continued in a low voice, as though speaking to himself, “I have certain
ties which you do not possess.”

For the first time during this interview a cloud spread over the
doctor’s countenance.

“Great Heavens!” said he, “and I was depending on you for three thousand
francs, which I require urgently.”

Mascarin smiled slyly at the doctor’s uneasiness. “Don’t worry,” he
answered. “You can have that; there ought to be some six or eight
thousand francs in the safe. But that is all, and that is the last
of our common capital,--this after twenty years of toil, danger, and
anxiety, and we have not twenty years before us to make a fresh fortune
in.”

“Yes,” continued Mascarin, “we are getting old, and therefore have the
greater reason for making one grand stroke to assure our fortune. Were I
to fall ill to-morrow, all would go to smash.”

“Quite true,” returned the doctor, with a slight shudder.

“We must, and that is certain, venture on a bold stroke. I have said
this for years, and woven a web of gigantic proportions. Do you now
know why at this last moment I appeal to you, and not to Catenac
for assistance? If only one out of two operations that I have fully
explained to you succeeds, our fortune is made.”

“I follow you exactly.”

“The question now is whether the chance of success is sufficiently great
to warrant our going on with these undertakings. Think it over and let
me have your opinion.”

An acute observer could easily have seen that the doctor was a man of
resource, and a thoroughly competent adviser, for the reason that his
coolness never deserted him. Compelled to choose between the use of the
contents of his locket, or the continuance of a life of luxurious ease,
the smile vanished from the doctor’s face, and he began to reflect
profoundly. Leaning back in his chair, with his feet resting on the
fender, he carefully studied every combination in the undertaking, as
a general inspects the position taken up by the enemy, when a battle
is impending, upon which the fate of an empire may hinge. That this
analysis took a favorable turn, was evident, for Mascarin soon saw a
smile appear upon the doctor’s lips. “We must make the attack at
once,” said he; “but make no mistake; the projects you propose are most
dangerous, and a single error upon our side would entail destruction;
but we must take some risk. The odds are against us, but still we may
win. Under these circumstances, and as necessity cheers us on, I say,
_Forward!_” As he said this, he rose to his feet, and extending his hand
toward his friend, exclaimed, “I am entirely at your disposal.”

Mascarin seemed relieved by the doctor’s decision, for he was in
that frame of mind when, however self-reliant a man may be, he has a
disinclination to be left alone, and the aid of a stout ally is of the
utmost service.

“Have you considered every point carefully?” asked he. “You know that
we can only act at present upon one of the undertakings, and that is the
one of which the Marquis de Croisenois----”

“I know that.”

“With reference to the affair of the Duke de Champdoce, I have still to
gather together certain things necessary for the ultimate success of
the scheme. There is a mystery in the lives of the Duke and Duchess,--of
this there is no doubt,--but what is this secret? I would lay my life
that I have hit upon the correct solution; but I want no suspicions,
no probabilities; I want absolute certainties. And now,” continued he,
“this brings us back to the first question. What do you think of Paul
Violaine?”

Hortebise walked up and down the room two or three times, and finally
stopped opposite to his friend. “I think,” said he, “that the lad has
many of the qualities we want, and we might find it hard to discover one
better suited for our purpose. Besides, he is a bastard, knows nothing
of his father, and therefore leaves a wide field for conjecture; for
every natural son has the right to consider himself, if he likes, the
offspring of a monarch. He has no family or any one to look after him,
which assures us that whatever may happen, there is no one to call us to
account. He is not overwise, but has a certain amount of talent, and any
quantity of ridiculous self-conceit. He is wonderfully handsome, which
will make matters easier, but--”

“Ah, there is a ‘but’ then?”

“More than one,” answered the doctor, “for there are three for certain.
First, there is Rose Pigoreau, whose beauty has so captivated our old
friend Tantaine,--she certainly appears to be a danger in the future.”

“Be easy,” returned Mascarin; “we will quickly remove this young woman
from our road.”

“Good; but do not be too confident,” answered Hortebise, in his usual
tone. “The danger from her is not the one you think, and which you are
trying to avoid. You think Paul loves her. You are wrong. He would drop
her to-morrow, so that he could please his self-indulgence. But the
woman who thinks that she hates her lover often deceives herself; and
Rose is simply tired of poverty. Give her a little amount of comfort,
good living, and luxury, and you will see her give them all up to come
back to Paul. Yes, I tell you, she will harass and annoy him, as women
of her class who have nothing to love always do. She will even go to
Flavia to claim him.”

“She had better not,” retorted Mascarin, in threatening accents.

“Why, how could you prevent it? She has known Paul from his infancy. She
knew his mother; she was perhaps brought up by her, perhaps even lived
in the same street. Look out, I say, for danger from that quarter.”

“You may be right, and I will take my precautions.”

It was sufficient for Mascarin to be assured of a danger to find means
of warding it off.

“My second ‘but,’” continued Hortebise, “is the idea of the mysterious
protector of whom the young man spoke. His mother, he says, has reason
to know that his father is dead, and I believe in the truth of the
statement. In this case, what has become of the person who paid Madame
Violaine her allowance?”

“You are right, quite right; these are the crevices in our armor; but I
keep my eyes open, and nothing escapes me.”

The doctor was growing rather weary, but he still went on courageously.
“My third ‘but’” said he, “is perhaps the strongest. We must see the
young fellow at once. It may be to-morrow, without even having prepared
him or taught him his part. Suppose we found that he was honest!
Imagine--if he returned a firm negative to all your dazzling offers!”

Mascarin rose to his feet in his turn. “I do not think that there is any
chance of that,” said he.

“Why not, pray?”

“Because when Tantaine brought him to me, he had studied him carefully.
He is as weak as a woman, and as vain as a journalist. Besides, he is
ashamed at being poor. No; I can mould him like wax into any shape I
like. He will be just what we wish.”

“Are you sure,” asked Hortebise, “that Flavia will have nothing to say
in this matter?”

“I had rather, with your permission, say nothing on that head,” returned
Mascarin. He broke off his speech and listened eagerly. “There is some
one listening,” said he. “Hark!”

The sound was repeated, and the doctor was about to seek refuge in the
inner room, when Mascarin laid a detaining hand upon his arm.

“Stay,” observed he, “it is only Beaumarchef;” and as he spoke,
he struck a gilded bell that stood on his desk. In another instant
Beaumarchef appeared, and with an air in which familiarity was mingled
with respect, he saluted in military fashion.

“Ah,” said the doctor pleasantly, “do you take your nips of brandy
regularly?”

“Only occasionally, sir,” stammered the man.

“Too often, too often, my good fellow. Do you think that your nose and
eyelids are not real telltales?”

“But I assure you, sir--”

“Do you not remember I told you that you had asthmatic symptoms?
Why, the movement of your pectoral muscles shows that your lungs are
affected.”

“But I have been running, sir.”

Mascarin broke in upon this conversation, which he considered frivolous.
“If he is out of breath,” remarked he, “it is because he has been
endeavoring to repair a great act of carelessness that he has committed.
Well, Beaumarchef, how did you get on?”

“All right, sir,” returned he, with a look of triumph. “Good!”

“What are you talking about?” asked the doctor.

Mascarin gave his friend a meaning glance, and then, in a careless
manner, replied, “Caroline Schimmel, a former servant of the Champdoce
family, also patronizes our office. How did you find her, Beaumarchef?”

“Well, an idea occurred to me.”

“Pooh! do you have ideas at your time of life?”

Beaumarchef put on an air of importance. “My idea was this,” he went
on: “as I left the office with Toto Chupin, I said to myself, the woman
would certainly drop in at some pub before she reached the boulevard.”

“A sound argument,” remarked the doctor.

“Therefore Toto and I took a squint into every one we passed, and before
we got to the Rue Carreau we saw her in one, sure enough.”

“And Toto is after her now?”

“Yes, sir; he said he would follow her like her shadow, and will bring
in a report every day.”

“I am very pleased with you, Beaumarchef,” said Mascarin, rubbing his
hands joyously.

Beaumarchef seemed highly flattered, but continued,--

“This is not all.”

“What else is there to tell?”

“I met La Candele on his way from the Place de Petit Pont, and he
has just seen that young girl--you know whom I mean--driving off in a
two-horse Victoria. He followed it, of course. She has been placed in a
gorgeous apartment in the Rue Douai; and from what the porter says, she
must be a rare beauty; and La Candele raved about her, and says that she
has the most magnificent eyes in the world.”

“Ah,” remarked Hortebise, “then Tantaine was right in his description of
her.”

“Of course he was,” answered Mascarin with a slight frown, “and this
proves the justice of the objection you made a little time back. A girl
possessed of such dazzling beauty may even influence the fool who has
carried her off to become dangerous.”

Beaumarchef touched his master’s arm kindly. “If you wish to get rid of
the masher,” said he, “I can show you a way;” and throwing himself
into the position of a fencer, he made a lunge with his right arm,
exclaiming, “One, two!”

“A Prussian quarrel,” remarked Mascarin. “No; a duel would do us no
good. We should still have the girl on our hands, and violent measures
are always to be avoided.” He took off his glasses, wiped them, and
looking at the doctor intently, said, “Suppose we take an epidemic as
our ally. If the girl had the smallpox, she would lose her beauty.”

Cynical and hardened as the doctor was, he drew back in horror at this
proposal. “Under certain circumstances,” remarked he, “science might aid
us; but Rose, even without her beauty, would be just as dangerous as she
is now. It is _her_ affection for Paul that we have to check, and not
_his_ for her; and the uglier a woman is, the more she clings to her
lover.”

“All this is worthy of consideration,” returned Mascarin; “meanwhile we
must take steps to guard ourselves from the impending danger. Have you
finished that report on Gandelu, Beaumarchef? What is his position?”

“Head over ears in debt, sir, but not harassed by his creditors because
of his future prospects.”

“Surely among these creditors there are some that we could influence?”
 said Mascarin. “Find this out, and report to me this evening; and
farewell for the present.”

When again alone, the two confederates remained silent for some time.
The decisive moment had arrived. As yet they were not compromised; but
if they intended to carry out their plans, they must no longer remain
inactive; and both of these men had sufficient experience to know that
they must look at the position boldly, and make up their minds at once.
The pleasant smile upon the doctor’s face faded away, and his fingers
played nervously with his locket. Mascarin was the first to break the
silence.

“Let us no longer hesitate,” said he; “let us shut our eyes to the
danger and advance steadily. You heard the promises made by the Marquis
de Croisenois. He will do as we wish, but under certain conditions.
Mademoiselle de Mussidan must be his bride.”

“That will be impossible.”

“Not so, if we desire it: and the proof of this is, that before two
o’clock the engagement between Mademoiselle Sabine and the Baron de
Breulh-Faverlay will be broken off.”

The doctor heaved a deep sigh. “I can understand Catenac’s scruples. Ah!
if, like him, I had a million!”

During this brief conversation Mascarin had gone into his sleeping room
and was busily engaged in changing his dress.

“If you are ready,” remarked the doctor, “we will make a start.”

In reply, Mascarin opened the door leading into the office. “Get a cab,
Beaumarchef,” said he.



CHAPTER IV.

A TRUSTWORTHY SERVANT.

In the City of Paris it is impossible to find a more fashionable quarter
than the one which is bounded on the one side by the Rue Faubourg Saint
Honore and on the other by the Seine, and commences at the Place de la
Concorde and ends at the Avenue de l’Imperatrice. In this favored spot
millionaires seem to bloom like the rhododendron in the sunny south.
There are the magnificent palaces which they have erected for their
accommodation, where the turf is ever verdant, and where the flowers
bloom perennially; but the most gorgeous of all these mansions was the
Hotel de Mussidan, the last _chef d’oeuvre_ of Sevair, that skilful
architect who died just as the world was beginning to recognize his
talents. With a spacious courtyard in front and a magnificent garden in
the rear, the Hotel de Mussidan is as elegant as it is commodious.
The exterior was extremely plain, and not disfigured by florid
ornamentation. White marble steps, with a light and elegant railing at
the sides, lead to the wide doors which open into the hall. The busy hum
of the servants at work at an early hour in the yard tells that an ample
establishment is kept up. There can be seen luxurious carriages, for
occasions of ceremony, and the park phaeton, and the simple brougham
which the Countess uses when she goes out shopping; and that carefully
groomed thoroughbred is Mirette, the favorite riding horse of
Mademoiselle Sabine. Mascarin and his confederate descended from their
cab a little distance at the corner of the Avenue Matignon. Mascarin, in
his dark suit, with his spotless white cravat and glittering spectacles,
looked like some highly respectable functionary of State. Hortebise wore
his usual smile, though his cheek was pale.

“Now,” remarked Mascarin, “let me see,--on what footing do you stand
with the Mussidans? Do they look upon you as a friend?”

“No, no; a poor doctor, whose ancestors were not among the Crusades,
could not be the intimate friend of such haughty nobles as the
Mussidans.”

“But the Countess knows you, and will not refuse to receive you, nor
have you turned out as soon as you begin to speak; for, taking shelter
behind some rogue without a name, you can shelter your own reputation. I
will see the Count.”

“Take care of him,” said Hortebise thoughtfully. “He has a reputation
for being a man of ungovernable temper, and, at the first word from you
that he objects to, would throw you out of the window as soon as look at
you.”

Mascarin shrugged his shoulders. “I can bring him to reason,” answered
he.

The two confederates walked a little past the Hotel de Mussidan, and the
doctor explained the interior arrangements of the house.

“I,” continued Mascarin, “will insist upon the Count’s breaking off his
daughter’s engagement with M. de Breulh-Faverlay, but shall not say
a word about the Marquis de Croisenois, while you will take the
opportunity of putting his pretensions before the Countess, and will not
say a word of M. de Breulh-Faverlay.”

“I have learned my lesson, and shall not forget it.”

“You see, doctor, the beauty of the whole affair is, that the Countess
will wonder how her husband will take her interference, while he will be
at a loss how to break the news to his wife. How surprised they will be
when they find that they have both the same end in view!”

There was something so droll in the whole affair, that the doctor burst
into a loud laugh.

“We go by such different roads,” said he, “that they will never suspect
that we are working together. Faith! my dear Baptiste, you are much more
clever than I thought.”

“Don’t praise me until you see that I am successful.”

Mascarin stopped opposite to a _café_ in the Faubourg Saint Honore.

“Wait here for me, doctor,” said he, “while I make a little call. If all
is all right; I will come for you again; then I will see the Count, and
twenty minutes later do you go to the house and ask for the Countess.”

The clock struck four as the worthy confederates parted, and Mascarin
continued his way along the Faubourg Saint Honore, and again stopped
before a public house, which he entered, the master of which, Father
Canon, was so well known in the neighborhood that he had not thought it
worth while to have his name painted over the door. He did not profess
to serve his best wine to casual customers, but for regular frequenters
of his house, chiefly the servants of noble families, he kept a better
brand of wine. Mascarin’s respectable appearance inclined the landlord
to step forward. Among Frenchmen, who are always full of gayety, a
serious exterior is ever an excellent passport.

“What can I do for you, sir?” asked he with great politeness.

“Can I see Florestan?”

“In Count de Mussidan’s service, I believe?”

“Just so; I have an appointment with him here.”

“He is downstairs in the band-room,” replied the landlord. “I will send
for him.”

“Don’t trouble; I will go down,” and, without waiting for permission,
Mascarin descended some steps that apparently led to a cellar.

“It appears to me,” murmured Father Canon, “that I have seen this cove’s
face before.”

Mascarin pushed open a door at the bottom of the flight of stairs, and
a strange and appalling noise issued from within (but this neither
surprised nor alarmed him), and entered a vaulted room arranged like a
_café_, with seats and tables, filled with customers. In the centre, two
men, in their shirt sleeves, with crimson faces, were performing upon
horns; while an old man, with leather gaiters, buttoning to the knee,
and a broad leather belt, was whistling the air the hornplayers were
executing. As Mascarin politely took off his hat, the performers ceased,
and the old man discontinued his whistling, while a well-built young
fellow, with pumps and stockings, and wearing a fashionable mustache,
exclaimed,--

“Aha, it is that good old Mascarin. I was expecting you; will you
drink?”

Without waiting for further invitation Mascarin helped himself from a
bottle that stood near.

“Did Father Canon tell you that I was here?” asked the young man, who
was the Florestan Mascarin had been inquiring for. “You see,” continued
he, “that the police will not permit us to practise the horn; so, you
observe, Father Canon has arranged this underground studio, from whence
no sound reaches the upper world.”

The hornplayers had now resumed their lessons, and Florestan was
compelled to place both hands to the side of his mouth, in order to
render himself audible, and to shout with all his might.

“That old fellow there is a huntsman in the service of the Duke de
Champdoce, and is the finest hornplayer going. I have only had twenty
lessons from him, and am getting on wonderfully.”

“Ah!” exclaimed Mascarin, “when I have more time I must hear your
performance; but to-day I am in a hurry, and want to say a few words to
you in private.”

“Certainly, but suppose we go upstairs and ask for a private room.”

The rooms he referred to were not very luxuriously furnished, but were
admirably suited for confidential communications; and had the walls been
able to speak, they could have told many a strange tale.

Florestan and Mascarin seated themselves in one of these before a small
table, upon which Father Canon placed a bottle of wine and two glasses.

“I asked you to meet me here, Florestan,” began Mascarin, “because you
can do me a little favor.”

“Anything that is in my power I will do,” said the young man.

“First, a few words regarding yourself. How do you get on with Count de
Mussidan?”

Mascarin had adopted an air of familiarity which he knew would please
his companion.

“I don’t care about the place,” replied Florestan, “and I am going to
ask Beaumarchef to look out another one for me.”

“I am surprised at that; all your predecessors said that the Count was a
perfect gentleman--”

“Just try him yourself,” broke in the valet. “In the first place he is
as fickle as the wind, and awfully suspicious. He never leaves anything
about,--no letters, no cigars, and no money. He spends half his time in
locking things up, and goes to bed with his keys under his pillow.”

“I allow that such suspicion on his part is most unpleasant.”

“It is indeed, and besides he is awfully violent. He gets in a rage
about nothing, and half a dozen times in the day he looks ready to
murder you. On my word, I am really frightened at him.”

This account, coupled with what he had heard from Hortebise seemed to
render Mascarin very thoughtful.

“Is he always like this, or only at intervals?”

“He is always a beast, but he is worse after drink or losing at cards.
He is never home until after four in the morning.”

“And what does his wife say?”

The query made Florestan laugh.

“Madame does not bother herself about her lord and master, I can assure
you. Sometimes they don’t meet for weeks. All she wants is plenty of
money. And ain’t we just dunned!”

“But the Mussidans are wealthy?”

“Tremendously so, but at times there is not the value of a franc in the
house. Then Madame is like a tigress, and would sent to borrow from all
her friends.”

“But she must feel much humiliated?”

“Not a bit; when she wants a heavy amount, she sends off to the Duke de
Champdoce, and he always parts; but she doesn’t mince matters with him.”

“It would seem as if you had known the contents of your mistress’s
letters?” remarked Mascarin with a smile.

“Of course I have; I like to know what is in the letters I carry about.
She only says, ‘My good friend, I want so much,’ and back comes the
money without a word. Of course it is easy to see that there has been
something between them.”

“Yes, evidently.”

“And when master and missus do meet they only have rows, and such rows!
When the working man has had a drop too much, he beats his wife, she
screams, then they kiss and make it up; but the Mussidans say things to
each other in cold blood that neither can ever forgive.”

From the air with which Mascarin listened to these details, it almost
seemed as if he had been aware of them before.

“Then,” said he, “Mademoiselle Sabine is the only nice one in the
house?”

“Yes, she is always gentle and considerate.”

“Then you think that M. de Breulh-Faverlay will be a happy man?”

“Oh, yes; but perhaps this marriage will----” but here Florestan
interrupted himself and assumed an air of extreme caution. After looking
carefully round, he lowered his voice, and continued, “Mademoiselle
Sabine has been left so much to herself that she acts just as she thinks
fit.”

“Do you mean,” asked Mascarin, “that the young lady has a lover?”

“Just so.”

“But that must be wrong; and let me tell you that you ought not to
repeat such a story.”

The man grew quite excited.

“Story,” repeated he; “I know what I know. If I spoke of a lover, it is
because I have seen him with my own eyes, not once, but twice.”

From the manner in which Mascarin received this intelligence, Florestan
saw that he was interested in the highest degree.

“I’ll tell you all about it,” continued he. “The first time was when she
went to mass; it came on to rain suddenly, and Modeste, her maid, begged
me to go for an umbrella. As soon as I came back I went in and saw
Mademoiselle Sabine standing by the receptacle for holy water, talking
to a young fellow. Of course I dodged behind a pillar, and kept a watch
on the pair--”

“But you don’t found all your story on this?”

“I think you would, had you seen the way they looked into each other’s
eyes.”

“What was he like?”

“Very good looking, about my height, with an aristocratic air.”

“How about the second time?”

“Ah, that is a longer story. I went one day with Mademoiselle when she
was going to see a friend in the Rue Marboeuf. She waited at a corner of
the street, and beckoned me to her. ‘Florestan,’ said she, ‘I forgot to
post this letter; go and do so; I will wait here for you.’”

“Of course you read it?”

“No. I thought there was something wrong. She wants to get rid of you,
so, instead of posting it, I slunk behind a tree and waited. I had
hardly done so, when the young fellow I had seen at the chapel came
round the corner; but I scarcely knew him. He was dressed just like a
working man, in a blouse all over plaster. They talked for about
ten minutes, and Mademoiselle Sabine gave him what looked like a
photograph.”

By this time the bottle was empty, and Florestan was about to call for
another, when Mascarin checked him, saying--

“Not to-day; it is growing late, and I must tell you what I want you to
do for me. Is the Count at home now?”

“Of course he is; he has not left his room for two days, owing to having
slipped going downstairs.”

“Well, my lad, I must see your master; and if I sent up my card, the
odds are he would not see me, so I rely upon you to show me up without
announcing me.”

Florestan remained silent for a few minutes.

“It is no easy job,” he muttered, “for the Count does not like
unexpected visitors, and the Countess is with him just now. However, as
I am not going to stay, I’ll chance it.”

Mascarin rose from his seat.

“We must not be seen together,” said he; “I’ll settle the score; do you
go on, and I will follow in five minutes. Remember we don’t know each
other.”

“I am fly; and mind you look out a good place for me.”

Mascarin paid the bill, and then looked into the _café_ to inform the
doctor of his movements, and a few minutes later, Florestan in his
most sonorous voice, threw open the door of his master’s room and
announced,--

“M. Mascarin.”



CHAPTER V.

A FORGOTTEN CRIME.

Baptiste Mascarin had been in so many strange situations, from which he
had extricated himself with safety and credit, that he had the fullest
self-confidence, but as he ascended the wide staircase of the Hotel de
Mussidan, he felt his heart beat quicker in anticipation of the struggle
that was before him. It was twilight out of doors, but all within was
a blaze of light. The library into which he was ushered was a vast
apartment, furnished in severe taste. At the sound of the unaristocratic
name of Mascarin, which seemed as much out of place as a drunkard’s oath
in the chamber of sleeping innocence, M. de Mussidan raised his head
in sudden surprise. The Count was seated at the other end of the room,
reading by the light of four candles placed in a magnificently wrought
candelabra. He threw down his paper, and raising his glasses, gazed with
astonishment at Mascarin, who, with his hat in his hand and his heart
in his mouth, slowly crossed the room, muttering a few unintelligible
apologies. He could make nothing, however, of his visitor, and said,
“Whom do you wish to see, sir?”

“The Count de Mussidan,” stuttered Mascarin; “and I hope that you will
forgive this intrusion.”

The Count cut his excuse short with a haughty wave of his hand. “Wait,”
 said he imperiously. He then with evident pain rose from his seat, and
crossing the room, rang the bell violently, and then reseated himself.
Mascarin, who still remained in the centre of the room, inwardly
wondered if after all he was to be turned out of the house. In another
second the door opened, and the figure of the faithful Florestan
appeared.

“Florestan,” said the Count, angrily, “this is the first time that you
have permitted any one to enter this room without my permission; if this
occurs again, you leave my service.”

“I assure your lordship,” began the man.

“Enough! I have spoken; you know what to expect.”

During this brief colloquy, Mascarin studied the Count with the deepest
attention.

The Count Octave de Mussidan in no way resembled the man sketched by
Florestan. Since the time of Montaigne, a servant’s portrait of his
employer should always be distrusted. The Count looked fully sixty,
though he was but fifty years of age; he was undersized, and he looked
shrunk and shrivelled; he was nearly bald, and his long whiskers were
perfectly white. The cares of life had imprinted deep furrows on his
brow, and told too plainly the story of a man who, having drained the
chalice of life to the bottom, was now ready to shiver the goblet. As
Florestan left the room the Count turned to Mascarin, and in the same
glacial tone observed, “And now, sir, explain this intrusion.”

Mascarin had often been rebuffed, but never so cruelly as this. His
vanity was sorely wounded, for he was vain, as all are who think that
they possess some hidden influence, and he felt his temper giving way.

“Pompous idiot!” thought he; “we will see how he looks in a short time;”
 but his face did not betray this, and his manner remained cringing
and obsequious. “You have heard my name, my lord, and I am a general
business agent.”

The Count was deceived by the honest accents which long practice
had taught Mascarin to use, and he had neither a suspicion nor a
presentiment.

“Ah!” said he majestically, “a business agent, are you? I presume you
come on behalf of one of my creditors. Well, sir, as I have before told
these people, your errand is a futile one. Why do they worry me when I
unhesitatingly pay the extravagant interest they are pleased to demand?
They know that they are all knaves. They are aware that I am rich, for I
have inherited a great fortune, which is certainly without encumbrance;
for though I could raise a million to-morrow upon my estates in
Poitiers, I have up to this time not chosen to do so.”

Mascarin had at length so recovered his self-command that he listened to
this speech without a word, hoping to gain some information from it.

“You may tell this,” continued the Count, “to those by whom you are
employed.”

“Excuse me, my lord--”

“But what?”

“I cannot allow--”

“I have nothing more to say; all will be settled as I promised, when I
pay my daughter’s dowry. You are aware that she will shortly be united
to M. de Breulh-Faverlay.”

There was no mistaking the order to go, contained in these words,
but Mascarin did not offer to do so, but readjusting his spectacles,
remarked in a perfectly calm voice,--

“It is this marriage that has brought me here.”

The Count thought that his ears had deceived him. “What are you saying?”
 said he.

“I say,” repeated the agent, “that I am sent to you in connection with
this same marriage.”

Neither the doctor nor Florestan had exaggerated the violence of the
Count’s temper. Upon hearing his daughter’s name and marriage mentioned
by this man, his face grew crimson and his eyes gleamed with a lurid
fire.

“Get out of this!” cried he, angrily.

But this was an order that Mascarin had no intention of obeying.

“I assure you that what I have to say is of the utmost importance,” said
he.

This speech put the finishing touch to the Count’s fury.

“You won’t go, won’t you?” said he; and in spite of the pain that at the
moment evidently oppressed him, he stepped to the bell, but was arrested
by Mascarin, uttering in a warning voice the words,--

“Take care; if you ring that bell, you will regret it to the last day of
your life.”

This was too much for the Count’s patience, and letting go the bell
rope, he snatched up a walking cane that was leaning against the
chimneypiece, and made a rush toward his visitor. But Mascarin did not
move or lift his hand in self-defence, contenting himself with saying
calmly,--

“No violence, Count; remember Montlouis.”

At this name the Count grew livid, and dropping the cane from his
nerveless hand staggered back a pace or two. Had a spectre suddenly
stood up before him with threatening hand, he could not have been more
horrified.

“Montlouis!” he murmured; “Montlouis!”

But now Mascarin, thoroughly assured of the value of his weapon, had
resumed all his humbleness of demeanor.

“Believe me, my lord,” said he, “that I only mentioned this name on
account of the immediate danger that threatens you.”

The Count hardly seemed to pay attention to his visitor’s words.

“It was not I,” continued Mascarin, “who devised the project of bringing
against you an act which was perhaps a mere accident. I am only a
plenipotentiary from persons I despise, to you, for whom I entertain the
very highest respect.”

By this time the Count had somewhat recovered himself.

“I really do not understand you,” said he, in a tone he vainly
endeavored to render calm. “My sudden emotion is only too easily
explained. I had a sad misfortune. I accidentally shot my secretary, and
the poor young man bore the name you just now mentioned; but the court
acquitted me of all blame in the matter.”

The smile upon Mascarin’s face was so full of sarcasm that the Count
broke off.

“Those who sent me here,” remarked the agent, slowly, “are well
acquainted with the evidence produced in court; but unfortunately, they
know the real facts, which certain honorable gentlemen had sense to
conceal at any risk.”

Again the Count started, but Mascarin went on implacably,--

“But reassure yourself, your friend did not betray you voluntarily.
Providence, in her inscrutable decrees----”

The Count shuddered.

“In short, sir, in short----”

Up to this time Mascarin had remained standing, but now that he saw that
his position was fully established, he drew up a chair and sat down.
The Count grew more livid at this insolent act, but made no comment, and
this entirely removed any doubts from the agent’s mind.

“The event to which I have alluded has two eye-witnesses, the Baron de
Clinchain, and a servant, named Ludovic Trofin, now in the employ of the
Count du Commarin.”

“I did not know what had become of Trofin.”

“Perhaps not, but my people do. When he swore to keep the matter secret,
he was unmarried, but a few years later, having entered the bonds of
matrimony, he told all to his young wife. This woman turned out badly;
she had several lovers, and through one of them the matter came to my
employer’s ears.”

“And it was on the word of a lackey, and the gossip of a dissolute
woman, that they have dared to accuse me.”

No word of direct accusation had passed, and yet the Count sought to
defend himself.

Mascarin saw all this, and smiled inwardly, as he replied, “We have
other evidence than that of Ludovic.”

“But,” said the Count, who was sure of the fidelity of his friend, “you
do not, I suppose, pretend that the Baron de Clinchain has deceived me?”

The state of mental anxiety and perturbation into which this man of the
world had been thrown must have been very intense for him not to
have perceived that every word he uttered put a fresh weapon in his
adversary’s hands.

“He has not denounced you by word of mouth,” replied the agent. “He has
done far more; he has written his testimony.”

“It is a lie,” exclaimed the Count.

Mascarin was not disturbed by this insult.

“The Baron has written,” repeated he, “though he never thought that any
eye save his own would read what he had penned. As you are aware,
the Baron de Clinchain is a most methodical man, and punctilious to a
degree.”

“I allow that; continue.”

“Consequently you will not be surprised to learn that from his earliest
years he has kept a diary, and each day he puts down in the most minute
manner everything that has occurred, even to the different conditions of
his bodily health.”

The Count knew of his friend’s foible, and remembered that when they
were young many a practical joke had been played upon his friend on this
account, and now he began to perceive the dangerous ground upon which he
stood.

“On hearing the facts of the case from Ludovic’s wife’s lover,”
 continued Mascarin, “my employers decided that if the tale was a true
one, some mention of it would be found in the Baron’s diary; and thanks
to the ingenuity and skill of certain parties, they have had in their
possession for twenty-four hours the volume for the year 1842.”

“Scoundrels!” muttered the Count.

“They find not only one, but three distinct statements relating to the
affair in question.”

The Count started again to his feet with so menacing a look, that the
worthy Mascarin pushed back his chair in anticipation of an immediate
assault.

“Proofs!” gasped the Count. “Give me proofs.”

“Everything has been provided for, and the three leaves by which you are
so deeply compromised have been cut from the book.”

“Where are these pages?”

Mascarin at once put on an air of injured innocence.

“I have not seen them, but the leaves have been photographed, and a
print has been entrusted to me, in order to enable you to recognize the
writing.”

As he spoke he produced three specimens of the photographic art,
wonderfully clear and full of fidelity. The Count examined them with the
utmost attention, and then in a voice which trembled with emotion, he
said, “True enough, it is his handwriting.”

Not a line upon Mascarin’s face indicated the delight with which he
received this admission.

“Before continuing the subject,” he observed placidly, “I consider it
necessary for you to understand the position taken up by the Baron de
Clinchain. Do you wish, my lord, to read these extracts, or shall I do
so for you?”

“Read,” answered the Count, adding in a lower voice, “I cannot see to do
so.”

Mascarin drew his chair nearer to the lights on the table. “I perceive,”
 said he, “that the first entry was made on the evening after the--well,
the accident. This is it: ‘October 26, 1842. Early this morning went
out shooting with Octave de Mussidan. We were accompanied by Ludovic, a
groom, and by a young man named Montlouis, whom Octave intends one day
to make his steward. It was a splendid day, and by twelve o’clock I had
killed a leash of hares. Octave was in excellent spirits, and by one
o’clock we were in a thick cover not far from Bevron. I and Ludovic were
a few yards in front of the others, when angry voices behind attracted
our attention. Octave and Montlouis were arguing violently, and all
at once the Count struck his future steward a violent blow. In another
moment Montlouis came up to me. ‘What is the matter?’ cried I. Instead
of replying to my question, the unhappy young man turned back to
his master, uttering a series of threats. Octave had evidently been
reproaching him for some low intrigue he had been engaged in, and
was reflecting upon the character of the woman. ‘At any rate,’ cried
Montlouis, ‘she is quite as virtuous as Madame de Mussidan was before
her marriage.’”

“‘As Octave heard these words, he raised the loaded gun he held in his
hand and fired. Montlouis fell to the ground, bathed in blood. We
all ran up to him, but he was quite dead, for the charge of shot had
penetrated his heart. I was almost beside myself, but Octave’s despair
was terrible to witness. Tearing his hair, he knelt beside the dead man.
Ludovic, however, maintained his calmness. “We must say that it was an
accident,” observed he quickly. “Thinking that Montlouis was not near,
my master fired into cover.”

“‘This was agreed to, and we carefully arranged what we should say. It
was I who went before the magistrate and made a deposition, which was
unhesitatingly received. But, oh, what a fearful day! My pulse is at
eighty, and I feel I shall not sleep all night. Octave is half mad, and
Heaven knows what will become of him.’”

The Count, from the depths of his armchair, listened without apparent
emotion to this terrible revelation. He was quite crushed, and was
searching for some means to exorcise the green spectre of the past,
which had so suddenly confronted him. Mascarin never took his eyes off
him. All at once the Count roused himself from his prostration, as a man
awakes from a hideous dream. “This is sheer folly,” cried he.

“It is folly,” answered Mascarin, “that would carry much weight with
it.”

“And suppose I were to show you,” returned the Count, “that all these
entries are the offspring of a diseased mind?”

Mascarin shook his head with an air of affected grief. “There is no
use, my lord, in indulging in vain hopes. We,” he continued, wishing
to associate himself with the Count, “we might of course admit that
the Baron de Clinchain had made this entry in his diary in a moment of
temporary insanity, were it not for the painful fact that there were
others. Le me read them.”

“Go on; I am all attention.”

“We find the following, three days later: ‘Oct. 29th, 1842. I am most
uneasy about my health. I feel shooting pains in all my joints. The
derangement of my system arises entirely from this business of Octave’s.
I had to run the gauntlet of a second court, and the judge’s eyes seemed
to look me through and through. I also saw with much alarm that my
second statement differs somewhat from the first one, so I have
now learned it by heart. Ludovic is a sharp fellow, and quite
self-possessed. I would like to have him in my household. I keep myself
shut up in my house for fear of meeting friends who want to hear all the
details of the accident. I believe I may say that I have repeated the
story more than a couple of dozen times.’ Now, my lord,” added Mascarin,
“what do you say to this?”

“Continue the reading of the extracts.”

“The third allusion, though it is short, is still very important:
‘November 3rd, 1842. Thank Heaven! all is over. I have just returned
from the court. Octave has been acquitted. Ludovic had behaved
wonderfully. He explained the reason of the misadventure in a way that
was really surprising in an uneducated man, and there was not an atom
of suspicion among judge, jury, or spectators. I have changed my mind;
I would not have a fellow like Ludovic in my service; he is much too
sharp. When I had been duly sworn, I gave my evidence. Though I was much
agitated, I went through it all right; but when I got home I felt
very ill, and discovered that my pulse was down to fifty. Ah, me! what
terrible misfortunes are wrought by a momentary burst of anger. I now
write this sentence in my diary: _“Never give way to first impulses.”_’
These words,” continued Mascarin, “were inscribed on every one of the
pages following,--at least so those who examined the entries informed
me.”

Mascarin persisted in representing himself as the agent of others, but
still the Count made no allusion to the persons in the background.

After a few moments the Count rose and limped up and down, as though he
hoped by this means to collect his ideas, or perhaps in order to prevent
his visitor from scanning his face too closely.

“Have you done?” asked he, all at once.

“Yes, my lord.”

“Have you thought what an impartial judge would say?”

“I think I have.”

“He would say,” broke in the Count, “that no sane man would have written
such things down, for there are certain secrets which we do not whisper
even to ourselves, and it is hardly likely that any man would make such
compromising entries in a diary which might be lost or stolen, and which
would certainly be read by his heir. Do you think that a man of high
position would record his perjury, which is a crime that would send him
to penal servitude?”

Mascarin gazed upon the Count with an air of pity.

“You are not going the right way, my lord, to get out of your trouble.
No lawyer would adopt your theory. If the remaining volumes of M. de
Clinchain’s diaries were produced in court, I imagine that other equally
startling entries would be found in them.”

The Count now appeared to have arrived at some decision, and to continue
the conversation simply for the purpose of gaining time.

“Well,” said he, “I will give up this idea; but how do I know that
these documents are not forgeries? Nowadays, handwritings are easily
facsimilied, when even bankers find it hard to distinguish between their
own notes and counterfeit ones.”

“That can be settled by seeing if certain leaves are missing from the
Baron’s diary.”

“That does not prove much.”

“Pardon me, it proves a great deal. This new line of argument, I assure
you, will avail you as little as the other. I am perfectly aware that
the Baron de Clinchain will utter whatever words you may place in his
mouth. Let us suppose that the leaves which have been torn out should
fit into the book exactly. Would not that be a strong point?”

The Count smiled ironically, as though he had a crushing reply in
reserve.

“And so this is your opinion, is it?” said he.

“It is indeed.”

“Then all I have to do is to plead guilty. I did kill Montlouis, just
as Clinchain describes, but----” and as he spoke he took a heavy volume
from a shelf, and opening it at a certain place laid it before Mascarin,
remarking,--“this is the criminal code; read. ‘All proceedings in
criminal law shall be cancelled after a lapse of ten years.’”

The Count de Mussidan evidently thought that he had crushed his
adversary by this shattering blow; but it was not so, for instead of
exhibiting any surprise, Mascarin’s smile was as bland as ever.

“I, too, know a little of the law,” said he. “The very first day this
matter was brought to me, I turned to this page and read what you have
just shown me to my employers.”

“And what did they say?”

“That they knew all this, but that you would be glad to compromise the
affair, even at the expense of half your fortune.”

The agent’s manner was so confident that the Count felt they had
discovered some means of turning this crime of his early days to
advantage; but he was still sufficiently master of himself to show no
emotion.

“No,” replied he, “it is not such an easy matter as you think to get
hold of half my fortune. I fancy that your friends’ demands will assume
a more modest tone, the more so when I repeat that these morsels of
paper, stolen from my friend’s diary, are absolutely worthless.”

“Do you think so?”

“Certainly, for the law on this matter speaks plainly enough.”

Mascarin readjusted his glasses, a sure indication that he was going to
make an important reply.

“You are quite right, my lord,” said he, slowly. “There is no intention
of taking you before any court, for there is no penalty now for a crime
committed twenty-three years ago; but the miserable wretches whom I
blush to act for have arranged a plan which will be disagreeable in the
highest degree both for you and the Baron.”

“Pray tell me what this clever plan is.”

“Most certainly. I came here to-day for this very purpose. Let us first
conclude that you have rejected the request with which I approached
you.”

“Do you call this style of thing a request?”

“What is the use of quarrelling over words. Well, to-morrow, my
clients--though I am ashamed to speak of them as such--will send to
a well known morning paper a tale, with the title, ‘Story of a Day’s
Shooting.’ Of course only initials will be used for the names, but no
doubt will exist as to the identity of the actors in the tragedy.”

“You forget that in actions for libel proofs are not admitted.”

Mascarin shrugged his shoulders.

“My employers forget nothing,” remarked he; “and it is upon this very
point that they have based their plans For this reason they introduce
into the matter a fifth party, of course an accomplice, whose name is
introduced into the story in the paper. Upon the day of its appearance,
this man lodges a complaint against the journal, and insists on proving
in a court of justice, that he did not form one of the shooting-party.”

“Well, what happens then?”

“Then, my lord, this man insists that the journal should give a
retraction of the injurious statement and summons as witnesses both
yourself and the Baron de Clinchain, and as a conclusion, Ludovic;
and as he claims damages, he employs a lawyer, who is one of the
confederates and behind the scenes. The lawyer will speak something to
this effect: ‘That the Count de Mussidan is clearly a murderer; that
the Baron de Clinchain is a perjurer, as proved by his own handwriting;
Ludovic has been tampered with, but my client, an honorable man, must
not be classed with these, etc., etc.’ Have I made myself understood?”

Indeed, he had, and with such cold and merciless logic that it seemed
hopeless to expect to escape from the net that had been spread.

As these thoughts passed through the Count’s brain, he saw at a glance
the whole terrible notoriety that the case would cause, and society
gloating over the details. Yet such was the obstinacy of his
disposition, and so impatient was he of control, that the more desperate
his position seemed, the fiercer was his resistance. He knew the world
well, and he also knew that the cutthroats who demanded his money with
threats had every reason to dread the lynx eye of the law. If he refused
to listen to them, as his heart urged him, perhaps they would not dare
to carry out their threats. Had he alone been concerned in the matter,
he would have resisted to the last, and fought it out to the last drop
of his blood, and as a preliminary, would have beaten the sneering rogue
before him to a jelly; but how dared he expose his friend Clinchain, who
had already braved so much for him? As he paced up and down the library,
these and many other thoughts swept across his brain, and he was
undecided whether to submit to these extortions or throw the agent out
of the window. His excited demeanor and the occasional interjections
that burst from his lips showed Mascarin that the account of him was
not exaggerated, and that when led by passion he would as soon shoot
a fellow-creature as a rabbit. And yet, though he knew not whether he
should make his exit by the door or the window, he sat twirling his
fingers with the most unconcerned air imaginable. At last the Count gave
ear to prudence. He stopped in front of the agent, and, taking no pains
to hide his contempt, said,--

“Come, let us make an end of this. How much do you want for these
papers?”

“Oh, my lord!” exclaimed Mascarin; “surely you do not think that I could
be guilty----?”

M. de Mussidan shrugged his shoulders. “Pray, do not take me for a
fool,” said he, “but name your sum.”

Mascarin seemed a little embarrassed, and hesitated. “We don’t want
money,” answered he at length.

“Not money!” replied the Count.

“We want something that is of no importance to you, but of the utmost
value to those who despatched me here. I am commissioned to inform you
that my clients desire that you should break off the engagement between
your daughter and M. de Breulh-Faverlay, and that the missing paper will
be handed to you on the completion of her marriage with any else whom
you may deem worthy of such an honor.”

This demand, which was utterly unexpected, so astonished the Count that
he could only exclaim, “Why, this is absolute madness!”

“No; it is plain, good sense, and a _bona fide_ offer.”

An idea suddenly flashed across the Count’s mind. “Is it your
intention,” asked he, “to furnish me with a son-in-law too?”

“I am sure, my lord,” answered Mascarin, looking the picture of
disinterested honesty, “that, even to save yourself, you would never
sacrifice your daughter.”

“But--”

“You are entirely mistaken; it is M. de Breulh-Faverlay whom my clients
wish to strike at, for they have taken an oath that he shall never wed a
lady with a million for her dowry.”

So surprised was the Count, that the whole aspect of the interview
seemed to have changed, and he now combated his own objections instead
of those of his unwelcome visitor. “M. de Breulh-Faverlay has my
promise,” remarked he; “but of course it is easy to find a pretext. The
Countess, however, is in favor of the match, and the chief opposition to
any change will come from her.”

Mascarin did not think it wise to make any reply, and the Count
continued, “My daughter also may not view this rupture with
satisfaction.”

Thanks to the information he had received from Florestan, Mascarin knew
how much importance to attach to this. “Mademoiselle, at her age and
with her tastes, is not likely to have her heart seriously engaged.” For
fully a quarter of an hour the Count still hesitated. He knew that he
was entirely at the mercy of those miscreants, and his pride revolted at
the idea of submission; but at length he yielded.

“I agree,” said he. “My daughter shall not marry M. de Breulh-Faverlay.”

Even in his hour of triumph, Mascarin’s face did not change. He bowed
profoundly, and left the room; but as he descended the stairs, he rubbed
his hands, exclaiming, “If the doctor has made as good a job of it as I
have, success is certain.”



CHAPTER VI.

A MEDICAL ADVISER.

Doctor Hortebise did not find it necessary to resort to any of those
expedients which Mascarin had found it advisable to use in order to
reach Madame de Mussidan. As soon as he presented himself--that is,
after a brief interval of five minutes--he was introduced into the
presence of the Countess. He rather wondered at this, for Madame de
Mussidan was one of those restless spirits that are seldom found at
home, but are to be met with at exhibitions, on race-courses, at the
_salons_, restaurants, shops, or theatres; or at the studio of some
famous artist; or at the rooms of some musical professor who had
discovered a new tenor; anywhere and everywhere, in fact, except at
home. Hers was one of those restless natures constantly craving for
excitement; and husband, home, and child were mere secondary objects in
her eyes. She had many avocations; she was a patroness of half a dozen
charitable institutions, but the chief thing that she did was to spend
money. Gold seemed to melt in her grasp like so much snow, and she never
knew what became of the sums she lavished so profusely. Husband and
wife had long been almost totally estranged, and led almost separate
existences. Dr. Hortebise was well aware of this, in common with others
who moved in society. Upon the appearance of the doctor, the Countess
dropped the book she had been perusing, and gave vent to an exclamation
of delight. “Ah, doctor, this is really very kind of you;” and at the
same time signed to the servant to place a chair for the visitor.

The Countess was tall and slender, and at forty-five had the figure of
a girl. She had an abundance of fair hair, the color of which concealed
the silver threads which plentifully interspersed it. A subtle perfume
hung about her, and her pale blue eyes were full of pride and cold
disdain.

“You know how to time your visits so well, doctor!” said she. “I am
thoroughly bored, and am utterly weary of books, for it always seems to
me, when I read, that I had perused the same thing before somewhere or
other. You have arrived at so opportune a moment, that you appear to be
a favorite of timely chance.”

The doctor was indeed a favorite of chance; but the name of the chance
was Baptiste Mascarin.

“I see so few visitors,” continued Madame de Mussidan, “that hardly any
one comes to see me. I must really set aside one day in the week for my
at home; for when I do happen to stay at home, I feel fearfully dull
and lonely. For two mortal hours I have been in this room. I have been
nursing the Count.”

The doctor knew better than this; but he smiled pleasantly, and said,
“Perfectly so,” exactly at the right moment.

“Yes,” continued the Countess, “my husband slipped on the stairs, and
hurt himself very much. Our doctor says it is nothing; but then I put
little faith in what doctors say.”

“I know that by experience, madame,” replied Hortebise.

“Present company of course always excepted; but, do you know, I once
really believed in you; but your sudden conversion to homeopathy quite
frightened me.”

The doctor smiled. “It is as safe a mode of practice as any other.”

“Do you really think so?”

“I am perfectly sure of it.”

“Well, now that you _are_ here, I am half inclined to ask your advice.”

“I trust that you are not suffering.”

“No, thank heaven; I have never any cause to complain of my health; but
I am very anxious about Sabine’s state.”

Her affection of maternal solicitude was a charming pendant to her
display of conjugal affection, and again the doctor’s expression of
assent came in in the right place.

“Yes, for a month, doctor, I have hardly seen Sabine, I have been so
much engaged; but yesterday I met her, and was quite shocked at the
change in her appearance.”

“Did you ask her what ailed her?”

“Of course, and she said, ‘Nothing,’ adding that she was perfectly
well.”

“Perhaps something had vexed her?”

“She,--why, don’t you know that every one likes her, and that she is one
of the happiest girls in Paris; but I want you to see her in spite of
that.” She rang the bell as she spoke, and as soon as the footman made
his appearance, said, “Lubin, ask Mademoiselle to have the goodness to
step downstairs.”

“Mademoiselle has gone out, madame.”

“Indeed! how long ago?”

“About three o’clock, madame.”

“Who went with her?”

“Her maid, Modeste.”

“Did Mademoiselle say where she was going to?”

“No, madame.”

“Very well, you can go.”

Even the imperturbable doctor was rather surprised at a girl of eighteen
being permitted so much freedom.

“It is most annoying,” said the Countess. “However, let us hope that the
trifling indisposition, regarding which I wished to consult you, will
not prevent her marriage.”

Here was the opening that Hortebise desired.

“Is Mademoiselle going to be married?” asked he with an air of
respectful curiosity.

“Hush!” replied Madame de Mussidan, placing her finger on her lips;
“this is a profound secret, and there is nothing definitely arranged;
but you, as a doctor, are a perfect father confessor, and I feel that
I can trust you. Let me whisper to you that it is quite possible that
Sabine will be Madame de Breulh-Faverlay before the close of the year.”

Hortebise had not Mascarin’s courage; indeed, he was frequently
terrified at his confederate’s projects; but having once given in his
adherence, he was to be relied on, and did not hesitate for a moment.
“I confess, madame, that I heard that mentioned before;” returned he
cautiously.

“And, pray, who was your informant?”

“Oh, I have had it from many sources; and let me say at once that it was
this marriage, and no mere chance, that brought me here to-day.”

Madame de Mussidan liked the doctor and his pleasant and witty
conversation very much, and was always charmed to see him; but it
was intolerable that he should venture to interfere in her daughter’s
marriage. “Really, sir, you confer a great honor upon the Count and
myself,” answered she haughtily.

Her severe manner, however, did not cause the doctor to lose his temper.
He had come to say certain things in a certain manner. He had learned
his part, and nothing that the Countess could say would prevent his
playing it.

“I assure you, madame,” returned he, “that when I accepted the mission
with which I am charged, I only did so from my feelings of respect to
you and yours.”

“You are really very kind,” answered the Countess superciliously.

“And I am sure, madame, that after you have heard what I have to say,
you will have even more reason to agree with me.” His manner as he
said this was so peculiar, that the Countess started as though she had
received a galvanic shock. “For more than twenty-five years,” pursued
the doctor, “I have been the constant depository of strange family
secrets, and some of them have been very terrible ones. I have
often found myself in a very delicate position, but never in such an
embarrassing one as I am now.”

“You alarm me,” said the Countess, dropping her impatient manner.

“If, madame, what I have come to relate to you are the mere ravings of
a lunatic, I will offer my most sincere apologies; but if, on the
contrary, his statements are true--and he has irrefragable proofs in his
possession,--then, madame----”

“What then, doctor?”

“Then, madame, I can only say, make every use of me, for I will
willingly place my life at your disposal.”

The Countess uttered a laugh as artificial as the tears of
long-expectant heirs. “Really,” said she, “your solemn air and tones
almost kill me with laughter.”

“She laughs too heartily, and at the wrong time. Mascarin is right,”
 thought the doctor. “I trust, madame,” continued he, “that I too may
laugh at my own imaginary fears; but whatever may be the result, permit
me to remind you that a little time back you said that a doctor was a
father confessor; for, like a priest, the physician only hears secrets
in order to forget them. He is also more fitted to console and advise,
for, as his profession brings him into contact with the frailties and
passions of the world, he can comprehend and excuse.”

“And you must not forget, doctor, that like the priest also, he preaches
very long sermons.”

As she uttered this sarcasm, there was a jesting look upon her features,
but it elicited no smile from Hortebise, who, as he proceeded, grew more
grave.

“I may be foolish,” he said; “but I had better be that than reopen some
old wound.”

“Do not be afraid, doctor; speak out.”

“Then, I will begin by asking if you have any remembrance of a young man
in your own sphere of society, who, at the time of your marriage,
was well known in every Parisian _salon_. I speak of the Marquis de
Croisenois.”

The Countess leaned back in her chair, and contracted her brow, and
pursed up her lips, as though vainly endeavoring to remember the name.

“The Marquis de Croisenois?” repeated she. “It seems as if----no--wait a
moment. No; I cannot say that I can call any such person to mind.”

The doctor felt that he must give the spur to this rebellious memory.

“Yes, Croisenois,” he repeated. “His Christian name was George, and he
had a brother Henry, whom you certainly must know, for this winter I saw
him at the Duchess de Laumeuse’s, dancing with your daughter.”

“You are right; I remember the name now.”

Her manner was indifferent and careless as she said this.

“Then perhaps you also recollect that some twenty-three years ago,
George de Croisenois vanished suddenly. This disappearance caused a
terrible commotion at the time, and was one of the chief topics of
society.”

“Ah! indeed?” mused the Countess.

“He was last seen at the Café de Paris, where he dined with some
friends. About nine he got up to leave. One of his friends proposed to
go with him, but he begged him not to do so, saying, ‘Perhaps I shall
see you later on at the opera, but do not count on me.’ The general
impression was that he was going to some love tryst.”

“His friends thought that, I suppose.”

“Yes, for he was attired with more care than usual, though he was always
one of the best dressed men in Paris. He went out alone, and was never
seen again.”

“Never again,” repeated the Countess, a slight shade passing across her
brow.

“Never again,” echoed the unmoved doctor. “At first his friends
merely thought his absence strange; but at the end of a week they grew
anxious.”

“You go very much into details.”

“I heard them all at the time, madame, and they were only brought back
to my memory this morning. All are to be found in the records of a
minute search that the authorities caused to be made into the affair.
The friends of De Croisenois had commenced the search; but when they
found their efforts useless, they called in the aid of the police. The
first idea was suicide: George might have gone into some lonely spot and
blown out his brains. There was no reason for this; he had ample means,
and always appeared contented and happy. Then it was believed that a
murder had been committed, and fresh inquiries were instituted, but
nothing could be discovered--nothing.”

The Countess affected to stifle a yawn, and repeated like an echo,
“Nothing.”

“Three months later, when the police had given up the matter in despair,
one of George de Croisenois’ friends received a letter from him.”

“He was not dead then, after all?”

Dr. Hortebise made a mental note of the tone and manner of the Countess,
to consider over at his leisure.

“Who can say?” returned he. “The envelope bore the Cairo post-mark. In
it George declared that, bored with Parisian life, he was going to start
on an exploring expedition to Central Africa, and that no one need be
anxious about him. People thought this letter highly suspicious. A man
does not start upon such an expedition as this without money; and it was
conclusively proved that on the day of De Croisenois’ disappearance
he had not more than a thousand francs about him, half of which was in
Spanish doubloons, won at whist before dinner. The letter was therefore
regarded as a trick to turn the police off the scent; but the best
experts asserted that the handwriting was George’s own. Two detectives
were at once despatched to Cairo, but neither there nor anywhere on the
road were any traces of the missing man discovered.”

As the doctor spoke, he kept his eyes riveted on the Countess, but her
face was impassable.

“Is that all?” asked she.

Dr. Hortebise paused a few moments before he replied, and then answered
slowly,--

“A man came to me yesterday, and asserts that you can tell me what has
become of George de Croisenois.”

A man could not have displayed the nerve evinced by this frail and
tender woman, for however callous he may be, some feature will betray
the torture he is enduring; but a woman can often turn a smiling face
upon the person who is racking her very soul. At the mere name of
Montlouis the Count had staggered, as though crushed down by a blow from
a sledge hammer; but at this accusation of Hortebise the Countess burst
into a peal of laughter, apparently perfectly frank and natural, which
utterly prevented her from replying.

“My dear doctor,” said she at length, as soon as she could manage to
speak, “your tale is highly sensational and amusing, but I really think
that you ought to consult a _clairvoyant_, and not a matter-of-fact
person like me, about the fate of George de Croisenois.”

But the doctor, who was ready with his retort, and, not at all
disconcerted by the cachinations of the Countess, heaved a deep sigh, as
though a great load had been removed from his heart, and, with an air of
extreme delight, exclaimed, “Thank Heaven! then I was deceived.”

He uttered these words with an affectation of such sincerity that the
Countess fell into the trap.

“Come,” said she, with a winning smile, “tell me who it is that says I
know so much.”

“Pooh! pooh!” returned Hortebise. “What good would that do? He has made
a fool of me, and caused me to risk losing your good opinion. Is not
that enough? To-morrow, when he comes to my house, my servants will
refuse to admit him; but if I were to do as my inclinations lead me, I
should hand him over to the police.”

“That would never do,” returned the Countess, “for that would change
a mere nothing into a matter of importance. Tell me the name of your
mysterious informer. Do I know him?”

“It is impossible that you could do so, madame, for he is far below you
in the social grade. You would learn nothing from his name. He is a man
I once helped, and is called Daddy Tantaine.”

“A mere nickname, of course.”

“He is miserably poor, a cynic, philosopher, but as sharp as a needle;
and this last fact causes me great uneasiness, for at first I thought
that he had been sent to me by some one far above him in position,
but--”

“But, doctor,” interposed the Countess, “you spoke to me of proofs, of
threats, of certain mysterious persons.”

“I simply repeated Daddy Tantaine’s words. The old idiot said to me,
‘Madame de Mussidan knows all about the fate of the Marquis, and this
is clearly proved by letters that she has received from him, as well as
from the Duke de Champdoce.’”

This time the arrow went home. She grew deadly pale, and started to her
feet with her eyes dilated with horror.

“My letters!” exclaimed she hoarsely.

Hortebise appeared utterly overwhelmed by this display of consternation,
of which he was the innocent cause.

“Your letters, madame,” replied he with evident hesitation, “this
double-dyed scoundrel declares he has in his possession.”

With a cry like that of a wounded lioness, the Countess, taking no
notice of the doctor’s presence, rushed from the room. Her rapid
footfall could be heard on the stairs, and the rustle of her silken
skirts against the banisters. As soon as he was left alone, the doctor
rose from his seat with a cynical smile upon his face.

“You may search,” mused he, “but you will find that the birds have
flown.” He walked up to one of the windows, and drummed on the glass
with his fingers. “People say,” remarked he, “that Mascarin never
makes a mistake. One cannot help admiring his diabolical sagacity and
unfailing logic. From the most trivial event he forges a long chain of
evidence, as the botanist is able, as he picks up a withered leaf, to
describe in detail the tree it came from. A pity, almost, that he did
not turn his talents to some nobler end; but no; he is now upstairs
putting the Count on the rack, while I am inflicting tortures on the
Countess. What a shameful business we are carrying on! There are moments
when I think that I have paid dearly for my life of luxury, for I know
well,” he added, half consciously fingering his locket, “that some day
we shall meet some one stronger than ourselves, and then the inevitable
will ensue.”

The reappearance of the Countess broke the chain of his thoughts. Her
hair was disturbed, her eyes had a wild look in them, and everything
about her betrayed the state of agitation she was in.

“Robbed! robbed!” cried she, as she entered the room. Her excitement was
so extreme that she spoke aloud, forgetting that the door was open,
and that the lackey in the ante-room could hear all she said. Luckily
Hortebise did not lose his presence of mind, and, with the ease of a
leading actor repairing the error of a subordinate, he closed the door.

“What have you lost?” asked he.

“My letters; they are all gone.”

She staggered on to a couch, and in broken accents went on. “And yet
these letters were in an iron casket closed by a secret spring; that
casket was in a drawer, the key of which never leaves me.”

“Good heavens!” exclaimed Hortebise in affected tones, “then Tantaine
spoke the truth.”

“He did,” answered the Countess hoarsely. “Yes,” she continued, “I am
the bondslave to people whose names I do not even know, who can control
my every movement and action.”

She hid her face in her hands as though her pride sought to conceal her
despair.

“Are these letters, then, so terribly compromising?” asked the doctor.

“I am utterly lost,” cried she. “In my younger days I had no experience;
I only thought of vengeance, and lately the weapons I forged myself
have been turned against me. I dug a pitfall for my adversaries and have
fallen into it myself.”

Hortebise did not attempt to stay the torrent of her words, for the
Countess was in one of those moods of utter despair when the inner
feelings of the soul are made manifest, as during a violent tempest the
weeds of ocean are hurled up to the surface of the troubled waters.

“I would sooner be lying in my grave a thousand times,” wailed she,
“than see these letters in my husband’s hands. Poor Octave! have I not
caused him sufficient annoyance already without this crowning sorrow?
Well, Dr. Hortebise, I am menaced with the production of these letters,
and they will be handed to my husband unless I agree to certain terms.
What are they? Of course money is required; tell me to what amount.”

The doctor shook his head.

“Not money?” cried the Countess; “what, then, do they require? Speak,
and do not torture me more.”

Sometimes Hortebise confessed to Mascarin that, putting his interests on
one side, he pitied his victims; but he showed no sign of this feeling,
and went on,--

“The value of what they require, madame, is best estimated by yourself.”

“Tell me what it is; I can bear anything now.”

“These compromising letters will be placed in your hands upon the day on
which your daughter marries Henry de Croisenois, the brother of George.”

Madame de Mussidan’s astonishment was so great that she stood as though
petrified into a statue.

“I am commissioned to inform you, madame, that every delay necessary
for altering any arrangements that may exist will be accorded you;
but, remember, if your daughter marries any one else than Henry de
Croisenois, the letters will be at once placed in your husband’s hands.”

As he spoke the doctor watched her narrowly. The Countess crossed the
room, faint and dizzy, and rested her head on the mantelpiece.

“And that is all?” asked she. “What you ask me to do is utterly
impossible: and perhaps it is for the best, for I shall have no long
agony of suspense to endure. Go, doctor, and tell the villain who holds
my letters that he can take them to the Count at once.”

The Countess spoke in such a decided tone that Hortebise was a little
puzzled.

“Can it be true,” she continued, “that scoundrels exist in our country
who are viler than the most cowardly murderers,--men who trade in the
shameful secrets that they have learned, and batten upon the money
they earn by their odious trade? I heard of such creatures before, but
declined to believe it; for I said to myself that such an idea only
existed in the unhealthy imaginations of novel writers. It seems,
however that I was in error; but do not let these villains rejoice too
soon; they will reap but a scanty harvest. There is one asylum left for
me where they cannot molest me.”

“Ah, madame!” exclaimed the doctor in imploring accents; but she paid no
attention to his remonstrances, and went on with increasing violence,--

“Do the miserable wretches think that I fear death? For years I
have prayed for it as a final mercy from the heaven I have so deeply
offended. I long for the quiet of the sepulchre. You are surprised at
hearing one like me speak in this way,--one who has all her life been
admired and flattered,--I, Diana de Laurebourg, Countess de Mussidan.
Even in the hours of my greatest triumphs my soul shuddered at the
thought of the grim spectre hidden away in the past; and I wished that
death would come and relieve my sufferings. My eccentricities have often
surprised my friends, who asked if sometimes I were not a little mad.
Mad? Yes, I am mad! They do not know that I seek oblivion in excitement,
and that I dare not be alone. But I have learned by this time that I
must stifle the voice of conscience.”

She spoke like a woman utterly bereft of hope, who had resolved on the
final sacrifice. Her clear voice rang through the room, and Hortebise
turned pale as he heard the footsteps of the servants pacing to and fro
outside the door, as they made preparations for dinner.

“All my life has been one continual struggle,” resumed she,--“a struggle
which has cost me sore; but now all is over, and to-night, for the first
time for many years, Diana de Mussidan will sleep a calm and untroubled
sleep.”

The excitement of the Countess had risen to so high a pitch that the
doctor asked himself how he could allay a tempest which he had not
foreseen; for her loud tones would certainly alarm the servants, who
would hasten to acquaint the Count, who was himself stretched upon the
rack; then the entire plot would be laid bare, and all would be lost.

Madame de Mussidan was about to rush from the room, when the doctor,
perceiving that he must act decisively, seized her by both wrists, and,
almost by force, caused her to resume her seat.

“In Heaven’s name, madame,” he whispered, “for your daughter’s sake,
listen to me. Do not throw up all; am not I here ready to do your
bidding, whatever it may be? Rely upon me,--rely upon the knowledge of a
man of the world, and of one who still possesses some portion of what is
called a heart. Cannot we form an alliance to ward off this attack?”

The doctor continued in this strain, endeavoring to reassure the
Countess as much as he had previously endeavored to terrify her, and
soon had the satisfaction of seeing his efforts crowned with success;
for Madame de Mussidan listened to his flow of language, hardly
comprehending its import, but feeling calmer as he went on; and in a
quarter of an hour he had persuaded her to look the situation boldly
in the face. Then Hortebise breathed more freely, and, wiping the
perspiration from his brow, felt that he had gained the victory.

“It is a nefarious plot,” said the Countess.

“So it is, madame; but the facts remain. Only tell me one thing, have
you any special objection to M. de Croisenois paying his addresses to
your daughter?”

“Certainly not.”

“He comes from a good family, is well educated, handsome, popular, and
only thirty-four. If you remember, George was his senior by fifteen
years. Why, then, is not the marriage a suitable one? Certainly, he has
led rather a fast life; but what young man is immaculate? They say
that he is deeply in debt; but then your daughter has enough for both.
Besides, his brother left him a considerable fortune, not far short of
two millions, I believe; and to this, of course Henry will eventually
succeed.”

Madame de Mussidan was too overwhelmed by what she had already gone
through to offer any further exposition of her feelings on the subject.

“All this is very well,” answered she; “but the Count has decided that
Sabine is to become the wife of M. de Breulh-Faverlay, and I have no
voice in the matter.”

“But if you exert your influence?”

The Countess shook her head. “Once on a time,” said she sadly, “I
reigned supreme over Octave’s heart; I was the leading spirit of his
existence. Then he loved me; but I was insensible to the depths of his
affection, and wore out a love that would have lasted as long as life
itself. Yes, in my folly I slew it, and now----” She paused for a moment
as if to collect her ideas, and then added more slowly: “and now our
lives are separate ones. I do not complain; it is all my own fault; he
is just and generous.”

“But surely you can make the effort?”

“But suppose Sabine loves M. de Breulh-Faverlay?”

“But, madame, a mother can always influence her daughter.”

The Countess seized the doctor’s hand, and grasped it so tightly that he
could hardly bear the pain.

“I must,” said she in a hoarse whisper, “divulge to you the whole extent
of my unhappiness. I am estranged from my husband, and my daughter
dislikes and despises me. Some people think that life can be divided
into two portions, one consecrated to pleasure and excitement, and the
other to domestic peace and happiness; but the idea is a false one. As
youth has been, so will be age, either a reward or an expiation.”

Dr. Hortebise did not care to follow this train of argument--for the
Count might enter at any moment, or a servant might come in to announce
dinner--and only sought to soothe the excited feelings of Madame de
Mussidan, and to prove to her that she was frightened by shadows, and
that in reality she was not estranged from her husband, nor did her
daughter dislike her; and finally a ray of hope illuminated the saddened
heart of the unfortunate lady.

“Ah, doctor!” said she, “it is only misfortune that teaches us to know
our true friends.”

The Countess, like her husband, had now laid down her arms; she had made
a longer fight of it, but in both cases the result had been the same.
She promised that she would commence operations the next day, and do her
utmost to break off the present engagement.

Hortebise then took his leave, quite worn out with the severe conflict
he had waged during his two hours’ interview with the Countess. In spite
of the extreme cold, the air outside seemed to refresh him considerably,
and he inhaled it with the happy feeling that he had performed his duty
in a manner worthy of all praise. He walked up the Rue de Faubourg Saint
Honore, and again entered the _café_ where he and his worthy confederate
had agreed to meet. Mascarin was there, an untasted cutlet before him,
and his face hidden by a newspaper which his anxiety would not permit
him to peruse. His suspense was terrible. Had Hortebise failed? had he
encountered one of those unforeseen obstacles which, like a minute grain
of sand, utterly hinders the working of a piece of delicate machinery?

“Well, what news?” said he eagerly, as soon as he caught sight of the
doctor.

“Success, perfect success!” said Hortebise gayly. “But,” added he, as he
sank exhausted upon a seat, “the battle has been a hard one.”



CHAPTER VII.

IN THE STUDIO.

Staggering like a drunken man, Paul Violaine descended the stairs
when his interview with Mascarin had been concluded. The sudden and
unexpected good fortune which had fallen so opportunely at his feet
had for the moment absolutely stunned him. He was now removed from a
position which had caused him to gaze with longing upon the still waters
of the Seine, to one of comparative affluence. “Mascarin,” said he to
himself, “has offered me an appointment bringing in twelve thousand
francs per annum, and proposed to give me the first month’s salary in
advance.”

Certainly it was enough to bewilder any man, and Paul was utterly dazed.
He went over all the events that had occurred during the day--the sudden
appearance of old Tantaine, with his loan of five hundred francs, and
the strange man who knew the whole history of his life, and who, without
making any conditions, had offered him a valuable situation. Paul was
in no particular hurry to get back to the Hotel de Perou, for he said to
himself that Rose could wait. A feeling of restlessness had seized
upon him. He wanted to squander money, and to have the sympathy of some
companions,--but where should he go, for he had no friends? Searching
the records of his memory, he remembered that, when poverty had first
overtaken him, he had borrowed twenty francs from a young fellow of his
own age, named Andre. Some gold coins still jingled in his pocket, and
he could have a thousand francs for the asking. Would it not add to his
importance if he were to go and pay this debt? Unluckily his creditor
lived a long distance off in the Rue de la Tour d’Auvergne. He, however,
hailed a passing cab, and was driven to Andre’s address. This young man
was only a casual acquaintance, whom Paul had picked up one day in a
small wine-shop to which he used to take Rose when he first arrived
in Paris. Andre, with whose other name Paul was unacquainted, was an
artist, and, in addition, was an ornamental sculptor, and executed
those wonderful decorations on the outside of houses in which builders
delight. The trade is not a pleasant one, for it necessitates working
at dizzy heights, on scaffolds that vibrate with every footstep,
and exposes you to the heat of summer and the frosts of winter. The
business, however, is well paid, and Andre got a good price for his
stone figures and wreaths. But all the money he earned went in the study
of the painter’s art, which was the secret desire of his soul. He
had taken a studio, and twice his pictures had been exhibited at the
_Salon_, and orders began to come in. Many of his brother artists
predicted a glorious future for him. When the cab stopped, Paul threw
the fare to the driver, and asked the clean-looking portress, who was
polishing the brasswork on the door, if M. Andre was at home.

“He is, sir,” replied the old woman, adding, with much volubility, “and
you are likely to find him in, for he has so much work; but he is such a
good and quiet young man, and so regular in his habits! I don’t believe
he owes a penny in the world; and as for drink, why he is a perfect
Anchorite. Then he has very few acquaintances,--one young lady, whose
face for a month past I have tried to see, but failed, because she wears
a veil, comes to see him, accompanied by her maid.”

“Good heavens, woman!” cried Paul impatiently, “will you tell me where
to find M. Andre?”

“Fourth floor, first door to the right,” answered the portress, angry at
being interrupted; and as Paul ran up the stairs, she muttered, “A young
chap with no manners, taking the words out of a body’s mouth like that!
Next time he comes, I’ll serve him out somehow.”

Paul found the door, with a card with the word “Andre” marked upon it
nailed up, and rapped on the panel. He heard the sound of a piece of
furniture being moved, and the jingle of rings being passed along a rod;
then a clear, youthful voice answered, “Come in!”

Paul entered, and found himself in a large, airy room, lighted by a
skylight, and exquisitely clean and orderly. Sketches and drawings were
suspended on the walls; there was a handsome carpet from Tunis, and
a comfortable lounge; a mirror in a carved frame, which would have
gladdened the heart of a connoisseur, stood upon the mantelpiece. An
easel with a picture upon it, covered with a green baize curtain, stood
in one corner. The young painter was in the centre of his studio, brush
and palette in hand. He was a dark, handsome young man, well built and
proportioned, with close-cut hair, and a curling beard flowing down over
his chest. His face was full of expression, and the energy and vigor
imprinted upon it formed a marked contrast to the appearance of
Mascarin’s _protégé_. Paul noticed that he did not wear the usual
painter’s blouse, but was carefully dressed in the prevailing fashion.
As soon as he recognized Paul, Andre came forward with extended hand.
“Ah,” said he, “I am pleased to see you, for I often wondered what had
become of you.”

Paul was offended at this familiar greeting. “I have had many worries
and disappointments,” said he.

“And Rose,” said Andre, “how is she--as pretty as ever, I suppose?”

“Yes, yes,” answered Paul negligently; “but you must forgive me for
having vanished so suddenly. I have come to repay your loan, with many
thanks.”

“Pshaw!” returned the painter, “I never thought of the matter again;
pray, do not inconvenience yourself.”

Again Paul felt annoyed, for he fancied that under the cloak of assumed
generosity the painter meant to humiliate him; and the opportunity of
airing his newly-found grandeur occurred to him.

“It was a convenience to me, certainly,” said he, “but I am all right
now, having a salary of twelve thousand francs.”

He thought that the artist would be dazzled, and that the mention of
this sum would draw from him some exclamations of surprise and envy.
Andre, however, made no reply, and Paul was obliged to wind up with the
lame conclusion, “And at my age that is not so bad.”

“I should call it superb. Should I be indiscreet in asking what you are
doing?”

The question was a most natural one, but Paul could not reply to it,
as he was entirely ignorant as to what his employment was to be, and he
felt as angry as if the painter had wantonly insulted him.

“I work for it,” said he, drawing himself up with such a strange
expression of voice and feature that Andre could not fail to notice it.

“I work too,” remarked he; “I am never idle.”

“But I have to work very hard,” returned Paul, “for I have not, like
you, a friend or protector to interest himself in me.”

Paul, who had not a particle of gratitude in his disposition, had
entirely forgotten Mascarin.

The artist was much amused by this speech. “And where do you think that
a foundling, as I am, would find a protector?”

Paul opened his eyes. “What,” said he, “are you one of those?”

“I am; I make no secret of it, hoping that there is no occasion for me
to feel shame, though there may be for grief. All my friends know this;
and I am surprised that you are not aware that I am simply a foundling
from the Hopital de Vendome. Up to twelve years of age I was perfectly
happy, and the master praised me for the knack I had of acquiring
knowledge. I used to work in the garden by day, and in the evening I
wasted reams of paper; for I had made up my mind to be an artist. But
nothing goes easily in this world, and one day the lady superintendent
conceived the idea of apprenticing me to a tanner.”

Paul, who had taken a seat on the divan in order to listen, here
commenced making a cigarette; but Andre stopped him. “Excuse me; but
will you oblige me by not smoking?”

Paul tossed the cigarette aside, though he was a little surprised,
as the painter was an inveterate smoker. “All right,” said he, “but
continue your story.”

“I will; it is a long one. I hated the tanner’s business from the
very beginning. Almost the first day an awkward workman scalded me so
severely that the traces still remain.” As he spoke he rolled up his
shirt sleeve, and exhibited a scar that covered nearly all one side
of his arm. “Horrified at such a commencement, I entreated the lady
superintendent, a hideous old woman in spectacles, to apprentice me to
some other trade, but she sternly refused. She had made up her mind that
I should be a tanner.”

“That was very nasty of her,” remarked Paul.

“It was, indeed; but from that day I made up my mind, and I determined
to run away as soon as I could get a little money together. I therefore
stuck steadily to the business, and by the end of the year, by means of
the strictest economy, I found myself master of thirty francs. This, I
thought, would do, and, with a bundle containing a change of linen, I
started on foot for Paris. I was only thirteen, but I had been gifted by
Providence with plenty of that strong will called by many obstinacy. I
had made up my mind to be a painter.”

“And you kept your vow?”

“But with the greatest difficulty. Ah! I can close my eyes and see the
place where I slept that first night I came to Paris. I was so exhausted
that I did not awake for twelve hours. I ordered a good breakfast; and
finding funds at a very low ebb, I started in search of work.”

Paul smiled. He, too, remembered _his_ first day in Paris. He was
twenty-two years of age, and had forty francs in his pocket.

“I wanted to make money--for I felt I needed it--to enable me to pursue
my studies. A stout man was seated near me at breakfast, and to him I
addressed myself.

“‘Look here,’ said I, ‘I am thirteen, and much stronger than I look. I
can read and write. Tell me how I can earn a living.’

“He looked steadily at me, and in a rough voice answered, ‘Go to the
market to-morrow morning, and try if one of the master masons, who are
on the lookout for hands, will employ you.’”

“And you went?”

“I did; and was eagerly watching the head masons, when I perceived my
stout friend coming toward me.

“‘I like the looks of you, my lad,’ he said; ‘I am an ornamental
sculptor. Do you care to learn my trade?’

“When I heard this proposal, it seemed as if Paradise was opening before
me, and I agreed with enthusiasm.”

“And how about your painting?”

“That came later on. I worked hard at it in all my hours of leisure. I
attended the evening schools, and worked steadily at my art and other
branches of education. It was a very long time before I ventured to
indulge in a glass of beer. ‘No, no, Andre,’ I would say to myself,
‘beer costs six sous; lay the money by.’ Finally, when I was earning
from eighty to a hundred francs a week, I was able to give more time to
the brush.”

The recital of this life of toil and self-denial, so different from his
own selfish and idle career, was inexpressibly mortifying to Paul; but
he felt that he was called upon to say something.

“When one has talents like yours,” said he, “success follows as a matter
of course.”

He rose to his feet, and affected to examine the sketches on the walls,
though his attention was attracted to the covered picture on the easel.
He remembered what the garrulous old portress had said about the veiled
lady who sometimes visited the painter, and that there had been some
delay in admitting him when he first knocked. Then he considered, for
whom had the painter dressed himself with such care? and why had he
requested him not to smoke? From all these facts Paul came to the
conclusion that Andre was expecting the lady’s visit, and that the
veiled picture was her portrait. He therefore determined to see it;
and with this end in view, he walked round the studio, admiring all the
paintings on the walls, maneuvering in such a manner as to imperceptibly
draw nearer to the easel.

“And this,” said he, suddenly extending his hand toward the cover, “is,
I presume, the gem of your studio?”

But Andre was by no means dull, and had divined Paul’s intention,
and grasped the young man’s outstretched hand just as it touched the
curtain.

“If I veil this picture,” said he, “it is because I do not wish it to be
seen.”

“Excuse me,” answered Paul, trying to pass over the matter as a jest,
though in reality he was boiling over with rage at the manner and tone
of the painter, and considered his caution utterly ridiculous.

“At any rate,” said he to himself, “I will lengthen out my visit, and
have a glimpse of the original instead of her picture;” and, with this
amiable resolution, he sat down by the artist’s table, and commenced an
apparently interminable story, resolved not to attend to any hints his
friend might throw out, who was glancing at the clock with the utmost
anxiety, comparing it every now and then with his watch.

As Paul talked on, he saw close to him on the table the photograph of a
young lady, and, taking advantage of the artist’s preoccupation, looked
at it.

“Pretty, very pretty!” remarked he.

At these words the painter flushed crimson, and snatching away the
photograph with some little degree of violence, thrust it between the
leaves of a book.

Andre was so evidently in a patina, that Paul rose to his feet, and for
a second or two the men looked into each other’s eyes as two adversaries
do when about to engage in a mortal duel. They knew but little of
each other, and the same chance which had brought them together
might separate them again at any moment, but each felt that the other
exercised some influence over his life.

Andre was the first to recover himself.

“You must excuse me; but I was wrong to leave so precious an article
about.”

Paul bowed with the air of a man who accepts an apology which he
considers his due; and Andre went on,--

“I very rarely receive any one except my friends; but to-day I have
broken through my rule.”

Paul interrupted him with a magniloquent wave of the hand.

“Believe me, sir,” said he, in a voice which he endeavoured to render
cutting and sarcastic, “had it not been for the imperative duty I before
alluded to, I should not have intruded.”

And with these words he left the room, slamming the door behind him.

“The deuce take the impudent fool!” muttered Andre. “I was strongly
tempted to pitch him out of the window.”

Paul was in a furious rage for having visited the studio with the kindly
desire of humiliating the painter. He could not but feel that the tables
had been turned upon himself.

“He shall not have it all his own way,” muttered he; “for I will see the
lady,” and not reflecting on the meanness of his conduct, he crossed the
street, and took up a position from which he could obtain a good view of
the house where Andre resided. It was snowing; but Paul disregarded the
inclemency of the weather in his eagerness to act the spy.

He had waited for fully half an hour, when a cab drove up. Two women
alighted from it. The one was eminently aristocratic in appearance,
while the other looked like a respectable servant. Paul drew closer;
and, in spite of a thick veil, recognized the features he had seen in
the photograph.

“Ah!” said he, “after all, Rose is more to my taste, and I will get back
to her. We will pay up Loupins, and get out of his horrible den.”



CHAPTER VIII.

MADEMOISELLE DE MUSSIDAN.

Paul had not been the only watcher; for at the sound of the carriage
wheels the ancient portress took up her position in the doorway, with
her eyes fixed on the face of the young lady. When the two women had
ascended the stairs, a sudden inspiration seized her, and she went out
and spoke to the cabman.

“Nasty night,” remarked she; “I don’t envy you in such weather as this.”

“You may well say that,” replied the driver; “my feet are like lumps of
ice.”

“Have you come far?”

“Rather; I picked them up in the Champs Elysees, near the Avenue de
Matignon.”

“That is a distance.”

“Yes; and only five sous for drink money. Hang your respectable women!”

“Oh! they are respectable, are they?”

“I’ll answer for that. The other lot are far more open-handed. I know
both of them.”

And with these words and a knowing wink, he touched up his horse and
drove away; and the portress, only half satisfied, went back to her
lodge.

“Why that is the quarter where all the swells live,” murmured she. “I’ll
tip the maid next time, and she’ll let out everything.”

After Paul’s departure, Andre could not remain quiet; for it appeared to
him as if each second was a century. He had thrown open the door of his
studio, and ran to the head of the stairs at every sound.

At last their footsteps really sounded on the steps. The sweetest music
in the world is the rustle of the beloved one’s dress. Leaning over the
banisters, he gazed fondly down. Soon she appeared, and in a short time
had gained the open door of the studio.

“You see, Andre,” said she, extending her hand, “you see that I am true
to my time.”

Pale, and trembling with emotion, Andre pressed the little hand to his
lips.

“Ah! Mademoiselle Sabine, how kind you are! Thanks, a thousand thanks.”

Yes, it was indeed Sabine, the scion of the lordly house of Mussidan,
who had come to visit the poor foundling of the Hotel de Vendome in his
studio, and who thus risked all that was most precious to her in
the world, her honor and her reputation. Yes, regardless of the
conventionalities among which she had been reared, dared to cross that
social abyss which separates the Avenue de Matignon from the Rue de la
Tour d’Auvergne. Cold reason finds no excuse for such a step, but the
heart can easily solve this seeming riddle. Sabine and Andre had been
lovers for more than two years. Their first acquaintance had commenced
at the Chateau de Mussidan. At the end of the summer of 1865, Andre,
whose constant application to work had told upon his health, determined
to take a change, when his master, Jean Lanier, called him, and said,--

“If you wish for a change, and at the same time to earn three or four
hundred francs, now is your time. An architect has written to me, asking
me for a skilled stone carver, to do some work in the country at a
magnificent mansion in the midst of the most superb scenery. Would you
care about undertaking this?”

The proposal was a most acceptable one to Andre, and in a week’s time he
was on his way to his work with a prospect of living for a month in
pure country air. Upon his arrival at the Chateau, he made a thorough
examination of the work with which he had been entrusted. He saw that he
could finish it with perfect ease, for it was only to restore the carved
work on a balcony, which would not take more than a fortnight. He did
not, however, press on the work, for the beautiful scenery enchanted
him.

He made many exquisite sketches, and his health began to return to him.
But there was another reason why he was in no haste to complete his
task, one which he hardly ventured even to confess to himself: he had
caught a glimpse of a young girl in the park of the Chateau who had
caused a new feeling to spring up in his heart. It was Sabine de
Mussidan. The Count, as the season came on, had gone to Germany, the
Countess had flitted away to Luzon, and the daughter was sent to the
dull old country mansion in charge of her old aunt. It was the old, old
story; two young hearts loving with all the truth and energy of their
natures. They had exchanged a few words on their first meeting, and on
the next Sabine went on to the balcony and watched the rapid play of
Andre’s chisel with childish delight. For a long time they conversed,
and Sabine was surprised at the education and refinement of the young
workman. Utterly fresh, and without experience, Sabine could not
understand her new sensations. Andre held, one night, a long converse
with himself, and was at last obliged to confess that he loved her
fondly. He ran the extent of his folly and madness, and recognized the
barrier of birth and wealth that stood between them, and was overwhelmed
with consternation.

The Chateau of Mussidan stands in a very lonely spot, and one of the
roads leading to it passes through a dense forest, and therefore it had
been arranged that Andre was to take his meals in the house. After
a time Sabine began to feel that this isolation was a needless
humiliation.

“Why can’t M. Andre take his meals with us?” asked she of her aunt. “He
is certainly more gentlemanlike than many of those who visit us, and I
think that his conversation would entertain you.”

The old lady was easily persuaded to adopt this suggestion, though at
first it seemed an odd kind of thing to admit a mere working man to her
table; but she was so bored with the loneliness of the place that she
hailed with delight anything that would break its monotony. Andre at
once accepted the proposal, and the old lady would hardly believe her
eyes when her guest entered the room with the dress and manners of a
highbred gentleman. “It is hardly to be believed,” said she, as she was
preparing to go to bed, “that a mere carver of stone should be so like
a gentleman. It seems to me that all distinctions of social rank have
vanished. It is time for me to die, or we are rapidly approaching a
state of anarchy.”

In spite of her prejudices, however, Andre contrived to win the old
lady’s heart, and won a complete victory by painting her portrait in
full gala costume. From that moment he was treated as one of the family,
and, having no fear of a rebuff, was witty and sprightly in his manner.
Once he told the old lady the true story of his life. Sabine was deeply
interested, and marvelled at his energy and endurance, which had won for
him a place on the ladder that leads to future eminence. She saw in
him the realization of all her girlish dreams, and finally confessed
to herself that she loved him. Both her father and mother had their own
pleasures and pursuits, and Sabine was as much alone in the world as
Andre.

The days now fled rapidly by. Buried in this secluded country house,
they were as free as the breeze that played through the trees of the
forest, for the old lady rarely disturbed them. After the morning meal,
she would beg Andre to read the newspaper to her, and fell into a doze
before he had been five minutes at the task. Then the young people
would slip quietly away, as merry as truants from school. They wandered
beneath the shade of the giant oaks, or climbed the rocks that stood
by the river bank. Sometimes, seated in a dilapidated boat, they would
drift down the stream with its flower-bedecked banks. The water was
often almost covered with rushes and water lilies. Two months of
enchantment thus fled past, two months of the intoxications of love,
though the mention of the tender passion never rose to their lips
from their hearts, where it was deeply imbedded. Andre had cast all
reflections regarding the perils of the future to the winds, and only
thanked heaven for the happiness that he was experiencing.

“Am I not too happy?” he would say to himself. “I fear this cannot
last.” And he was right. Anxious to justify his remaining at Mussidan
after his task was completed, Andre determined to add to what he had
already done a masterpiece of modern art, by carving a garland of fruit
and flowers over the old balcony, and every morning he rose with the sun
to proceed with his task.

One morning the valet came to him, saying that the old lady was desirous
of seeing him, and begged him to lose no time, as the business was
urgent. A presentiment of evil came like a chilly blast upon the young
man’s heart. He felt that his brief dream of happiness was at an end,
and he followed the valet as a criminal follows his executioner to the
scaffold.

As he opened the door in which Sabine’s aunt was awaiting him, the old
man whispered,--

“Have a care, sir, have a care. Madame is in a terrible state; I have
not seen her like this since her husband died.”

The old lady was in a terrible state of excitement, and in spite of
rheumatic pains was walking up and down the room, gesticulating wildly,
and striking her crutch-handled stick on the floor.

“And so,” cried she in that haughty tone adopted by women of
aristocratic lineage when addressing a supposed inferior, “you have, I
hear, had the impudence to make love to my niece?”

Andre’s pale face grew crimson as he stammered out,--

“Madame--”

“Gracious powers, fellow!” cried the angry woman, “do you dare to
deny this when your very face betrays you? Do you know that you are an
insolent rogue even to venture to look on Sabine de Mussidan? How dare
you! Perhaps you thought that if you compromised her, we should be
forced to submit to this ignoble alliance.”

“On my honor, madame, I assure you--”

“On your honor! To hear you speak, one would suppose that you were a
gentleman. If my poor husband were alive, he would break every bone in
your body; but I am satisfied with ordering you out of the house. Pick
up your tools, and be off at once.”

Andre stood as though petrified into stone. He took no notice of her
imperious manner, but only realized the fact that he should never see
Sabine again, and, turning deadly pale, staggered to a chair. The
old lady was so surprised at the manner in which Andre received her
communication, that for a time she too was bewildered, and could not
utter a word.

“I am unfortunately of a violent temper,” said she, speaking in more
gentle accents, “and perhaps I have spoken too severely, for I am much
to blame in this matter, as the priest of Berron said when he came to
inform me of what was going on. I am so old that I forgot what happens
when young people are thrown together, and I was the only one who did
not know what was going on when you were affording subject of gossip for
the whole countryside; my niece--”

But here Andre started to his feet with a threatening look upon his
face.

“I could strangle them all,” cried he.

“That is right,” returned the old lady, secretly pleased at his vigor
and energy, “but you cannot silence every idle tongue. Fortunately,
matters have not gone too far. Go away, and forget my niece.”

She might as well have told the young man to go away and die.

“Madame!” cried he in accents of despair, “pray listen to me. I am
young, and full of hope and courage.”

The old lady was so touched by his evident sorrow, that the tears rolled
down her wrinkled cheeks.

“What is the good of saying this to me?” asked she. “Sabine is not my
daughter. All that I can do is never to say a word to her father and
mother. Great heavens, if Mussidan should ever learn what has occurred!
There, do go away. You have upset me so that I do not believe I shall
eat a mouthful for the next two days.”

Andre staggered out of the room. It seemed to him as if the flooring
heaved and rolled beneath his feet. He could see nothing, but he felt
some one take him by the hand. It was Sabine, pallid and cold as a
marble statue.

“I have heard everything, Andre,” murmured she.

“Yes,” stammered he. “All is over, and I am dismissed.”

“Where are you going to?”

“Heaven only knows, and when once I leave this place I care not.”

“Do not be desperate,” urged Sabine, laying her hand upon his arm.

His fixed glance terrified her as he muttered,--

“I cannot help it; I am driven to despair.”

Never had Sabine appeared so lovely; her eyes gleamed with some generous
impulse, and her face glowed.

“Suppose,” said she, “I could give you a ray of future hope, what would
you do then?”

“What would I _not_ do then? All that a man could. I would fight my way
through all opposition. Give me the hardest task, and I will fulfil it.
If money is wanted, I will gain it; if a name, I will win it.”

“There is one thing that you have forgotten, and that is patience.”

“And that, Mademoiselle, I possess also. Do you not understand that with
one word of hope from you I can live on?”

Sabine raised her head heavenwards. “Work!” she exclaimed. “Work and
hope, for I swear that I will never wed other than you.”

Here the voice of the old lady interrupted the lovers.

“Still lingering here!” she cried, in a voice like a trumpet call. Andre
fled away with hope in his heart, and felt that he had now something
to live for. No one knew exactly what happened after his departure. No
doubt Sabine brought round her aunt to her way of thinking, for at her
death, which happened two months afterward, she left the whole of her
immense fortune directly to her niece, giving her the income while
she remained single, and the capital on her marriage, whether with or
without the consent of her parents. Madame de Mussidan declared that
the old lady had gone crazy, but both Andre and Sabine knew what she had
intended, and sincerely mourned for the excellent woman, whose last act
had been to smooth away the difficulties from their path. Andre worked
harder than ever, and Sabine encouraged him by fresh promises. Sabine
was even more free in Paris than at Mussidan, and her attached maid,
Modeste, would have committed almost any crime to promote the happiness
of her beloved mistress. The lovers now corresponded regularly, and
Sabine, accompanied by Modeste, frequently visited the artist’s studio,
and never was a saint treated with greater respect and adoration than
was Sabine by Andre.



CHAPTER IX.

ROSE’S PROMOTION.

As soon as Andre had released her hand, Sabine took off her hat, and,
handing it to Modeste, remarked,--

“How am I looking to-day, Andre?”

The young painter hastened to reassure her on this point, and she
continued in joyous tones,--

“No, I do not want compliments; I want to know if I look the right thing
for sitting for my portrait.”

Sabine was very beautiful, but hers was a different style of beauty from
that of Rose, whose ripe, sensuous charms were fitted to captivate the
admiration of the voluptuary, while Sabine was of the most refined and
ethereal character. Rose fettered the body with earthly trammels, while
Sabine drew the soul heavenward. Her beauty was not of the kind that
dazzles, for the air of proud reserve which she threw over it, in some
slight measure obscured its brilliancy.

She might have passed unnoticed, like the work of a great master’s brush
hanging neglected over the altar of a village church; but when the eye
had once fathomed that hidden beauty, it never ceased to gaze on it with
admiration. She had a broad forehead, covered with a wealth of chestnut
hair, soft, lustrous eyes, and an exquisitely chiselled mouth.

“Alas!” said Andre, “when I gaze upon you, I have to confess how
impossible it is to do you justice. Before you came I had fancied
that the portrait was completed, but now I see that I have only made a
failure.”

As he spoke, he drew aside the curtain, and the young girl’s portrait
was revealed. It was by no means a work of extraordinary merit. The
artist was only twenty-four years of age, and had been compelled to
interrupt his studies to toil for his daily bread, but it was full of
originality and genius. Sabine gazed at it for a few moments in silence,
and then murmured the words,--

“It is lovely!”

But Andre was too discouraged to notice her praise.

“It is like,” remarked he, “but a photograph also has that merit. I have
only got your features, but not your expression; it is an utter failure.
Shall I try again?”

Sabine stopped him with a gesture of denial.

“You shall not try again,” said she decidedly.

“And why not?” asked he in astonishment.

“Because this visit will be my last, Andre.”

“The last?” stammered the painter. “In what way have I so offended you,
that you should inflict so terrible a punishment on me?”

“I do not wish to punish you. You asked for my portrait, and I yielded
to your request; but let us talk reasonably. Do you not know that I am
risking my reputation by coming here day after day?”

Andre made no reply, for this unexpected blow had almost stunned him.

“Besides,” continued Mademoiselle de Mussidan, “what is to be done with
the portrait? It must be hidden away, as if it were something we were
ashamed of. Remember, on your success hangs our marriage.”

“I do not forget that.”

“Hasten then to gain all honor and distinction, for the world must agree
with me in saying that my choice has been a wise one.”

“I will do so.”

“I fully believe you, dear Andre, and remember what I said to you a year
ago. Achieve a name, then go to my father and ask for my hand. If he
refuses, if my supplications do not move him, I will quit his roof
forever.”

“You are right,” answered Andre. “I should indeed by a fool if I
sacrificed a future happy life for a few hours of present enjoyment, and
I will implicitly--”

“And now,” said Sabine, “that we have agreed on this point, let us
discuss our mutual interests, of which it seems that we have been a
little negligent up till now.”

Andre at once began to tell her of all that had befallen him since they
had last met, his defeats and successes.

“I am in an awkward plight,” said he. “Yesterday, that well known
collector, Prince Crescenzi, came to my studio. One of my pictures took
his fancy, and he ordered another from me, for which he would pay six
thousand francs.”

“That was quite a stroke of luck.”

“Just so, but unfortunately he wants it directly. Then Jean Lamou, who
has more in his hand than he can manage, has offered me the decoration
of a palatial edifice that he is building for a great speculator, M.
Gandelu. I am to engage all the workmen, and shall receive some seven or
eight hundred francs a month.”

“But how does this trouble you?”

“I will tell you. I have twice seen M. Gandelu, and he wants me to begin
work at once; but I cannot accept both, and must choose between them.”

Sabine reflected.

“I should execute the Prince’s commission,” said she.

“So should I, only----”

The girl easily found the cause of his hesitation.

“Will you never forget that I am wealthy?” replied she.

“The one would bring in the most money,” he returned, “and the other
most credit.”

“Then accept the offer of M. Gandelu.”

The old cuckoo-clock in the corner struck five.

“Before we part, dear Andre,” resumed she, “I must tell you of a fresh
trouble which threatens us; there is a project for marrying me to M. de
Breulh-Faverlay.”

“What, that very wealthy gentleman?”

“Just so.”

“Well, if I oppose my father’s wishes, an explanation must ensue, and
this just now I do not desire. I therefore intend to speak openly to M.
de Breulh-Faverlay, who is an honorable, straightforward man; and when I
tell him the real state of the case, he will withdraw his pretensions.”

“But,” replied Andre, “should he do so, another will come forward.”

“That is very possible, and in his turn the successor will be
dismissed.”

“Ah!” murmured the unhappy man, “how terrible will be your life,--a
scene of daily strife with your father and mother.”

After a tender farewell, Sabine and Modeste left. Andre had wished to
be permitted to go out and procure a vehicle, but this the young girl
negatived, and took her leave, saying.--

“I shall see M. de Breulh-Faverlay to-morrow.”

For a moment after he was left alone Andre felt very sad, but a happy
thought flashed across his brain.

“Sabine,” said he, “went away on foot, and I may follow her without
injury to her reputation.”

In another moment he was in the street, and caught a glimpse of Sabine
and her maid under a lamp at the next corner. He crossed to the other
side of the way and followed them cautiously.

“Perhaps,” murmured he, “the time is not far distant when I shall have
the right to be with her in her walks, and feel her arm pressed against
mine.”

By this time Sabine and her companion had reached the Rue Blanche, and
hailing a cab, were rapidly driven away. Andre gazed after it, and as
soon as it was out of sight, decided to return to his work. As he passed
a brilliantly lighted shop, a fresh young voice saluted him.

“M. Andre, M. Andre.”

He looked up in extreme surprise, and saw a young woman, dressed in
the most extravagant style, standing by the door of a brougham, which
glittered with fresh paint and varnish. In vain he tried to think who
she could be, but at length his memory served him.

“Mademoiselle Rose,” said he, “or I am much mistaken.”

A shrill, squeaky voice replied, “Madame Zora Chantemille, if you
please.”

Andre turned sharply round and found himself face to face with a young
man who had completed an order he was giving to the coachman.

“Ah, is that you?” said he.

“Yes, Chantemille is the name of the estate that I intend to settle on
madame.”

The painter examined the personage who had just addressed him with
much curiosity. He was dressed in the height or rather the burlesque of
fashion, wore an eyeglass, and an enormous locket on his chain. The face
which surmounted all this grandeur was almost that of a monkey, and
Toto Chupin had not exaggerated its ugliness when he likened it to that
animal.

“Pooh,” cried Rose, “what matters a name? All you have to do is to ask
this gentleman, who is an old friend of mine, to dinner.” And without
waiting for a reply, she took Andre by the hand and led him into a
brilliantly lighted hall. “You must dine with us,” she exclaimed; “I
will take no denial. Come, let me introduce you, M. Andre, M. Gaston de
Gandelu. There, that is all settled.”

The man bowed.

“Andre, Andre,” repeated Gandelu; “why, the name is familiar to me,--and
so is the face. Have I not met you at my father’s house? Come in; we
intend to have a jovial evening.”

“I really cannot,” pleaded Andre. “I have an engagement.”

“Throw it over then; we intend to keep you, now that we have got you.”

Andre hesitated for a moment, but he felt dispirited, and that he
required rousing. “After all,” thought he, “why should I refuse? If this
young man’s friends are like himself, the evening will be an amusing
one.”

“Come up,” cried Rose, placing her foot upon the stairs. Andre was about
to follow her, but was held back by Gandelu, whose face was radiant with
delight.

“Was there ever such a girl?” whispered he; “but there, don’t jump at
conclusions. I have only had her in hand for a short time, but I am a
real dab at starting a woman grandly, and it would be hard to find my
equal in Paris, you may bet.”

“That can be seen at a glance,” answered Andre, concealing a smile.

“Well, look here, I began at once. Zora is a quaint name, is it not?
It was my invention. She isn’t a right down swell to-day, but I have
ordered six dresses for her from Van Klopen; such swell gets up! You
know Van Klopen, don’t you, the best man-milliner in Paris. Such taste!
such ideas! you never saw the like.”

Rose had by this time reached her drawing-room. “Andre,” said she,
impatiently, “are you never coming up?”

“Quick, quick,” said Gandelu, “let us go at once; if she gets into a
temper she is sure to have a nervous attack, so let us hurry up.”

Rose did all she could to dazzle Andre, and as a commencement exhibited
to him her domestics, a cook and a maid; then he was shown every article
of furniture, and not one was spared him. He was forced to admire the
drawing-room suite covered with old gold silk, trimmed blue, and to test
the thickness of the curtains. Bearing aloft a large candelabra, and
covering himself with wax, Gandelu led the way, telling them the price
of everything like an energetic tradesman.

“That clock,” said he, “cost me a hundred louis, and dirt cheap at the
price. How funny that you should have known my father! Has he not
a wonderful intellect? That flower stand was three hundred francs,
absolutely given away. Take care of the governor, he is as sharp as a
needle. He wanted me to have a profession, but no, thank you. Yes, that
occasional table was a bargain at twenty louis. Six months ago I thought
that the old man would have dropped off, but now the doctors say--” He
stopped suddenly, for a loud noise was heard in the vestibule. “Here
come the fellows I invited,” cried he, and placing the candelabra on the
table, he hurried from the room.

Andre was delighted at so grand an opportunity of studying the _genus_
masher. Rose felt flattered by the admiration her fine rooms evidently
caused.

“You see,” cried she, “I have left Paul; he bothered me awfully, and
ended by half starving me.”

“Why, you are joking; he came here to-day, and said he was earning
twelve thousand francs a year.”

“Twelve thousand humbugs. A fellow that will take five hundred francs
from an old scarecrow he never met before is--”

Rose broke off abruptly, for at that moment young Gandelu brought in his
friends, and introduced them; they were all of the same type as
their host, and Andre was about to study them more intently, when a
white-waistcoated waiter threw open the door, exclaiming pompously,
“Madame, the dinner is on the table.”



CHAPTER X.

“YOU ARE A THIEF.”

When Mascarin was asked what was the best way to achieve certain
results, his invariable reply was, “Keep moving, keep moving.” He had
one great advantage over other men, he put in practice the doctrines he
preached, and at seven o’clock the morning after his interview with the
Count de Mussidan he was hard at work in his room. A thick fog hung over
the city, even penetrating into the office, which had begun to fill
with clients. This crowd had but little interest for the head of the
establishment, as it consisted chiefly of waiters from small eating
houses, and cooks who knew little or nothing of what was going on in the
houses where they were in service. Finding this to be the case, Mascarin
handed them all over to Beaumarchef, and only occasionally nodded to the
serviteur of some great family, who chanced to stroll in.

He was busily engaged in arranging those pieces of cardboard which had
so much puzzled Paul in his first visit, and was so much occupied with
his task, that all he could do was to mutter broken exclamations: “What
a stupendous undertaking! but I have to work single-handed, and hold in
my hands all these threads, which for twenty years, with the patience of
a spider, I have been weaving into a web. No one, seeing me here,
would believe this. People who pass me by in the street say, ‘That is
Mascarin, who keeps a servants’ registry office;’ that is the way in
which they look upon me. Let them laugh if they like; they little know
the mighty power I wield in secret. No one suspects me, no, not one. I
may seem too sanguine, it is true,” he continued, still glancing over
his papers, “or the net may break and some of the fishes slip out. That
idiot, Mussidan, asked me if I was acquainted with the Penal code. I
should think I was, for no one has studied them more deeply than I have,
and there is a clause in volume 3, chapter 2, which is always before me.
Penal servitude for a term of years; and if I am convicted under Article
306, then it means a life sentence.” He shuddered, but soon a smile of
triumph shone over his face as he resumed, “Ah, but to send a man like
Mascarin for change of air to Toulon, he must be caught, and that is not
such an easy task. The day he scents danger he disappears, and leaves
no trace behind him. I fear that I cannot look for too much from my
companions, Catenac and Hortebise; I have up to now kept them back.
Croisenois would never betray me, and as for Beaumarchef, La Candele,
Toto Chupin, and a few other poor devils, they would be a fine haul
for the police. They couldn’t split, simply because they know nothing.”
 Mascarin chuckled, and then adjusting his spectacles with his favorite
gesture, said, “I shall go on in the course I have commenced, straight
as the flight of an arrow. I ought to make four millions through
Croisenois. Paul shall marry Flavia, that is all arranged, and Flavia
will make a grand duchess with her magnificent income.”

He had by this time arranged his pasteboard squares, then he took a
small notebook, alphabetically arranged, from a drawer, wrote a name
or two in it, and then closing it said with a deadly smile, “There, my
friends, you are all registered, though you little suspect it. You are
all rich, and think that you are free, but you are wrong, for there is
one man who owns you, soul and body, and that man is Baptiste Mascarin;
and at his bidding, high as you hold your heads now, you will crawl to
his feet in humble abasement.” His musings were interrupted by a knock
at the door. He struck the bell on his writing table, and the last sound
of it was hardly died away, when Beaumarchef stood on the threshold.

“You desired me, sir,” said he, with the utmost deference, “to complete
my report regarding young M. Gandelu, and it so happens that the cook
whom he has taken into his service in the new establishment he has
started is on our list. She has just come in to pay us eleven francs
that she owed us, and is waiting outside. Is not this lucky?”

Mascarin made a little grimace. “You are an idiot, Beaumarchef,” said
he, “to be pleased at so trivial a matter. I have often told you that
there is no such thing as luck or chance, and that all comes to those
who work methodically.”

Beaumarchef listened to his master’s wisdom in silent surprise.

“And pray, who is this woman?” asked Mascarin.

“You will know her when you see her, sir. She is registered under class
D, that is, for employment in rather fast establishments.”

“Go and fetch her,” observed Mascarin, and as the man left the room, he
muttered, “Experience has taught me that it is madness to neglect the
smallest precaution.”

In another moment the woman appeared, and Mascarin at once addressed her
with that air of friendly courtesy which made him so popular among such
women. “Well, my good girl,” said he, “and so you have got the sort of
place you wanted, eh?”

“I hope so, sir, but you see I have only been with Madame Zora de
Chantemille since yesterday.”

“Ah, Zora de Chantemille, that is a fine name, indeed.”

“It is only a fancy name, and she had an awful row over it with master.
She wanted to be called Raphaela, but he stood out for Zora.”

“Zora is a very pretty name,” observed Mascarin solemnly.

“Yes, sir, just what the maid and I told her. She is a splendid woman,
and doesn’t she just squander the shiners? Thirty thousand francs have
gone since yesterday.”

“I can hardly credit it.”

“Not cash, you understand, but tick. M. de Gandelu has not a sou of his
own in the world, so a waiter at Potier’s told me, and he knew what
was what; but the governor is rolling in money. Yesterday they had a
house-warming--the dinner, with wine, cost over a thousand francs.”

Not seeing how to utilize any of this gossip, Mascarin made a gesture of
dismissal, when the woman exclaimed,--

“Stop, sir, I have something to tell you.”

“Well,” said Mascarin, throwing himself back in his chair with an air of
affected impatience, “let us have it.”

“We had eight gents to dinner, all howling swells, but my master was the
biggest masher of the lot. Madame was the only woman at table. Well, by
ten o’clock, they had all had their whack of drink, and then they told
the porter to keep the courtyard clear. What do you think they did then?
Why, they threw plates, glasses, knives, forks, and dishes bang out of
the window. That is a regular swell fashion, so the waiter at Potier’s
told me, and was introduced into Paris by a Russian.”

Mascarin closed his eyes and answered languidly, “Go on.”

“Well, sir, there was one gent who was a blot on the whole affair. He
was tall, shabbily dressed, and with no manners at all. He seemed all
the time to be sneering at the rest. But didn’t Madame make up to him
just. She kept heaping up his plate and filling his glass. When the
others got to cards, he sat down by my mistress, and began to talk.”

“Could you hear what they said?”

“I should think so. I was in the bedroom, and they were near the door.”

“Dear me,” remarked Mascarin, appearing much shocked, “surely that was
not right?”

“I don’t care a rap whether it was right or not. I like to hear all
about the people whom I engage with. They were talking about a M. Paul,
who had been Madame’s friend before, and whom the gentleman also knew.
Madame said that this Paul was no great shakes, and that he had stolen
twelve thousand francs.”

Mascarin pricked up his ears, feeling that his patience was about to
meet its reward.

“Can you tell me the gentleman’s name, to whom Madame said all this?”
 asked he.

“Not I. The others called him ‘The painter.’”

This explanation did not satisfy Mascarin.

“Look here, my good girl,” said he, “try and find out the fellow’s name.
I think he is an artist who owes me money.”

“All right! Rely on me; and now I must be off, for I have breakfast to
get ready, but I’ll call again to-morrow;” and with a curtsy she left
the room.

Mascarin struck his hand heavily on the table.

“Hortebise has a wonderful nose for sniffing out danger,” said he. “This
Rose and the young fool who is ruining himself for her must both be
suppressed.”

Beaumarchef again made a motion of executing a thrust with the rapier.

“Pooh, pooh!” answered his master; “don’t be childish. I can do better
than that. Rose calls herself nineteen, but she is more, she is of age,
while Gandelu is still a minor. If old Gandelu had any pluck, he would
put Article 354 in motion.”

“Eh, sir?” said Beaumarchef, much mystified.

“Look here. Before twenty-four hours have elapsed I must know everything
as to the habits and disposition of Gandelu senior. I want to know on
what terms he is with his son.”

“Good. I will set La Candele to work.”

“And as the young fellow will doubtless need money, contrive to let him
know of our friend Verminet, the chairman of the Mutual Loan Society.”

“But that is M. Tantaine’s business.”

Mascarin paid no heed to this, so occupied was he by his own thoughts.

“This young artist seems to have more brains than the rest of the set,
but woe to him if he crosses my path. Go back to the outer office,
Beaumarchef, I hear some clients coming in.”

The man, however, did not obey.

“Pardon me, sir,” said he, “but La Candele, who is outside, will see
them. I have my report to make.”

“Very good. Sit down and go on.”

Enchanted at this mark of condescension, Beaumarchef went on. “Yesterday
there was nothing of importance, but this morning Toto Chupin came.”

“He had not lost Caroline Schimmel, I trust?”

“No, sir; he had even got into conversation with her.”

“That is good. He is a cunning little devil; a pity that he is not a
trifle more honest.”

“He is sure,” continued Beaumarchef, “that the woman drinks, for she is
always talking of persons following her about who menace her, and she is
so afraid of being murdered that she never ventures out alone. She lives
with a respectable workingman and his wife, and pays well for her board,
for she seems to have plenty of money.”

“That is a nuisance,” remarked Mascarin, evidently much annoyed. “Where
does she live?”

“At Montmartre, beyond the Chateau Rouge.”

“Good. Tantaine will inquire and see if Toto has made no mistake, and
does not let the woman slip through his fingers.”

“He won’t do that, for he told me that he was on the right road to find
out who she was, and where she got her money from. But I ought to warn
you against the young scamp, for I have found out that he robs us and
sells our goods far below their value.”

“What do you mean?”

“I have long had my suspicions, and yesterday I wormed it all out from
a disreputable looking fellow, who came here to ask for his friend
Chupin.”

Men accustomed to danger are over prompt in their decisions. “Very
well,” returned Mascarin, “if this is the case, Master Chupin shall have
a taste of prison fare.”

Beaumarchef withdrew, but almost immediately reappeared.

“Sir,” said he, “a servant from M. de Croisenois is here with a note.”

“Send the man in,” said Mascarin.

The domestic was irreproachably dressed, and looked what he was, the
servant of a nobleman.

He had something the appearance of an Englishman, with a high collar,
reaching almost to his ears. His face was clean shaved, and of a
ruddy hue. His coat was evidently the work of a London tailor, and his
appearance was as stiff as though carved out of wood. Indeed, he looked
like a very perfect piece of mechanism.

“My master,” said he, “desired me to give this note into your own
hands.”

Under cover of breaking the seal, Mascarin viewed this model servant
attentively. He was a stranger to him, for he had never supplied
Croisenois with a domestic.

“It seems, my good fellow,” said he, “that your master was up earlier
than usual this morning?”

The man frowned a little at this familiar address, and then slowly
replied,--

“When I took service with the Marquis, he agreed to give me fifteen
louis over my wages for the privilege of calling me ‘a good fellow,’
but I permit no one to do so gratis. I think that my master is still
asleep,” continued the man solemnly. “He wrote the note on his return
from the club.”

“Is there any reply.”

“Yes, sir.”

“Good; then wait a little.”

And Mascarin, opening the note, read the following:

“MY DEAR FRIEND,--

“Baccarat has served me an ugly turn, and in addition to all my ready
cash I have given an I.O.U. for three thousand francs. To save my credit
I must have this by twelve to-morrow.”

“His credit,” said Mascarin. “His credit! That is a fine joke indeed.”
 The servant stood up stiffly erect, as one seeming to take no notice,
and the agent continued reading the letter.

“Am I wrong in looking to you for this trifle? I do not think so.
Indeed, I have an idea that you will send me a hundred and fifty louis
over and above, so that I may not be left without a coin in my pocket.
How goes the great affair? I await your decision on the brink of a
precipice.

“Yours devotedly,

“HENRY DE CROISENOIS.”


“And so,” growled Mascarin, “he has flung away five thousand francs,
and asks me to find it for him in my coffers. Ah, you fool, if I did not
want the grand name that you have inherited from your ancestors, a
name that you daily bespatter and soil, you might whistle for your five
thousand francs.”

However, as Croisenois was absolutely necessary to him, Mascarin slowly
took from his safe five notes of a thousand francs each, and handed them
to the man.

“Do you want a receipt?” asked the man.

“No; this letter is sufficient, but wait a bit;” and Mascarin, with
an eye to the future, drew a twenty franc piece from his pocket, and
placing it on the table, said in his most honeyed accents,--

“There, my friend, is something for yourself.”

“No, sir,” returned the man; “I always ask wages enough to prevent the
necessity of accepting presents.” And with this dignified reply he bowed
with the stiff air of a Quaker, and walked rigidly out of the room.

The agent was absolutely thunderstruck. In all his thirty years’
experience he had never come across anything like this.

“I can hardly believe my senses,” muttered he; “where on earth did
the Marquis pick this fellow up? Can it be that he is sharper than I
fancied?”

Suddenly a new and terrifying idea flashed across his mind. “Can it be,”
 said he, “that the fellow is not a real servant, after all? I have
so many enemies that one day they may strive to crush me, and however
skilfully I may play my cards, some one may hold a better hand.” This
idea alarmed him greatly, for he was in a position in which he had
nothing to fear; for when a great work is approaching completion, the
anxiety of the promoter becomes stronger and stronger. “No, no,” he
continued; “I am getting too full of suspicions;” and with these words
he endeavored to put aside the vague terrors which were creeping into
his soul.

Suddenly Beaumarchef, evidently much excited, appeared upon the
threshold.

“What, you here again!” cried Mascarin, angrily; “am I to have no peace
to-day?”

“Sir, the young man is here.”

“What young man? Paul Violaine?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Why, I told him not to come until twelve; something must have gone
wrong.” He broke off his speech, for at the half-open door stood
Paul. He was very pale, and his eyes had the expression of some hunted
creature. His attire was in disorder and betokened a night spent in
aimless wanderings to and fro.

“Ah, sir!” said he, as he caught sight of Mascarin.

“Leave us, Beaumarchef,” said the latter, with an imperious wave of his
hand; “and now, my dear boy, what is it?”

Paul sank into a chair.

“My life is ended,” said he; “I am lost, dishonored for ever.”

Mascarin put on a face of the most utter bewilderment, though he well
knew the cause of Paul’s utter prostration; but it was with the air of
a ready sympathizer that he drew his chair nearer to that of Paul, and
said,--

“Come, tell me all about it; what can possibly have happened to affect
you thus?”

In deeply tragic tones, Paul replied,--

“Rose has deserted me.”

Mascarin raised his hands to heaven.

“And is this the reason that you say you are dishonored? Do you not see
that the future is full of promise?”

“I loved Rose,” returned Paul, and his voice was so full of pathos that
Mascarin could hardly repress a smile. “But this is not all,” continued
the unhappy boy, making a vain effort to restrain his tears; “I am
accused of theft.”

“Impossible!” exclaimed Mascarin.

“Yes, sir; and you who know everything are the only person in the world
who can save me. You were so kind to me yesterday that I ventured to
come here before the time appointed, in order to entreat your help.”

“But what do you think I can do?”

“Everything, sir; but let me tell you the whole hideous complication.”

Mascarin’s face assumed an air of the deepest interest, as he answered,
“Go on.”

“After our interview,” began Paul, “I went back to the Hotel de Perou,
and on the mantelpiece in my garret found this note from Rose.”

He held it out as he spoke, but Mascarin made no effort to take it.

“In it,” resumed Paul, “Rose tells me she no longer loves me, and begs
me not to seek to see her again; and also that, wearied out of poverty,
she has accepted the offer of unlimited supplies of money, a carriage,
and diamonds.”

“Are you surprised at this?” asked Mascarin, with a sneer.

“How could I anticipate such an infidelity, when only the evening before
she swore by all she held most sacred that she loved me only? Why did
she lie to me? Did she write to make the blow fall heavier? When I
ascended the staircase, I was picturing to myself her joy when I told
her of your kind promises to me. For more than an hour I remained in my
garret, overwhelmed with the terrible thought that I should never see
her again.”

Mascarin watched Paul attentively, and came to the conclusion that his
words were too fine for his grief to be sincere.

“But what about the accusation of theft?”

“I am coming to that,” returned the young man. “I then determined to
obey your injunctions and leave the Hotel de Perou, with which I was
more than ever disgusted. I went downstairs to settle with Madame
Loupins, when ah! hideous disgrace! As I handed her the two weeks’ rent,
she asked me with a contemptuous sneer, where I had stolen the money
from?”

Mascarin secretly chuckled over the success of his plans thus announced
by Paul.

“What did you say?” asked he.

“Nothing, sir; I was too horror-stricken; the man Loupins came up, and
both he and his wife scowled at me threateningly. After a short pause,
they asserted that they were perfectly sure that Rose and I had robbed
M. Tantaine.”

“But did you not deny this monstrous charge?”

“I was utterly bewildered, for I saw that every circumstance was against
me. The evening before, Rose, in reply to Madame Loupin’s importunities,
had told her that she had no money, and did not know where to get any.
But, as you perceive, on the very next day I appeared in a suit of new
clothes, and was prepared to pay my debts, while Rose had left the
house some hours before. Does not all this form a chain of strange
coincidences? Rose changed the five hundred franc note that Tantaine had
lent me at the shop of a grocer, named Melusin, and this suspicious
fool was the first to raise a cry against us, and dared to assert that a
detective had been ordered to watch us.”

Mascarin knew all this story better than Paul, but here he interrupted
his young friend.

“I do not understand you,” said he, “nor whether your grief arises from
indignation or remorse. Has there been a robbery?”

“How can I tell? I have never seen M. Tantaine from that day. There is
a rumor that he has been plundered and important papers taken from him,
and that he has consequently been arrested.”

“Why did you not explain the facts?”

“It would have been of no use. It would clearly prove that Tantaine was
no friend of mine, not even an acquaintance, and they would have laughed
me to scorn had I declared that the evening before he came into my room
and made me a present of five hundred francs.”

“I think that I can solve the riddle,” remarked Mascarin. “I know the
old fellow so well.”

Paul listened with breathless eagerness.

“Tantaine,” resumed Mascarin, “is the best and kindest fellow in the
world, but he is not quite right in the upper story. He was a
wealthy man once, but his liberality was his ruin. He is as poor as
a church-mouse now, but he is as anxious as ever to be charitable.
Unfortunately in the place I procured for him he had a certain amount
of petty cash at his disposal, and moved to pity at the sight of your
sufferings, he gave you the money that really belonged to others. Then
he sent in his accounts, and the deficiency was discovered. He lost his
head, and declared that he had been robbed. You lived in the next room;
you were known to be in abject poverty on the one day and in ample funds
on the next; hence these suspicions.”

All was too clear to Paul, and a cold shiver ran through his frame as he
saw himself arrested, tried, and condemned.

“But,” stammered he, “M. Tantaine holds my note of hand, which is a
proof that I acted honestly.”

“My poor boy, do you think that if he hoped to save himself at your
expense he would produce it?”

“Luckily, sir, you know the real state of the case.”

Mascarin shook is head.

“Would my story be credited?” asked he. “Justice is not infallible, and
I must confess that appearances are against you.”

Paul was crushed down beneath this weight of argument. “There is no
resource for me then but death,” murmured he, “for I will not live a
dishonored man.”

The conduct of Paul was precisely what Mascarin had expected, and he
felt that the moment had arrived to strike a final blow.

“You must not give way to despair, my boy,” said he.

But Paul made no reply; he had lost the power of hearing. Mascarin,
however, had no time to lose, and taking him by the arm, shook him
roughly. “Rouse yourself. A man in your position must help himself, and
bring forward proofs of his innocence.”

“There is no use in fighting,” replied Paul. “Have you not just shown me
that it is hopeless to endeavor to prove my innocence?”

Mascarin grew impatient at this unnecessary exhibition of cowardice, but
he concealed his feelings as best he could.

“No, no,” answered he; “I only wished to show you the worst side of the
affair.”

“There is only one side.”

“Not so, for it is only a supposition that Tantaine had made away
with money entrusted to him, and we are not certain of it. And we only
surmise that he has been arrested, and thrown the blame on you. Before
giving up the game, would it not be best to be satisfied on these
points?”

Paul felt a little reassured.

“I say nothing,” continued Mascarin, “of the influence I exercise over
Tantaine, and which may enable me to compel him to confess the truth.”

Weak natures like Paul’s are raised in a moment from the lowest depths
of depression to the highest pitch of exultation, and he already
considered that he was saved.

“Shall I ever be able to prove my gratitude to you?” said he
impulsively.

Mascarin’s face assumed a paternal expression.

“Perhaps you may,” answered he; “and as a commencement you must entirely
forget the past. Daylight dispels the hideous visions of the night. I
offer you a fresh lease of life; will you become a new man?”

Paul heaved a deep sigh. “Rose,” he murmured; “I cannot forget her.”

Mascarin frowned. “What,” said he, “do you still let your thoughts dwell
on that woman? There are people who cringe to the hand that strikes
them, and the more they are duped and deceived, the more they love. If
you are made of this kind of stuff, we shall never get on. Go and
find your faithless mistress, and beg her to come back and share your
poverty, and see what she will say.”

These sarcasms roused Paul. “I will be even with her some day,” muttered
he.

“Forget her; that is the easiest thing for you to do.”

Even now Paul seemed to hesitate. “What,” said his patron reproachfully,
“have you no pride?”

“I have, sir.”

“You have not, or you would never wish to hamper yourself with a woman
like Rose. You should keep your hands free, if you want to fight your
way through the battle of life.”

“I will follow your advice, sir,” said Paul hurriedly.

“Very soon you will thank Rose deeply for having left you. You will
climb high, I can tell you, if you will work as I bid you.”

“Then,” stammered Paul, “this situation at twelve thousand francs a
year----”

“There never has been such a situation.”

A ghastly pallor overspread Paul’s countenance, as he saw himself again
reduced to beggary.

“But, sir,” he murmured, “will you not permit me to hope--”

“For twelve thousand francs! Be at ease, you shall have that and much
more. I am getting old. I have no ties in the world--you shall be my
adopted son.”

A cloud settled on Paul’s brow, for the idea that his life was to be
passed in this office was most displeasing to him. Mascarin divined his
inmost thoughts with perfect ease. “And the young fool does not know
where to go for a crust of bread,” thought he. “Ah, if there were no
Flavia, no Champdoce;” then, speaking aloud, he resumed, “don’t fancy,
my dear boy, that I wish to condemn you to the treadmill that I am
compelled to pass my life in. I have other views for you, far more
worthy of your merits. I have taken a great liking to you, and I will do
all I can to further your ambitious views. I was thinking a great
deal of you, and in my head I raised the scaffolding of your future
greatness. ‘He is poor,’ said I, ‘and at his age, and with his tastes,
this is a cruel thing. Why, pray, should I not find a wife for him among
those heiresses who have a million or two to give the man they marry?
When I talk like this, it is because I know of an heiress, and my
friend, Dr. Hortebise, shall introduce her to you. She is nearly, if
not quite, as pretty as Rose, and has the advantage of her in being
well-born, well-educated, and wealthy. She has influential relatives,
and if her husband should happen to be a poet, or a composer, she could
assist him in becoming famous.”

A flush came over Paul’s face, This seemed like the realization of some
of his former dreams.

“With regard to your birth,” continued Mascarin, “I have devised a
wonderful plan. Before ‘93, you know, every bastard was treated as
a gentleman, as he might have been the son of some high and mighty
personage. Who can say that your father may not have been of the noblest
blood of France, and that he has not lands and wealth? He may even now
be looking for you, in order to acknowledge you and make you his heir.
Would you like to be a duke?”

“Ah, sir,” stammered the young man.

Mascarin burst into a fit of laughter. “Up to now,” said he, “we are
only in the region of suppositions.”

“Well, sir, what do you wish me to do?” asked Paul, after a short pause.

Mascarin put on a serious face. “I want absolute obedience from
you,” said he; “a blind and undeviating obedience, one that makes no
objections and asks no questions.”

“I will obey you, sir; but, oh! do not desert me.”

Without making any reply, Mascarin rang for Beaumarchef, and as soon as
the latter appeared, said, “I am going to Van Klopen’s, and shall leave
you in charge here.” Then, turning to Paul, he added, “I always mean
what I say; we will go and breakfast at a neighboring restaurant. I want
to have a talk with you, and afterward--afterward, my boy, I will show
you the girl I intend to be your wife. I am curious to know how you like
her looks.”



CHAPTER XI.

THE MAN-MILLINER.

Gaston de Gandelu was much surprised at finding that Andre should be
ignorant of the existence of Van Klopen, the best-known man in Paris.
To assure oneself of this, it was only necessary to glance at his
circulars, which were ornamented with the representations of medals won
at all sorts of exhibitions in different quarters of the world, together
with various decorations received from foreign potentates. One had
been presented to him by the Queen of Spain, while he had a diploma
appointing him the supplier to the Court of the Czar. The great Van
Klopen was not an Alsatian, as was generally supposed, but a stout,
handsome Dutchman, who, in the year 1850, had been a tailor in his small
native town, and manufactured in cloth, purchased on credit, the
long waistcoats and miraculous coats worn by the wealthy citizens of
Rotterdam. Van Klopen, however, was not successful in his business, and
was compelled to close his shop and abscond from his creditors. He took
refuge in Paris, where he seemed likely to die of hunger. One day over
a magnificent establishment in the Rue de Grammont appeared a signboard
with the name of Van Klopen, dressmaker, and in the thousands of
handbills distributed with the utmost profusion, he called himself
the “Regenerator of Fashion.” This was an idea that would have never
originated in the brain of the phlegmatic Dutchman, and whence came the
funds to carry on the business? On this point he was discreetly silent.
The enterprise was at first far from a success, for during nearly a
month Paris almost split its sides laughing at the absurd pretensions
of the self-dubbed “Regenerator of Fashion.” Van Klopen bent before the
storm he had aroused, and in due time his advertisements brought him two
customers, who were the first to blow the trumpet of his fame. One was
the Duchess de Suirmeuse, a very great lady indeed, and renowned for her
eccentricities and extravagant manner, while the other was an example of
another class being no less than the celebrated Jennie Fancy, who was
at that time under the protection of the Count de Tremouselle; and
for these two Van Klopen invented such dresses as had never been
seen before. From this moment his success was certain; indeed, it was
stupendous, and Paris resounded with his praises. Now he has achieved a
world-wide reputation, and has nothing to fear from the attacks of his
rivals. He would not execute orders for every one, saying that he must
pick and choose his customers, and he did so, excising the names of
such as he did not think would add to his reputation. Rank and wealth
disputed the honor of being his customers. The haughtiest dames did not
shrink from entrusting to him secrets of form and figure, which they
even hid from their husbands. They endured without shrinking the touch
of his coarse hands as he measured them. He was the rage, and his
showrooms were a species of neutral ground, where women of all circles
of society met and examined each other. The Duchess of --- did not
shrink from being in the same room with the celebrated woman for whom
the Baron de --- had blown out the few brains he possessed. Perhaps the
Duchess thought that by employing the same costumier, she might also
gain some of the venal beauteous attractions. Mademoiselle D---, of the
Gymnase Theatre, who was well known to earn just one thousand francs per
annum, took a delight in astonishing the haughty ladies of fashion by
the reckless extravagance of her orders. Van Klopen, who was a born
diplomatist, distributed his favors between his different customers;
consequently he was termed the most charming and angelic of men. Many
a time had he heard the most aristocratic lips let fall the words, “I
shall die, Van Klopen, if my dress is not ready.” On the evenings of the
most aristocratic balls a long line of carriages blocked up the road in
front of his establishment, and the finest women in Paris crowded the
showrooms for a word of approval from him.

He gave credit to approved customers, and also, it was whispered,
lent money to them. But woe to the woman who permitted herself to be
entrapped in the snare of credit that he laid for her; for the woman who
owed him a bill was practically lost, never knowing to what depths she
might be degraded to obtain the money to settle her account. It was not
surprising that such sudden prosperity should have turned Van Klopen’s
head. He was stout and ruddy, impudent, vain, and cynical. His admirers
said that he was witty.

It was to this man’s establishment that Mascarin conducted Paul after a
sumptuous breakfast at Philipe’s.

It is necessary to give a slight description of Van Klopen’s
establishment. Carpets of the most expensive description covered the
stairs to his door on the first floor, at which stood the liveried
menials resplendent in gold lace and scarlet. As soon as Mascarin made
his appearance, one of these gorgeous creatures hastened to him and
said, “M. Van Klopen is just now engaged with the Princess Korasoff, but
as soon as he hears of your arrival he will manage to get rid of her.
Will you wait for him in his private room?”

But Mascarin answered,--

“We are in no hurry, and may as well wait in the public room with the
other customers. Are there many of them?”

“There are about a dozen ladies, sir.”

“Good; I am sure that they will amuse me.”

And, without wasting any more words, Mascarin opened a door which led
into a magnificent drawing-room, decorated in very florid style. The
paper on the walls almost disappeared beneath a variety of watercolor
sketches, representing ladies in every possible style of costume. Each
picture had an explanatory note beneath it, such as “Costume of Mde.
de C--- for a dinner at the Russian Ambassador’s,” “Ball costume of the
Marchioness de V--- for a ball at the Hotel de Ville,” etc.

Paul, who was a little nervous at finding himself among such splendor,
hesitated in the doorway; but Mascarin seized his young friend by the
arm, and, as he drew him to a settee, whispered in his ear,--

“Keep your eyes about you; the heiress is here.”

The ladies were at first a little surprised at this invasion of the
room by the male element, but Paul’s extreme beauty soon attracted their
attention. The hum of conversation ceased, and Paul’s embarrassment
increased as he found a battery of twelve pairs of eyes directed full
upon him.

Mascarin, however, was quite at his ease, and upon his entrance had made
a graceful though rather old-fashioned bow to the fair inmates of the
room. His coolness was partly due to the contempt he felt for the
human race in general, and also to his colored glasses, which hid the
expression of his countenance. When he saw that Paul still kept his eyes
on the ground, he tapped him gently on the arm.

“Is this the first time you ever saw well-dressed women? Surely you are
not afraid of them. Look to the right,” continued Mascarin, “and you
will see the heiress.”

A young girl, not more than eighteen, was seated near one of the
windows. She was not perhaps so beautiful as Mascarin had described,
but her face was a very striking one nevertheless. She was slight and
good-looking, with the clear complexion of a brunette. Her features
were not perhaps very regular, but her glossy black hair was a beauty
in itself. She had a pair of dark, melting eyes, and her wide, high
forehead showed that she was gifted with great intelligence. There was
an air of restrained voluptuousness about her, and she seemed the very
embodiment of passion.

Paul felt insensibly attracted toward her. Their eyes met, and both
started at the same moment. Paul was fascinated in an instant, and the
girl’s emotion was so evident that she turned aside her head to conceal
it.

The babel had now commenced again, and general attention was being paid
to a lady who was enthusiastically describing the last new costume which
had made its appearance in the Bois de Boulogue.

“It was simply miraculous,” said she; “a real triumph of Van Klopen’s
art. The ladies of a certain class are furious, and Henry de Croisenois
tells me that Jenny Fancy absolutely shed tears of rage. Imagine three
green skirts of different shades, each draped----”

Mascarin, however, only paid attention to Paul and the young girl, and a
sarcastic smile curled his lips.

“What do you think of her?” asked he.

“She is adorable!” answered Paul, enthusiastically.

“And immensely wealthy.”

“I should fall at her feet if she had not a sou.”

Mascarin gave a little cough, and adjusted his glasses.

“Should you, my lad?” said he to himself; “whether your admiration is
for the girl or her money, you are in my grip.”

Then he added, aloud,--

“Would you not like to know her name?”

“Tell me, I entreat you.”

“Flavia.”

Paul was in the seventh heaven, and now boldly turned his eyes on the
girl, forgetting that owing to the numerous mirrors, she could see his
every movement.

The door was at this moment opened quietly, and Van Klopen appeared on
the threshold. He was about forty-four, and too stout for his height.
His red, pimply face had an expression upon it of extreme insolence,
and his accent was thoroughly Dutch. He was dressed in a ruby velvet
dressing-gown, with a cravat with lace ends. A huge cluster-diamond ring
blazed on his coarse, red hand.

“Who is the next one?” asked he, rudely.

The lady who had been talking so volubly rose to her feet, but the
tailor cut her short, for catching sight of Mascarin, he crossed the
room, and greeted him with the utmost cordiality.

“What!” said he; “is it you that I have been keeping waiting? Pray
pardon me. Pray go into my private room; and this gentleman is with you?
Do me the favor, sir, to come with us.”

He was about to follow his guests, when one of the ladies started
forward.

“One word with you, sir, for goodness sake!” cried she.

Van Klopen turned sharply upon her.

“What is the matter?” asked he.

“My bill for three thousand francs falls due to-morrow.”

“Very likely.”

“But I can’t meet it.”

“That is not my affair.”

“I have come to beg you will renew it for two months, or say one month,
on whatever terms you like.”

“In two months,” answered the man brutally, “you will be no more able to
pay than you are to-day. If you can’t pay it, it will be noted.”

“Merciful powers! then my husband will learn all.”

“Just so; that will be what I want; for he will then have to pay me.”

The wretched woman grew deadly pale.

“My husband will pay you,” said she; “but I shall be lost.”

“That is not my lookout. I have partners whose interests I have to
consult.”

“Do not say that, sir! He has paid my debts once, and if he should be
angry and take my children from me--Dear M. Van Klopen, be merciful!”

She wrung her hands, and the tears coursed down her cheeks; but the
tailor was perfectly unmoved.

“When a woman has a family of children, one ought to have in a
needlewoman by the hour.”

She did not desist from her efforts to soften him, and, seizing his
hand, strove to carry it to her lips.

“Ah! I shall never dare to go home,” wailed she; “never have the courage
to tell my husband.”

“If you are afraid of your own husband, go to some one else’s,” said he
roughly; and tearing himself from her, he followed Mascarin and Paul.

“Did you hear that?” asked he, as soon as he had closed the door of his
room with an angry slam. “These things occasionally occur, and are not
particularly pleasant.”

Paul looked on in disgust. If he had possessed three thousand francs, he
would have given them to this unhappy woman, whose sobs he could still
hear in the passage.

“It is most painful,” remarked he.

“My dear sir,” said the tailor, “you attach too much importance to these
hysterical outbursts. If you were in my place, you would soon have to
put their right value on them. As I said before, I have to look after
my own and my partners’ interests. These dear creatures care for nothing
but dress; father, husband, and children are as nothing in comparison.
You cannot imagine what a woman will do in order to get a new dress, in
which to outshine her rival. They only talk of their families when they
are called on to pay up.”

Paul still continued to plead for some money for the poor lady, and the
discussion was getting so warm that Mascarin felt bound to interfere.

“Perhaps,” said he, “you have been a little hard.”

“Pooh,” returned the tailor; “I know my customer; and to-morrow my
account will be settled, and I know very well where the money will come
from. Then she will give me another order, and we shall have the whole
comedy over again. I know what I am about.” And taking Mascarin into
the window, he made some confidential communication, at which they both
laughed heartily.

Paul, not wishing to appear to listen, examined the consulting-room,
as Van Klopen termed it. He saw a great number of large scissors, yard
measures, and patterns of material, and heaps of fashion plates.

By this time the two men had finished their conversation.

“I had,” said Mascarin, as they returned to the fireplace, “I had meant
to glance through the books; but you have so many customers waiting,
that I had better defer doing so.”

“Is that all that hinders you?” returned Van Klopen, carelessly. “Wait a
moment.”

He left the room, and in another moment his voice was heard.

“I am sorry, ladies, very sorry, on my word; but I am busy with my silk
mercer. I shall not be very long.”

“We will wait,” returned the ladies in chorus.

“That is the way,” remarked Van Klopen, as he returned to the
consulting-room. “Be civil to women, and they turn their backs on you;
try and keep them off, and they run after you. If I was to put up ‘no
admittance’ over my door, the street would be blocked up with women.
Business has never been better,” continued the tailor, producing a large
ledger. “Within the last ten days we have had in orders amounting to
eighty-seven thousand francs.”

“Good!” answered Mascarin; “but let us have a look at the column headed
‘Doubtful.’”

“Here you are,” returned the arbiter of fashion, as he turned over
the leaves. “Mademoiselle Virginie Cluhe has ordered five theatrical
costumes, two dinner, and three morning dresses.”

“That is a heavy order.”

“I wanted for that reason to consult you. She doesn’t owe us
much--perhaps a thousand francs or so.”

“That is too much, for I hear that her friend has come to grief. Do not
decline the order, but avoid taking fresh ones.”

Van Klopen made a few mysterious signs in the margin of his ledger.

“On the 6th of this month the Countess de Mussidan gave us an order--a
perfectly plain dress for her daughter. Her account is a very heavy one,
and the Count has warned us that he will not pay it.”

“Never mind that. Go on with the order, put press for payment.”

“On the 7th a new customer came--Mademoiselle Flavia, the daughter of
Martin Rigal, the banker.”

When Paul heard this name, he could not repress a start, of which,
however, Mascarin affected to take no notice.

“My good friend,” said he, turning to Van Klopen, “I confide this young
lady to you; give her your whole stock if she asks for it.”

By the look of surprise which appeared upon the tailor’s face, Paul
could see that Mascarin was not prodigal of such recommendations.

“You shall be obeyed,” said Van Klopen, with a bow.

“On the 8th a young gentleman of the name of Gaston de Gandelu was
introduced by Lupeaux, the jeweller. His father is, I hear, very
wealthy, and he will come into money on attaining his majority, which
is near at hand. He brought with him a lady,” continued the tailor, “and
said her name was Zora de Chantemille, a tremendously pretty girl.”

“That young man is always in my way,” said Mascarin. “I would give
something to get him out of Paris.”

Van Klopen reflected for a moment. “I don’t think that would be
difficult,” remarked he; “that young fellow is capable of any act of
folly for that fair girl.”

“I think so too.”

“Then the matter is easy. I will open an account with him; then, after a
little, I will affect doubts as to his solvency, and ask for a bill;
and we shall then place our young friend in the hands of the Mutual
Loan Society, and M. Verminet will easily persuade him to write his name
across the bottom of a piece of stamped paper. He will bring it to me; I
will accept it, and then we shall have him hard and fast.”

“I should have proposed another course.”

“I see no other way, however,” He suddenly stopped, for a loud noise was
heard in the ante-room, and the sound of voices in loud contention.

“I should like to know,” said Van Klopen, rising to his feet, “who the
impudent scoundrel is, who comes here kicking up a row. I expect that it
is some fool of a husband.”

“Go and see what it is,” suggested Mascarin.

“Not I! My servants are paid to spare me such annoyances.”

Presently the noise ceased.

“And now,” resumed Mascarin, “let us return to our own affairs. Under
the circumstances, your proposal appears to be a good one. How
about writing in another name? A little forgery would make our hands
stronger.” He rose, and taking the tailor into the window recess, again
whispered to him.

During this conversation Paul’s cheek had grown paler and paler, for,
occupied as he was, he could not fail to comprehend something of what
was going on. During the breakfast Mascarin had partially disclosed many
strange secrets, and since then he had been even more enlightened. It
was but too evident to him that his protector was engaged in some dark
and insidious plot, and Paul felt that he was standing over a mine which
might explode at any moment. He now began to fancy that there was
some mysterious link between the woman Schimmel, who was so carefully
watched, and the Marquis de Croisenois, so haughty, and yet on such
intimate terms with the proprietor of the registry office. Then there
was the Countess de Mussidan, Flavia, the rich heiress, and Gaston de
Gandelu, who was to be led into a crime the result of which would be
penal servitude,--all jumbled and mixed up together in one strange
phantasmagoria. Was he, Paul, to be a mere tool in such hands? Toward
what a precipice was he being impelled! Mascarin and Van Klopen were not
friends, as he had at first supposed, but confederates in villainy. Too
late did he begin to see collusion between Mascarin and Tantaine, which
had resulted in his being accused of theft during his absence. But the
web had been woven too securely, and should he struggle to break through
it, he might find himself exposed to even more terrible dangers. He felt
horrified at his position, but with this there was mingled no horror of
the criminality of his associates, for the skilful hand of Mascarin had
unwound and mastered all the bad materials of his nature. He was dazzled
at the glorious future held out before him, and said to himself that a
man like Mascarin, unfettered by law, either human or Divine, would be
most likely to achieve his ends. “I should be in no danger,” mused he to
himself, “if I yield myself up to the impetuous stream which is already
carrying me along, for Mascarin is practised swimmer enough to keep both
my head and his own above water.”

Little did Paul think that every fleeting expression in his countenance
was caught up and treasured by the wily Mascarin; and it was
intentionally that he had permitted Paul to listen to this compromising
conversation. He had decided that very morning, that if Paul was to be a
useful tool, he must be at once set face to face with the grim realities
of the position.

“Now,” said he, “for the really serious reason for my visit. How do we
stand now with regard to the Viscountess Bois Arden?”

Van Klopen gave his shoulders a shrug as he answered, “She is all right.
I have just sent her several most expensive costumes.”

“How much does she owe you?”

“Say twenty-five thousand francs. She has owed us more than that
before.”

“Really?” remarked Mascarin, “that woman has been grossly libelled; she
is vain, frivolous, and fond of admiration, but nothing more. For a
whole fortnight I have been prying into her life, but I can’t hit
upon anything in it to give us a pull over her. The debt may help us,
however. Does her husband know that she has an account with us?”

“Of course he does not; he is most liberal to her, and if he inquired--”

“Then we are all right; we will send in the bill to him.”

“But, my good sir,” urged Van Klopen, “it was only last week that she
paid us a heavy sum on account.”

“The more reason to press her, for she must be hard up.”

Van Klopen would have argued further, but an imperious sign from
Mascarin reduced him to silence.

“Listen to me,” said Mascarin, “and please do not interrupt me. Are you
known to the domestics at the house of the Viscountess?”

“Not at all.”

“Well, then, at three o’clock sharp, the day after to-morrow, call on
her. Her footman will say that Madame has a visitor with her.”

“I will say I will wait.”

“Not at all. You must almost force your way in, and you will find
the Viscountess talking to the Marquis de Croisenois. You know him, I
suppose?”

“By sight--nothing more.”

“That is sufficient. Take no notice of him; but at once present your
bill, and violently insist upon immediate payment.”

“What can you be thinking of? She will have me kicked out of doors.”

“Quite likely; but you must threaten to take the bill to her husband.
She will command you to leave the house, but you will sit down doggedly
and declare that you will not move until you get the money.”

“But that is most unbusinesslike behavior.”

“I quite agree with you; but the Marquis de Croisenois will interfere;
he will throw a pocketbook in your face, exclaiming, ‘There is your
money, you impudent scoundrel!’”

“Then I am to slink away?”

“Yes, but before doing so, you will give a receipt in this
form--‘Received from the Marquis de Croisenois, the sum of so many
francs, in settlement of the account of the Viscountess Bois Arden.’”

“If I could only understand the game,” muttered the puzzled Van Klopen.

“There is no necessity for that now; only act up to your instructions.”

“I will obey, but remember that we shall not only lose her custom, but
that of all her acquaintance.”

Again the same angry sounds were heard in the corridor.

“It is scandalous,” cried a voice. “I have been waiting an hour;
my sword and armor. What, ho, lackeys; hither, I say. Van Klopen is
engaged, is he? Hie to him and say I must see him at once.”

The two accomplices exchanged looks, as though they recognized the
shrill, squeaky voice.

“That is our man,” whispered Mascarin, as the door was violently
flung open, and Gaston de Gandelu burst in. He was dressed even more
extravagantly than usual, and his face was inflamed with rage.

“Here am I,” cried he; “and an awful rage I am in. Why, I have been
waiting twenty minutes. I don’t care a curse for your rules and
regulations.”

The tailor was furious at this intrusion; but as Mascarin was present,
and he felt that he must respect his orders, he by a great effort
controlled himself.

“Had I known, sir,” said he sulkily, “that you were here----”

These few words mollified the gorgeous youth, who at once broke in.

“I accept your apologies,” cried he; “the lackeys remove our arms, the
joust is over. My horses have been standing all this time, and may have
taken cold. Of course you have seen my horses. Splendid animals, are
they not? Zora is in the other room. Quick, fetch her here.”

With these words he rushed into the passage and shouted out, “Zora,
Mademoiselle de Chantemille, my dear one, come hither.”

The renowned tailor was exquisitely uncomfortable at so terrible a scene
in his establishment. He cast an appealing glance at Mascarin, but the
face of the agent seemed carved in marble. As to Paul, he was quite
prepared to accept this young gentleman as a perfect type of the glass
of fashion and the mould of form, and could not forbear pitying him in
his heart. He went across the room to Mascarin.

“Is there no way,” whispered he, “of saving this poor young fellow?”

Mascarin smiled one of those livid smiles which chilled the hearts of
those who knew him thoroughly.

“In fifteen minutes,” said he, “I will put the same question to you,
leaving you to reply to it. Hush, this is the first real test that you
have been subjected to; if you are not strong enough to go through it,
then we had better say farewell. Be firm, for a thunderbolt is about to
fall!”

The manner in which these apparently trivial words were spoken startled
Paul, who, by a strong effort, recovered his self-possession; but,
prepared as he was, it was with the utmost difficulty that he stifled
the expression of rage and surprise that rose to his lips at the sight
of the woman who entered the room. The Madame de Chantemille, the Zora
of the youthful Gandelu, was there, attired in what to his eyes seemed
a most dazzling costume. Rose seemed a little timid as Gandelu almost
dragged her into the room.

“How silly you are!” said he. “What is there to be frightened at? He is
only in a rage with his flunkies for having kept us waiting.”

Zora sank negligently into an easy chair, and the gorgeously attired
youth addressed the all-powerful Van Klopen.

“Well, have you invented a costume that will be worthy of Madame’s
charms?”

For a few moments Van Klopen appeared to be buried in profound
meditation.

“Ah,” said he, raising his hand with a grandiloquent gesture, “I have
it; I can see it all in my mind’s eye.”

“What a man!” murmured Gaston in deep admiration.

“Listen,” resumed the tailor, his eye flashing with the fire of
genius. “First, a walking costume with a polonaise and a cape _a
la pensionnaire_; bodice, sleeves, and underskirt of a brilliant
chestnut----”

He might have continued in this strain for a long time, and Zora would
not have heard a word, for she had caught sight of Paul, and in spite of
all her audacity, she nearly fainted. She was so ill at ease, that
young Gandelu at last perceived it; but not knowing the effect that the
appearance of Paul would necessarily cause, and being also rather dull
of comprehension he could not understand the reason for it.

“Hold hard, Van Klopen, hold hard! the joy has been too much for her,
and I will lay you ten to one that she is going into hysterics.”

Mascarin saw that Paul’s temper might blaze forth at any moment, and
so hastened to put an end to a scene which was as absurd as it was
dangerous.

“Well, Van Klopen, I will say farewell,” said he. “Good morning, madame;
good morning, sir;” and taking Paul by the arm, he led him away by a
private exit which did not necessitate their passing through the great
reception-room.

It was time for him to do so, and not until they were in the street did
the wily Mascarin breathe freely.

“Well, what do you say, now?” asked he.

Paul’s vanity had been so deeply wounded, and the effort that he had
made to restrain himself so powerful, that he could only reply by a
gasp.

“He felt it more than I thought he would,” said Mascarin to himself.
“The fresh air will revive him.”

Paul’s legs bent under him, and he staggered so that Mascarin led him
into a little _café_ hard by, and ordered a glass of cognac, and in a
short time Paul was himself once again.

“You are better now,” observed Mascarin; and then, believing it would be
best to finish his work, he added, “A quarter of an hour ago I promised
that I would ask you to settle what our intentions were to be regarding
M. de Gandelu.”

“That is enough,” broke in Paul, violently.

Mascarin put on his most benevolent smile.

“You see,” remarked he, “how circumstances change ideas. Now you are
getting quite reasonable.”

“Yes, I am reasonable enough now; that is, that I mean to be wealthy.
You have no need to urge me on any more. I am willing to do whatever you
desire, for I will never again endure degradation like that I have gone
through to-day.”

“You have let temper get the better of you,” returned Mascarin, with a
shrug of his shoulders.

“My anger may pass over, but my determination will remain as strong as
ever.”

“Do not decide without thinking the matter well over,” answered the
agent. “To-day you are your own master; but if you give yourself up to
me, you must resign your dearly loved liberty.”

“I am prepared for all.”

Victory had inclined to the side of Mascarin, and he was proportionally
jubilant.

“Good,” said he. “Then Dr. Hortebise shall introduce you to Martin
Rigal, the father of Mademoiselle Flavia, and one week after your
marriage I will give you a duke’s coronet to put on the panels of your
carriage.”



CHAPTER XII.

A STARTLING REVELATION.

When Sabine de Mussidan told her lover that she would appeal to the
generosity of M. de Breulh-Faverlay, she had not calculated on the
necessity she would have for endurance, but had rather listened to the
dictates of her heart; and this fact came the more strongly before her,
when in the solitude of her own chamber, she inquired of herself how she
was to carry out her promise. It seemed to her very terrible to have to
lay bare the secrets of her soul to any one, but the more so to M. de
Breulh-Faverlay, who had asked for her hand in marriage. She uttered no
word on her way home, where she arrived just in time to take her place
at the dinner table, and never was a more dismal company assembled for
the evening meal. Her own miseries occupied Sabine, and her father
and mother were suffering from their interviews with Mascarin and Dr.
Hortebise. What did the liveried servants, who waited at table with
such an affectation of interest, care for the sorrows of their master
or mistress? They were well lodged and well fed, and nothing save their
wages did they care for. By nine o’clock Sabine was in her own room
trying to grow accustomed to the thoughts of an interview with M. de
Breulh-Faverlay. She hardly closed her eyes all night, and felt worn out
and dispirited by musing; but she never thought of evading the promise
she had made to Andre, or of putting it off for a time. She had vowed
to lose no time, and her lover was eagerly awaiting a letter from her,
telling him of the result. In the perplexity in which she found herself,
she could not confide in either father or mother, for she felt that a
cloud hung over both their lives, though she knew not what it was. When
she left the convent where she had been educated, and returned home, she
felt that she was in the way, and that the day of her marriage would be
one of liberation to her parents from their cares and responsibilities.
All this prayed terribly upon her mind, and might have driven a less
pure-minded girl to desperate measures. It seemed to her that it
would be less painful to fly from her father’s house than to have this
interview with M. de Breulh-Faverlay. Luckily for her, frail as she
looked, she possessed an indomitable will, and this carried her through
most of her difficulties.

For Andre’s sake, as well as her own, she did not wish to violate any
of the unwritten canons of society, but she longed for the hour to come
when she could acknowledge her love openly to the world. At one moment
she thought of writing a letter, but dismissed the thought as the height
of folly. As the time passed Sabine began to reproach herself for her
cowardice. All at once she heard the clang of the opening of the main
gates. Peeping from her window, she saw a carriage drive up, and, to her
inexpressible delight, M. de Breulh-Faverlay alighted from it.

“Heaven has heard my prayer, and sent him to me,” murmured she.

“What do you intend to do, Mademoiselle?” asked the devoted Modeste;
“will you speak to him now?”

“Yes, I will. My mother is still in her dressing-room, and no one
will venture to disturb my father in the library. If I meet M. de
Breulh-Faverlay in the hall and take him into the drawing-room, I shall
have time for a quarter of an hour’s talk, and that will be sufficient.”

Calling up all her courage, she left her room on her errand. Had Andre
seen the man selected by the Count de Mussidan for his daughter’s
husband, he might well have been proud of her preference for him. M. de
Breulh-Faverlay was one of the best known men in Paris, and fortune
had showered all her blessings on his head. He was not forty, of an
extremely aristocratic appearance, highly educated, and witty; and, in
addition, one of the largest landholders in the country. He had always
refused to enter public life. “For,” he would say to those who spoke to
him on the matter, “I have enough to spend my money on without making
myself ridiculous.” He was a perfect type of what a French gentleman
should be--courteous, of unblemished reputation, and full of chivalrous
devotion and generosity. He was, it is said, a great favorite with the
fair sex; but, if report spoke truly, his discretion was as great as
his success. He had not always been wealthy, and there was a mysterious
romance in his life. When he was only twenty, he had sailed for South
America, where he remained twelve years, and returned no richer than
he was before; but shortly afterward his aged uncle, the Marquis de
Faverlay, died bequeathing his immense fortune to his nephew on the
condition that he should add the name of Faverlay to that of De Breulh.
De Breulh was passionately fond of horses; but he was really a lover of
them, and not a mere turfite, and this was all that the world knew of
the man who held in his hands the fates of Sabine de Mussidan and Andre.
As soon as he caught sight of Sabine he made a profound inclination.

The girl came straight up to him.

“Sir,” said she, in a voice broken by conflicting emotions, “may I
request the pleasure of a short private conversation with you?”

“Mademoiselle,” answered De Breulh, concealing his surprise beneath
another bow, “I am at your disposal.”

One of the footmen, at a word from Sabine, threw open the door of the
drawing-room in which the Countess had thrown down her arms in her duel
with Dr. Hortebise. Sabine did not ask her visitor to be seated, but
leaning her elbow on the marble mantel-piece, she said, after a silence
equally trying to both,--

“This strange conduct on my part, sir, will show you, more than any
explanation, my sincerity, and the perfect confidence with which you
have inspired me.”

She paused, but De Breulh made no reply, for he was perfectly mystified.

“You are,” she continued, “my parents’ intimate friend, and must have
seen the discomforts of our domestic hearth, and that though both my
father and mother are living, I am as desolate as the veriest orphan.”

Fearing that M. de Breulh might not understand her reason for speaking
thus, she threw a shade of haughtiness into her manner as she resumed,--

“My reason, sir, for seeing you to-day is to ask,--nay, to entreat
you, to release me from my engagement to you, and to take the whole
responsibility of the rupture on yourself.”

Man of the world as he was, M. de Breulh could not conceal his surprise,
in which a certain amount of wounded self-love was mingled.

“Mademoiselle!” commenced he--

Sabine interrupted him.

“I am asking a great favor, and your granting it will spare me many
hours of grief and sadness, and,” she added, as a faint smile flickered
across her pallid features, “I am aware that I am asking but a trifling
sacrifice on your part. You know scarcely anything of me, and therefore
you can only feel indifference toward me.”

“You are mistaken,” replied the young man gravely; “and you do not judge
me rightly. I am not a mere boy, and always consider a step before I
take it; and if I asked for your hand, it was because I had learned to
appreciate the greatness both of your heart and intellect; and I believe
that if you would condescend to accept me, we could be very happy
together.”

The girl seemed about to speak, but De Breulh continued,--

“It seems, however, that I have in some way displeased you,--I do not
know how; but, believe me, it will be a source of sorrow to me for the
rest of my life.”

De Breulh’s sincerity was so evident, that Mademoiselle de Mussidan was
deeply affected.

“You have not displeased me in any way,” answered she softly, “and are
far too good for me. To have become your wife would have made me a proud
and happy woman.”

Here she stopped, almost choked by her tears, but M. de Breulh wished to
fathom this mystery.

“Why then this resolve?” asked he.

“Because,” replied Sabine faintly, as she hid her face,--“because I have
given all my love to another.”

The young man uttered an exclamation so full of angry surprise, that
Sabine turned upon him at once.

“Yes, sir,” answered she, “to another; one utterly unknown to my
parents, yet one who is inexpressibly dear to me. This ought not to
irritate you, for I gave him my love long before I met you. Besides, you
have every advantage over him. He is at the foot, while you are at the
summit, of the social ladder. You are of aristocratic lineage,--he is
one of the people. You have a noble name,--he does not even know his
own. Your wealth is enormous,--while he works hard for his daily bread.
He has all the fire of genius, but the cruel cares of life drag and
fetter him to the earth. He carries on a workman’s trade to supply funds
to study his beloved art.”

Incautiously, Sabine had chosen the very means to wound this noble
gentleman most cruelly, for her whole beauty blazed out as, inflamed by
her passion, she spoke so eloquently of Andre and drew such a parallel
between the two young men.

“Now, sir,” said she, “do you comprehend me? I know the terrible social
abyss which divides me from the man I love, and the future may hold in
store some terrible punishment for my fidelity to him, but no one shall
ever hear a word of complaint from my lips, for----” she hesitated, and
then uttered these simple words--“for I love him.”

M. de Breulh listened with an outwardly impassible face, but the venomed
tooth of jealousy was gnawing at his heart. He had not told Sabine the
entire truth, for he had studied her for a long time, and his love had
grown firm and strong. Without an unkind thought the girl had shattered
the edifice which he had built up with such care and pain. He would have
given his name, rank, and title to have been in this unknown lover’s
place, who, though he worked for his bread, and had no grand ancestral
name, was yet so fondly loved. Many a man in his position would have
shrugged his shoulders and coldly sneered at the words, “I love him,”
 but he did not, for his nature was sufficiently noble to sympathize
with hers. He admired her courage and frankness, which disdaining all
subterfuges, went straight and unhesitatingly to the point she desired
to reach. She might be imprudent and reckless, but in his eyes these
seemed hardly to be faults, for it is seldom that convent-bred young
ladies err in this way.

“But this man,” said he, after a long pause,--“how do you manage ever to
see him?

“I meet him out walking,” replied she, “and I sometimes go to his
studio.”

“To his studio?”

“Yes, I have sat to him several times for my portrait; but I have
never done anything that I need blush to own. You know all now, sir,”
 continued Sabine; “and it has been very hard for a young girl like me
to say all this to you. It is a thing that ought to be confided to my
mother.”

Only those who have heard a woman that they are ardently attached to
say, “I do not love you,” can picture M. de Breulh’s frame of mind.
Had any one else than Sabine made this communication he would not have
withdrawn, but would have contested the prize with his more fortunate
rival. But now that Mademoiselle de Mussidan had, as it were, thrown
herself upon his mercy, he could not bring himself to take advantage of
her confidence.

“It shall be as you desire,” said he, with a faint tinge of bitterness
in his tone. “To-night I will write to your father, and withdraw my
demand for your hand. It is the first time that I have ever gone back
from my word; and I am sure that your father will be highly indignant.”

Sabine’s strength and firmness had now entirely deserted her. “From
the depth of my soul, sir,” said she, “I thank you; for by this act of
generosity I shall avoid a contest that I dreaded.”

“Unfortunately,” broke in De Breulh, “you do not see how useless to
you will be the sacrifice that you exact from me. Listen! you have not
appeared much in society; and when you did, it was in the character of
my betrothed; as soon as I withdraw hosts of aspirants for your hand
will spring up.”

Sabine heaved a deep sigh, for Andre had foreseen the same result.

“Then,” continued De Breulh, “your situation will become even a more
trying one; for if your noble qualities are not enough to excite
admiration in the bosoms of the other sex, your immense wealth will
arouse the cupidity of the fortune-hunters.”

When De Breulh referred to fortune-hunters, was this a side blow at
Andre? With this thought rushing through her brain, she gazed upon him
eagerly, but read no meaning in his eyes.

“Yes,” answered she dreamily, “it is true that I am very wealthy.”

“And what will be your reply to the next suitor, and to the one after
that?” asked De Breulh.

“I know not; but I shall find some loophole of escape when the time
comes; for if I act in obedience to the dictates of my heart and
conscience, I cannot do wrong, for Heaven will come to my aid.”

The phrase sounded like a dismissal; but De Breulh, man of the world as
he was, did not accept it.

“May I permit myself to offer you a word of advice?”

“Do so, sir.”

“Very well, then; why not permit matters to remain as they now are? So
long as our rupture is not public property, so long will you be left
in peace. It would be the simplest thing in the world to postpone all
decisive steps for a twelvemonth, and I would withdraw as soon as you
notified me that it was time.”

Sabine put every confidence in this proposal, believing that everything
was in good faith. “But,” said she, “such a subterfuge would be unworthy
of us all.”

M. de Breulh did not urge this point; a feeling of deep sympathy had
succeeded to his wounded pride; and, with all the chivalrous instinct of
his race, he determined to do his best to assist these lovers.

“Might I be permitted,” asked he, “now that you have placed so much
confidence in me, to make the acquaintance of the man whom you have
honored with your love?”

Sabine colored deeply. “I have no reason to conceal anything from you:
his name is Andre, he is a painter, and lives in the Rue de la Tour
d’Auvergne.”

De Breulh made a mental note of the name, and continued,--

“Do not think that I ask this question from mere idle curiosity; my only
desire is to aid you. I should be glad to be a something in your life. I
have influential friends and connections----”

Sabine was deeply wounded. Did this man propose patronizing Andre, and
thus place his position and wealth in contrast with that of the obscure
painter? In his eagerness de Breulh had made a false move.

“I thank you,” answered she coldly; “but Andre is very proud, and any
offer of assistance would wound him deeply. Forgive my scruples, which
are perhaps exaggerated and absurd. All he has of his own are his
self-respect and his natural pride.”

As she spoke, Sabine rang the bell, to show her visitor that the
conversation was at an end.

“Have you informed my mother of M. de Breulh-Faverlay’s arrival?” asked
she, as the footman appeared at the door.

“I have not, mademoiselle; for both the Count and Countess gave the
strictest order that they were not to be disturbed on any pretext
whatsoever.”

“Why did you not tell me that before?” demanded M. de Breulh; and,
without waiting for any explanation, he bowed gravely to Sabine, and
quitted the room, after apologizing for his involuntary intrusion, and
by his manner permitted all the domestics to see that he was much put
out.

“Ah!” sighed Sabine, “that man is worthy of some good and true woman’s
affection.”

As she was about to leave the room, she heard some one insisting upon
seeing the Count de Mussidan. Not being desirous of meeting strangers,
she remained where she was. The servant persisted in saying that his
master could receive no one.

“What do I care for your orders?” cried the visitor; “your master would
never refuse to see his friend the Baron de Clinchain;” and, thrusting
the lackey on one side, he entered the drawing-room; and his agitation
was so great that he hardly noticed the presence of the young girl.

M. de Clinchain was a thoroughly commonplace looking personage in face,
figure, and dress, neither tall nor short, handsome nor ill-looking. The
only noticeable point in his attire was that he wore a coral hand on his
watch chain; for the Baron was a firm believer in the evil eye. When a
young man, he was most methodical in his habits; and, as he grew older,
this became an absolute mania with him. When he was twenty, he recorded
in his diary the pulsations of his heart, and at forty he added remarks
regarding his digestion and general health.

“What a fearful blow!” murmured he; “and to fall at such a moment when I
had indulged in a more hearty dinner than usual. I shall feel it for the
next six months, even if it does not kill me outright.”

Just then M. de Mussidan entered the room, and the excited man ran up to
him, exclaiming,--

“For Heaven’s sake, Octave, save us both, by cancelling your daughter’s
engagement with M. de--”

The Count laid his hand upon his friend’s lips.

“Are you mad?” said he; “my daughter is here.”

In obedience to a warning gesture, Sabine left the room; but she
had heard enough to fill her heart with agitation and terror. What
engagement was to be cancelled, and how could such a rupture affect her
father or his friend? That there was some mystery, was proved by the
question with which the Count had prevented his friend from saying any
more. She was sure that it was the name of M. de Breulh-Faverlay with
which the Baron was about to close his sentence, and felt that the
destiny of her life was to be decided in the conversation about to take
place between her father and his visitor. It was deep anxiety that she
felt, not mere curiosity; and while these thoughts passed through her
brain, she remembered that she could hear all from the card-room, the
doorway of which was only separated from the drawing-room by a curtain.
With a soft, gliding step she gained her hiding-place and listened
intently. The Baron was still pouring out his lamentations.

“What a fearful day this has been!” groaned the unhappy man. “I ate much
too heavy a breakfast, I have been terribly excited, and came here a
great deal too fast. A fit of passion caused by a servant’s insolence,
joy at seeing you, then a sudden interruption to what I was going to
say, are a great deal more than sufficient to cause a serious illness at
my age.”

But the Count, who was usually most considerate of his friend’s foibles,
was not in a humor to listen to him.

“Come, let us talk sense,” said he sharply; “tell me what has occurred.”

“Occurred!” groaned De Clinchain; “oh, nothing, except that the whole
truth is known regarding what took place in the little wood so many
years back. I had an anonymous letter this morning, threatening me with
all sorts of terrible consequences if I do not hinder you from
marrying your daughter to De Breulh. The rogues say that they can prove
everything.”

“Have you the letter with you?”

De Clinchain drew the missive from his pocket. It was to the full as
threatening as he had said; but M. de Mussidan knew all its contents
beforehand.

“Have you examined your diary, and are the three leaves really missing?”

“They are.”

“How were they stolen? Are you sure of your servants?”

“Certainly; my valet has been sixteen years in my service. You know
Lorin? The volumes of my diary are always locked up in the escritoire,
the key of which never leaves me. And none of the other servants ever
enter my room.”

“Some one must have done so, however.”

Clinchain struck his forehead, as though an idea had suddenly flashed
across his brain.

“I can partly guess,” said he. “Some time ago Lorin went for a holiday,
and got drunk with some fellows he picked up in the train. Drink brought
on fighting, and he was so knocked about that he was laid up for
some weeks. He had a severe knife wound in the shoulder and was much
bruised.”

“Who took his place?”

“A young fellow that my groom got at a servants’ registry office.”

M. de Mussidan felt that he was on the right track, for he remembered
that the man who had called on him had had the audacity to leave a card,
on which was marked:

“B. MASCARIN,

“Servants’ Registry Office,
“Rue Montorgueil.”

“Do you know where this place is?” asked he.

“Certainly; in the Rue du Dauphin nearly opposite to my house.”

The Count swore a deep oath. “The rogues are very wily; but, my dear
fellow if you are ready, we will defy the storm together.”

De Clinchain felt a cold tremor pass through his whole frame at this
proposal.

“Not I,” said he; “do not try and persuade me. If you have come to this
decision, let me know at once, and I will go home and finish it all with
a pistol bullet.”

He was just the sort of nervous, timorous man to do exactly as he said,
and would sooner have killed himself than endure all kinds of annoyance,
which might impair his digestion.

“Very well,” answered his friend, with sullen resignation, “then I will
give in.”

De Clinchain heaved a deep sigh of relief, for he, not knowing what had
passed before, had expected to have had a much more difficult task in
persuading his friend.

“You are acting like a reasonable man for once in your life,” said he.

“You think so, because I give ear to your timorous advice. A thousand
curses on that idiotic habit of yours of putting on paper not only your
own secrets, but those of others.”

But at this remark Clinchain mounted his hobby.

“Do not talk like that,” said he. “Had you not committed the act, it
would not have appeared in my diary.”

Chilled to the very bone, and quivering like an aspen leaf, Sabine had
listened to every word. The reality was even more dreadful than she
had dreamed of. There was a hidden sorrow, a crime in her father’s past
life.

Again the Count spoke. “There is no use in recrimination. We cannot wipe
out the past, and must, therefore, submit. I promise you, on my honor,
that this day I will write to De Breulh, and tell him this marriage must
be given up.”

These words threw the balm of peace and safety into De Clinchain’s soul,
but the excess of joy was too much for him, and murmuring, “Too much
breakfast, and the shock of too violent an emotion,” he sank back,
fainting, on a couch.

The Count de Mussidan was terrified, he pulled the bell furiously, and
the domestics rushed in, followed by the Countess. Restoratives were
applied, and in ten minutes the Baron opened one eye, and raised himself
on his elbow.

“I am better now,” said he, with a faint smile. “It is weakness and
dizziness. I know what I ought to take--two spoonfuls of _eau des
carmes_ in a glass of sugar and water, with perfect repose of both mind
and body. Fortunately, my carriage is here. Pray, be prudent, Mussidan.”
 And, leaning upon the arm of one of the lackeys, he staggered feebly
out, leaving the Count and Countess alone, and Sabine still listening
from her post of espial in the card-room.



CHAPTER XIII.

HUSBAND AND WIFE.

Ever since Mascarin’s visit, the Count de Mussidan had been in a
deplorable state of mind. Forgetting the injury to his foot, he passed
the night pacing up and down the library, cudgelling his brains for some
means of breaking the meshes of the net in which he was entangled. He
knew the necessity for immediate action, for he felt sure that this
demand would only be the forerunner of numerous others of a similar
character. He thought over and dismissed many schemes. Sometimes he had
almost decided to go to the police authorities and make a clean breast;
then the idea of placing the affair in the hands of a private detective
occurred to him; but the more he deliberated, the more he realized the
strength of the cord that bound him, and the scandal which exposure
would cause. This long course of thought had in some measure softened
the bitterness of his wrath, and he was able to receive his old
friend M. de Clinchain with some degree of calmness. He was not at
all surprised at the receipt of the anonymous letter,--indeed, he had
expected that a blow would be struck in that direction. Still immersed
in thought, M. de Mussidan hardly took heed of his wife’s presence,
and he still paced the room, uttering a string of broken phrases. This
excited the attention of the Countess, for her own threatened position
caused her to be on the alert.

“What is annoying you, Octave?” asked she. “Surely, not M. de
Clinchain’s attack of indigestion?”

For many years the Count had been accustomed to that taunting and
sarcastic voice, but this feeble joke at such a moment was more than he
could endure.

“Don’t address me in that manner,” said he angrily.

“What is the matter--are you not well?”

“Madame!”

“Will you have the kindness to tell me what has taken place?”

The color suffused the Count’s face, and his rage burst forth the more
furiously from his having had to suppress it so long; and coming to
a halt before the chair in which the Countess was lounging, his eyes
blazing with hate and anger, he exclaimed,--

“All I wish to tell you is, that De Breulh-Faverlay shall not marry our
daughter.”

Madame de Mussidan was secretly delighted at this reply, for it showed
her that half the task required of her by Dr. Hortebise had been
accomplished without her interference; but in order to act cautiously,
she began at once to object, for a woman’s way is always at first to
oppose what she most desires.

“You are laughing at me, Count!” said she. “Where can we hope to find so
good a match again?”

“You need not be afraid,” returned the Count, with a sneer; “you shall
have another son-in-law.”

These words sent a pang through the heart of the Countess. Was it an
allusion to the past? or had the phrase dropped from her husband’s lips
accidentally? or had he any suspicion of the influence that had been
brought to bear upon her? She, however, had plenty of courage, and would
rather meet misfortune face to face than await its coming in dread.

“Of what other son-in-law are you speaking?” asked she negligently. “Has
any other suitor presented himself? May I ask his name? Do you intend to
settle my child’s future without consulting me?”

“I do, madame.”

A contemptuous smile crossed the face of the Countess, which goaded the
Count to fury.

“Am I not the master here?” exclaimed he in accents of intense rage.
“Am I not driven to the exercise of my power by the menaces of a pack of
villains who have wormed out the hidden secrets which have overshadowed
my life from my youth upward? They can, if they desire, drag my name
through the mire of infamy.”

Madame de Mussidan bounded to her feet, asking herself whether her
husband’s intellect had not given way.

“You commit a crime!” gasped she.

“I, madame, I myself! Does that surprise you? Have you never had any
suspicion? Perhaps you have not forgotten a fatal accident which took
place out shooting, and darkened the earlier years of our married life?
Well, the thing was not an accident, but a deliberate murder committed
by me. Yes, I murdered him, and this fact is known, and can be proved.”

The Countess grew deadly pale, and extended her hand, as though to guard
herself from some coming danger.

“You are horrified, are you?” continued the Count, with a sneer.
“Perhaps I inspire you with horror; but do not fear; the blood is no
longer on my hands, but it is here, and is choking me.” And as he spoke
he pressed his fingers upon his heart. “For twenty-three years I have
endured this hideous recollection and even now when I wake in the night
I am bathed in cold sweat, for I fancy I can hear the last gasps of the
unhappy man.”

“This is horrible, too horrible!” murmured Madame de Mussidan faintly.

“Ah, but you do not know why I killed him,--it was because the dead man
had dared to tell me that the wife I adored with all the passion of my
soul was unfaithful to me.”

Words of eager denial rose to the lips of the Countess; but her husband
went on coldly, “And it was all true, for I heard all later on.

“Poor Montlouis! _he_ was really loved. There was a little shop-girl,
who toiled hard for daily bread, but she was a thousand times more
honorable than the haughty woman of noble race that I had just married.”

“Have mercy, Octave.”

“Yes, and she fell a victim to her love for Montlouis. Had he lived,
he would have made her his wife. After his death, she could no longer
conceal her fault. In small towns the people are without mercy; and when
she left the hospital with her baby at her breast, the women pelted
her with mud. But for me,” continued the Count, “she would have died of
hunger. Poor girl! I did not allow her much, but with it she managed
to give her son a decent education. He has now grown up, and whatever
happens, his future is safe.”

Had M. de Mussidan and his wife been less deeply engaged in this hideous
recital, they would have heard the stifled sobs that came from the
adjoining room.

The Count felt a certain kind of savage pleasure in venting the rage,
that had for years been suppressed, upon the shrinking woman before him.
“Would it not be a cruel injustice, madame, to draw a comparison between
you and this unhappy girl? Have you always been deaf to the whisperings
of conscience? and have you never thought of the future punishment
which most certainly awaits you? for you have failed in the duties of
daughter, wife, and mother.”

Generally the Countess cared little for her husband’s reproaches, well
deserved as they might be, but to-day she quailed before him.

“With your entrance into my life,” continued the Count, “came shame and
misfortune. When people saw you so gay and careless under the oak-trees
of your ancestral home, who could have suspected that your heart
contained a dark secret? When my only wish was to win you for my wife,
how did I know that you were weaving a hideous conspiracy against me?
Even when so young, you were a monster of dissimulation and hypocrisy.
Guilt never overshadowed your brow, nor did falsehood dim the frankness
of your eyes. On the day of our marriage I mentally reproached myself
for any unworthiness. Wretched fool that I was, I was happy beyond all
power of expression, when you, madame, completed the measure of your
guilt by adding infidelity to it.”

“It is false,” murmured the Countess. “You have been deceived.”

M. de Mussidan laughed a grim and terrible laugh.

“Not so,” answered he; “I have every proof. This seems strange to you,
does it? You have always looked upon me as one of those foolish husbands
that may be duped without suspicion on their parts. You thought that
you had placed a veil over my eyes, but I could see through it when you
little suspected that I could do so. Why did I not tell you this before?
Because I had not ceased to love you, and this fatal love was stronger
than all honor, pride, and even self-respect.” He poured out this
tirade with inconceivable rapidity, and the Countess listened to it in
awe-struck silence. “I kept silence,” continued the Count, “because I
knew that on the day I uttered the truth you would be entirely lost to
me. I might have killed you; I had every right to do so, but I could not
live apart from you. You will never know how near the shadow of death
has been to you. When I have kissed you, I have fancied that your lips
were soiled with the kisses of others, and I could hardly keep my
hands from clutching your ivory neck until life was extinct, and failed
utterly to decide whether I loved you or hated you the most.”

“Have mercy, Octave! have mercy!” pleaded the unhappy woman.

“You are surprised, I can see,” answered he, with a dark smile; “yet
I could give you further food for wonder if I pleased, but I have said
enough now.”

A tremor passed over the frame of the Countess. Was her husband
acquainted with the existence of the letters? All hinged upon this.
He could not have read them, or he would have spoken in very different
terms, had he known the mystery contained in them.

“Let me speak,” began she.

“Not a word,” replied her husband.

“On my honor--”

“All is ended; but I must not forget to tell you of one of my youthful
follies. You may laugh at it, but that signifies nothing. I actually
believed that I could gain your affection. I said to myself that one day
you would be moved by my deep passion for you. I was a fool. As if love
or affection could ever penetrate the icy barriers that guarded your
heart.”

“You have no pity,” wailed she.

He gazed upon her with eyes in which the pent-up anger of twenty years
blazed and consumed slowly. “And you, what are you? I drained to the
bottom the poisoned cup held out to a deceived husband by an unfaithful
wife. Each day widened the breach between us, until at last we sank into
this miserable existence which is wearing out my life. I kept no watch
on you; I was not made for a jailer. What I wanted was your soul and
heart. To imprison the body was easy, but your soul would still have
been free to wander in imagination to the meeting-place where your lover
expected you. I know not how I had the courage to remain by your side.
It was not to save an honor that had already gone, but merely to keep
up appearances; for as long as we were nominally together the tongue of
scandal was forced to remain silent.”

Again the unhappy woman attempted to protest her innocence, and again
the Count paid no heed to her. “I wished too,” resumed he, “to save some
portion of our property, for your insatiable extravagance swallowed up
all like a bottomless abyss. At last your trades-people, believing me to
be ruined, refused you credit, and this saved me. I had my daughter to
think of, and have gathered together a rich dowry for her, and yet----”
 he hesitated, and ceased speaking for a moment.

“And yet,” repeated Madame de Mussidan.

“I have never kissed her,” he burst forth with a fresh and terrible
explosion of wrath, “without feeling a hideous doubt as to whether she
was really my child.”

This was more than the Countess could endure.

“Enough,” she cried, “enough! I have been guilty, Octave; but not so
guilty as you imagine.”

“Why do you venture to defend yourself?”

“Because it is my duty to guard Sabine.”

“You should have thought of this earlier,” answered the Count with a
sneer. “You should have moulded her mind--have taught her what was noble
and good, and have perused the unsullied pages of the book of her young
heart.”

In the deepest agitation the Countess answered,--

“Ah, Octave, why did you not speak of this sooner, if you knew all; but
I will now tell you everything.”

By an inconceivable error of judgment the Count corrected her speech.
“Spare us both,” said he. “If I have broken through the silence that I
have maintained for many a year, it is because I knew that no word you
could utter would touch my heart.”

Feeling that all hope had fled, Madame de Mussidan fell backward
upon the couch, while Sabine, unable to listen to any more terrible
revelations, had crept into her own chamber. The Count was about to
leave the drawing-room, when a servant entered, bearing a letter on
a silver salver. De Mussidan tore it open; it was from M. de
Breulh-Faverlay, asking to be released from his engagement to Sabine de
Mussidan. This last stroke was almost too much for the Count’s nerves,
for in this act he saw the hand of the man who had come to him with
such deadly threats, and terror filled his soul as he thought of the
far-stretching arm of him whose bondslave he found himself to be; but
before he could collect his thoughts, his daughter’s maid went into the
room crying with all her might, “Help, help; my poor mistress is dying!”



CHAPTER XIV.

FATHER AND DAUGHTER.

Van Klopen, the man-milliner, knew Paris and its people thoroughly like
all tradesmen who are in the habit of giving large credit. He knew
all about the business of his customers, and never forgot an item of
information when he received one. Thus, when Mascarin spoke to him about
the father of the lovely Flavia, whose charms had set the susceptible
heart of Paul Violaine in a blaze, the arbiter of fashion had replied,--

“Martin Rigal; yes, I know him; he is a banker.” And a banker, indeed,
Martin Rigal was, dwelling in a magnificent house in the Rue Montmartre.
The bank was on the ground floor, while his private rooms were in the
story above. Though he did not do business in a very large way, yet
he was a most respectable man, and his connection was chiefly with the
smaller trades-people, who seem to live a strange kind of hand-to-mouth
existence, and who might be happy were it not for the constant
reappearance of that grim phantom--bills to be met. Nearly all these
persons were in the banker’s hands entirely. Martin Rigal used his power
despotically and permitted no arguments, and speedily quelled rebellion
on the part of any new customer who ventured to object to his arbitrary
rules. In the morning the banker was never to be seen, being engaged in
his private office, and not a clerk would venture to knock at his
door. Even had one done so, no reply would have been returned; for the
experiment had been tried, and it was believed that nothing short of an
alarm of fire would have brought him out.

The banker was a big man, quite bald, his face was clean shaved, and
his little gray eyes twinkled incessantly. His manner was charmingly
courteous, and he said the most cruel things in the most honied accents,
and invariably escorted to the door the man whom he would sell up the
next day. In his dress he affected a fashionable style, much used by the
modern school of Shylocks. When not in business, he was a pleasant, and,
as some say, a witty companion. He was not looked on as an ascetic, and
did not despise those little pleasures which enable us to sustain life’s
tortuous journey. He liked a good dinner, and had always a smile ready
for a young and attractive face. He was a widower, and all his love
was concentrated on his daughter. He did not keep a very extravagant
establishment, but the report in the neighborhood was that Mademoiselle
Flavia, the daughter of the eminent banker, would one day come into
millions. The banker always did his business on foot, for the sake of
his health, as he said; but Flavia had a sweet little Victoria, drawn
by two thoroughbred horses, to drive in the Bois de Boulogne, under the
protection of an old woman, half companion and half servant, who was
driven half mad by her charge’s caprices. As yet her father has never
denied her anything. He worked harder than all his clerks put together,
for, after having spent the morning in his counting house over his
papers, he received all business clients.

On the day after Flavia and Paul Violaine had met at Van Klopen’s, M.
Martin Rigal was, at about half-past five, closeted with one of his
female clients. She was young, very pretty, and dressed with simple
elegance, but the expression of her face was profoundly melancholy.
Her eyes were overflowing with tears, which she made vain efforts to
restrain.

“If you refuse to renew our bill, sir, we are ruined,” said she. “I
could meet it in January. I have sold all my trinkets, and we are
existing on credit.”

“Poor little thing!” interrupted the banker.

Her hopes grew under these words of pity.

“And yet,” continued she, “business has never been so brisk. New
customers are constantly coming in, and though our profits are small,
the returns are rapid.”

As Martin Rigal heard her exposition of the state of affairs, he nodded
gravely.

“That is all very well,” said he at last, “but this does not make the
security you offer me of any more value. I have more confidence in you.”

“But remember, sir, that we have thirty thousand francs’ worth of
stock.”

“That is not what I was alluding to,” and the banker accompanied these
words with so meaning a look, that the poor woman blushed scarlet and
almost lost her nerve. “Your stock,” said he, “is of no more value in
my eyes than the bill you offer me. Suppose, for instance, you were to
become bankrupt, the landlord might come down upon everything, for he
has great power.”

He broke off abruptly, for Flavia’s maid, as a privileged person,
entered the room without knocking.

“Sir,” said she, “my mistress wishes to see you at once.”

The banker got up directly. “I am coming,” said he; then, taking the
hand of his client, he led her to the door, repeating: “Do not worry
yourself; all the difficulties shall be got through. Come again, and we
will talk them over;” and before she could thank him he was half way to
his daughter’s apartment. Flavia had summoned her father to show him
a new costume which had just been sent home by Van Klopen, and which
pleased her greatly. Flavia’s costume was a masterpiece of fashionable
bad taste, which makes women look all alike and destroys all appearance
of individuality. It was a mass of frills, furbelows, fringes, and
flutings of rare hue and form, making a series of wonderful contrasts.
Standing in the middle of the room, with every available candle alight,
for the day was fading away, she was so dainty and pretty that even the
_bizarre_ dress of Van Klopen’s was unable to spoil her appearance. As
she turned round, she caught sight of her father in a mirror, panting
with the haste he had made in running upstairs.

“What a time you have been!” said she pettishly.

“I was with a client,” returned he apologetically.

“You ought to have got rid of him at once. But never mind that; look at
me and tell me plainly what you think of me.”

She had no need to put the question, for the most intense admiration
beamed in his face.

“Exquisite, delicious, heavenly!” answered he.

Flavia, accustomed as she was to her father’s compliments, was highly
delighted. “Then you think that he will like me?” asked she.

She alluded to Paul Violaine, and the banker heaved a deep sigh as he
replied,--

“Is it possible that any human being exists that you cannot please?”

“Ah!” mused she, “if it were any one but he, I should have no doubts or
misgivings.”

Martin Rigal took a seat near the fire, and, drawing his daughter to
him, pressed a fond kiss upon her brow, while she with the grace and
activity of a cat, nestled upon his knee. “Suppose, after all, that he
should not like me,” murmured she; “I should die of grief.”

The banker turned away his face to hide the gloom that overspread it.
“Do you love him, then, even now?” asked he.

She paused for a moment, and he added, “More than you do me?”

Flavia pressed her father’s hand between both her palms and answered
with a musical laugh, “How silly you are, papa! Why, of course I love
you. Are you not my father? I love you too because you are kind and
do all I wish, and because you are always telling me that you love me.
Because you are like the cupids in the fairy stories--dear old people
who give their children all their heart’s desire; I love you for my
carriage, my horses, and my lovely dresses; for my purse filled with
gold, for my beautiful jewelry, and for all the lovely presents you make
me.”

Every word she spoke betrayed the utter selfishness of her soul, and yet
her father listened with a fixed smile of delight on his face.

“And why do you love him?” asked he.

“Because--because,” stammered the girl, “first, because he is himself;
and then,--well, I can’t say, but I _do_ love him.”

Her accents betrayed such depth of passion that the father uttered a
groan of anguish.

Flavia caught the expression of his features, and burst into a fit of
laughter.

“I really believe that you are jealous,” said she, as if she were
speaking to a spoiled child. “That is very naughty of you; you ought to
be ashamed of yourself. I tell you that the first time I set eyes upon
him at Van Klopen’s, I felt a thrill of love pierce through my heart,
such love as I never felt for a human being before. Since then, I have
known no rest. I cannot sleep, and instead of blood, liquid fire seems
to come through my veins.”

Martin Rigal raised his eyes to the ceiling in mute surprise at this
outburst of feeling.

“You do not understand me,” went on Flavia. “You are the best of
fathers, but, after all, you are but a man. Had I a mother, she would
comprehend me better.”

“What could your mother have done for you more than I? Have I neglected
anything for your happiness?” asked the banker, with a sigh.

“Perhaps nothing; for there are times when I hardly understand my own
feelings.”

In gloomy silence the banker listened to the narrative of his daughter’s
state of mind; then he said,--

“All shall be as you desire, and the man you love shall be your
husband.”

The girl was almost beside herself with joy, and, throwing her arms
around his neck, pressed kiss upon kiss on his cheeks and forehead.

“Darling,” said she, “I love you for this more than for anything that
you have given me in my life.”

The banker sighed again; and Flavia, shaking her pretty little fist at
him, exclaimed, “What is the meaning of that sigh, sir? Do you by any
chance regret your promise? But never mind that. How do you mean to
bring him here without causing any suspicion?”

A benevolent smile passed over her father’s face, as he answered,--

“That, my pet, is my secret.”

“Very well, keep it; I do not care what means you use, as long as I see
him soon, very soon,--to-night perhaps, in an hour, or even in a few
minutes. You say Dr. Hortebise will bring him here; he will sit at our
table. I can look at him without trouble, I shall hear his voice--”

“Silly little puss!” broke in the banker; “or, rather, I should say,
unhappy child.”

“Silly, perhaps; but why should you say unhappy?”

“You love him too fondly, and he will take advantage of your feeling for
him.”

“Never; I do not believe it,” answered the girl.

“I hope to heaven, darling, that my fears may never be realized. But he
is not the sort of husband that I intended for you; he is a composer.”

“And is that anything against him!” exclaimed Flavia in angry tones;
“one would think from your sneers that this was a crime. Not only is he
a composer, but he is a genius. I can read that in his face. He may be
poor, but I am rich enough for both, and he will owe all to me; so much
the better, for then he will not be compelled to give lessons for his
livelihood, and he will have leisure to compose an opera more beautiful
than any that Gounod has ever written, and I shall share all his glory.
Why, perhaps, he may even sing his own songs to me alone.”

Her father noticed her state of feverish excitement and gazed upon her
sadly. Flavia’s mother had been removed from this world at the early
age of twenty-four by that insidious malady, consumption, which defies
modern medical science, and in a brief space changes a beautiful girl
into a livid corpse, and the father viewed her excited manner, flushed
cheeks, and sparkling eyes with tears and dismay.

“By heavens!” cried he, bursting into a sudden fit of passion; “if ever
he ill treats you, he is a dead man.”

The girl was startled at the sudden ferocity of his manner.

“What have I done to make you angry?” asked she; “and why do you have
such evil thoughts of him?”

“I tremble for you, in whom my whole soul is wrapped up,” answered the
banker. “This man has robbed me of my child’s heart, and you will be
happier with him than you are with your poor old father. I tremble
because of your inexperience and his weakness, which may prove a source
of trouble to you.”

“If he is weak, all the better; my will can guide him.”

“You are wrong,” replied her father, “as many other women have been
before you. You believe that weak and vacillating dispositions are
easily controlled, but I tell you that this is an error. Only determined
characters can be influenced, and it is on substantial foundations that
we find support.”

Flavia made no reply, and her father drew her closer to him.

“Listen to me, my child,” said he. “You will never have a better friend
than I am. You know that I would shed every drop of blood in my veins
for you. He is coming, so search your heart to discover if this is not
some mere passing fancy.”

“Father!” cried she.

“Remember that your happiness is in your own hands now, so be careful
and conceal your feelings, and do not let him discover how deep your
love is for him. Men’s minds are so formed that while they blame a woman
for duplicity, they complain far more if she acts openly and allows her
feelings to be seen----”

He paused, for the door-bell rang. Flavia’s heart gave a bound of
intense joy.

“He has come!” gasped she, and, with a strong effort to retain her
composure, she added, “I will obey you, my dear father; I will not come
here again until I have entirely regained my composure. Do not fear, and
I will show you that your daughter can act a part as well as any other
woman.”

She fled from the room as the door opened, but it was not Paul who made
his appearance, but some other guests--a stout manufacturer and his
wife, the latter gorgeously dressed, but with scarcely a word to say for
herself. For this evening the banker had issued invitations to twenty of
his friends, and among this number Paul would scarcely be noticed. He in
due time made his appearance with Dr. Hortebise, who had volunteered to
introduce him into good society. Paul felt ill at ease; he had just
come from the hands of a fashionable tailor, who, thanks to Mascarin’s
influence, had in forty-eight hours prepared an evening suit of such
superior cut that the young man hardly knew himself in it. Paul had
suffered a good deal from conflicting emotions after the visit to Van
Klopen’s, and more than once regretted the adhesion that he had given
to Mascarin’s scheme; but a visit the next day from Hortebise, and the
knowledge that the fashionable physician was one of the confederates,
had reconciled him to the position he had promised to assume.

He was moreover struck with Flavia’s charms, and dazzled with the
accounts of her vast prospective fortune. To him, Hortebise, gay, rich,
and careless, seemed the incarnation of happiness, and contributed
greatly to stifle the voice of Paul’s conscience. He would, however,
perhaps have hesitated had he known what the locket contained that
dangled so ostentatiously from the doctor’s chain.

Before they reached the banker’s door, driven in the doctor’s elegant
brougham, a similar one to which Paul mentally declared he would have,
as soon as circumstances would permit, the young man’s mentor spoke.

“Let me say a few words to you. You have before you a chance which is
seldom afforded to any young man, whatever his rank and social standing.
Mind that you profit by it.”

“You may be sure I will,” said Paul, with a smile of self-complacency.

“Good, dear boy; but let me fortify your courage with a little of my
experience. Do you know what an heiress really is?”

“Well, really----”

“Permit me to continue. An heiress and more so if she is an only child,
is generally a very disagreeable person, headstrong, capricious,
and puffed up with her own importance. She is utterly spoiled by the
flattery to which she has been accustomed from her earliest years, and
thinks that all the world is made to bend before her.”

“Ah!” answered Paul, a little discomfited. “I hope it is not
Mademoiselle Flavia’s portrait that you have been sketching?”

“Not exactly,” answered the doctor, with a laugh. “But I must warn you
that even she has certain whims and fancies. For instance, I am quite
sure that she would give a suitor every encouragement, and then repulse
him without rhyme or reason.”

Paul, who up to this time had only seen the bright side of affairs, was
a good deal disconcerted.

“Buy why should you introduce me to her then?”

“In order that you may win her. Have you not everything to insure
success? She will most likely receive you with the utmost cordiality;
but beware of being too sanguine. Even if she makes desperate love to
you, I say, take care; it may be only a trap; for, between ourselves,
a girl who has a million stitched to her petticoats is to be excused if
she endeavors to find out whether the suitor is after her or her money.”

Just then the brougham stopped, and Dr. Hortebise and his young friend
entered the house in the Rue Montmartre, where they were cordially
greeted by the banker.

Paul glanced round, but there were no signs of Flavia, nor did she
make her appearance until five minutes before the dinner hour, when the
guests flocked round her. She had subdued all her emotions, and not
a quiver of the eyelids disclosed the excitement under which she was
laboring. Her eye rested on Paul, and he bowed ceremoniously. The banker
was delighted, for he had not believed much in her self-command. But
Flavia had taken his advice to heart, and when seated at table abstained
from casting a glance in Paul’s direction. When dinner was over and many
of the guests had sat down to whist; Flavia ventured to approach Paul,
and in a low voice, which shook a little in spite of her efforts,
said,--

“Will you not play me one of your own compositions, M. Violaine?”

Paul was but a medium performer, but Flavia seemed in the seventh
heaven, while her father and Dr. Hortebise, who had taken their seats
not far away, watched the young couple with much anxiety.

“How she adores him!” whispered the banker. “And yet I cannot judge of
the effect that she has produced upon him.”

“Surely Mascarin will worm it all out of him to-morrow,” returned the
doctor. “To-morrow the poor fellow will have his hands full, for there
is to be a general meeting, when we shall hear all about Catenac’s
ideas, and I shall be glad to know what Croisenois’s conduct will be
when he knows what he is wanted for.”

It was growing late, and the guests began to drop off. Dr. Hortebise
signalled to Paul, and they left the house together. According to the
promise to her father, Flavia had acted her part so well, that Paul did
not know whether he had made an impression or not.



CHAPTER XV.

MASTER CHUPIN.

Beaumarchef, when Mascarin called a general meeting of his associates,
was in the habit of assuming his very best attire; for as he was often
called into the inner office to answer questions, he was much
impressed with the importance of the occasion. This time, however, the
subordinate, although he had received due notice of the meeting, was
still in his every-day dress. This discomposed him a good deal, though
he kept muttering to himself that he meant no disrespect by it. Early in
the morning he had been compelled to make up the accounts of two
cooks, who, having obtained situations, were leaving the servants’
lodging-house. When this matter was completed, he had hoped for half an
hour’s leisure. As he was crossing the courtyard, however, he fell in
with Toto Chupin bringing in his daily report, which Beaumarchef thought
would be what it usually was--a mere matter of form. He was, however,
much mistaken; for though outwardly Toto was the same, yet his ideas had
taken an entirely new direction; and when Beaumarchef urged him to look
sharp, the request was received with a great deal of sullenness.

“I ain’t lost no time,” said he, “and have fished up a thing or two
fresh; but before saying a word--”

He stopped, and seemed a little confused.

“Well, go on.”

“I want a fresh arrangement.”

Beaumarchef was staggered.

“Arrangement!” he echoed.

“Of course you can lump it if yer don’t like it,” said the boy. “Do
you think as how I’m going to work like a horse, and not get a wink of
sleep, just for a ‘thank ye, Chupin?’ No fear. I’m worth a sight more
nor that.”

Beaumarchef flew into a rage.

“Then you are not worth a pinch of salt,” said he.

“All right, my cove.”

“And you are an ungrateful young villain to talk like this after all the
kindness your master has shown you.”

Chupin gave a sarcastic laugh.

“Goodness!” cried he. “To hear you go on, one would think that the boss
had ruined himself for my sake.”

“He took you out of the streets, and has given you a room ever since.”

“A room, do you say? I call it a dog kennel.”

“You have your breakfast and dinner every day regularly.”

“I know that, and half a bottle of wine at each meal, which has so much
water in it that it cannot even stain the tablecloth.”

“You are an ungrateful young hound,” exclaimed Beaumarchef, “and forget
that, in addition to this, he has set you up in business as a hot
chestnut seller.”

“Good old business! I am allowed to stand all day under the gateway,
roasted on one side, and frozen on the other, and gain, perhaps twenty
sous.”

“You know that in summer he has promised to set you up in the fried
potato line.”

“Thank ye for nothing; I don’t like the smell of grease.”

“What is it you want, then?”

“Nothing. I feels that I ought to be a gentleman at large.”

Beaumarchef cast a furious glance at the shameless youth, and told him
that he would report everything to his master. The boy, however, did not
seem to care a pin.

“I intends to see Master Mascarin myself presently,” remarked Chupin.

“You are an idiot.”

“Why so? Do you think I didn’t live better before I had anything to
do with this blooming old cove? I never worked then. I used to sing in
front of the pubs, and easily made my three francs a day. My pal and I
soon check ‘em though, and then off we went to the theatre. Sometimes
we’d make tracks for Ivry, and take our doss in a deserted factory, into
which the crushers never put their noses. In the winter we used to go to
the glass houses and sleep in the warm ashes. All these were good times,
while now--”

“Well, what have you to grumble at now? Don’t I hand you a five-franc
piece every day that you are at work?”

“But that ain’t good enough. Come, don’t get shirty; all I asks is a
rise of salary. Only say either Yes or No; and if you say No, why, I
sends in my resignation.”

Beaumarchef would have given a five-franc piece out of his own pocket
for Mascarin to have heard the boy’s impertinence.

“You are a young rascal!” said he, “and keep the worst of company. There
is no use in denying it, for a hang-dog fellow, calling himself Polyte,
has been here asking after you.”

“My company ain’t any business of yours.”

“Well, I give you warning, you will come to grief.”

“How?” returned Toto Chupin sulkily. “How can I come to grief? If old
Mascarin interferes, I’ll shut up his mouth pretty sharp. I wish you and
your master wouldn’t poke their noses into my affairs. I’m sick of you
both. Don’t you think I’m up to you? When you make me follow some one
for a week at a time, it isn’t to do ‘em a kindness, I reckon. If things
turn out badly, I’ve only to go before a beak and speak up; I should get
off easily enough then; and if I do so, you will be sorry for not having
given me more than my five francs a day.”

Beaumarchef was an old soldier and a bold man, but he was easily upset,
for the lad’s insolence made him believe that he was uttering words that
had been put in his mouth by some wily adviser; and not knowing how
to act, the ex-soldier thought it best to adopt a more conciliating
demeanor.

“How much do you want?” asked he.

“Well, seven francs to start with.”

“The deuce you do! Seven francs a day is a sum. Well, I’ll give it you
myself to-day and will speak about you to the master.”

“You won’t get me to loosen my tongue for that amount to-day; you may
bet your boots on that,” answered the lad insolently. “I wants one
hundred francs down on the nail.”

“One hundred francs,” echoed Beaumarchef, scandalized at such a demand.

“Yes, my cove, that and no less.”

“And what will you give in return? No, no, my lad; your demand is a
preposterous one; besides, you wouldn’t know how to spend such a sum.”

“Don’t you flurry yourself about that; but of one thing you may be sure,
I sha’n’t spend my wages as you do--in wax for your mustache.”

Beaumarchef could not endure an insult to his mustache, and Chupin was
about to receive the kick he had so richly earned, when Daddy Tantaine
suddenly made his appearance, looking exactly as he did when he visited
Paul in his garret.

“Tut, tut; never quarrel with the door open.”

Beaumarchef thanked Providence for sending this sudden reinforcement to
his aid, and began in a tone of indignation,--

“Toto Chupin--”

“Stop! I have heard every word,” broke in Tantaine.

On hearing this, Toto felt that he had better make himself scarce; for
though he hardly knew Mascarin, and utterly despised Beaumarchef, he
trembled before the oily Tantaine, for in him he recognized a being who
would stand no nonsense. He therefore began in an apologetic tone,--

“Just let me speak, sir; I only wanted--”

“Money, of course, and very natural too. Come, Beaumarchef, hand this
worthy lad the hundred francs that he has so politely asked for.”

Beaumarchef was utterly stupefied, and was about to make some objection
when he was struck by a signal which Toto did not perceive, and, drawing
out his pocketbook, extracted a note which he offered to the lad. Toto
glanced at the note, then at the faces of the two men, but was evidently
afraid to take the money.

“Take the money,” said Tantaine. “If your information is not worth the
money, I will have it back from you; come into the office, where we
shall not be disturbed.”

Tantaine took a chair, and glancing at Toto, who stood before him
twirling his cap leisurely, said,--

“I heard you.”

The lad had by this time recovered his customary audacity.

“Five days ago,” he began, “I was put on to Caroline Schimmel; I have
found out all about her by this time. She is as regular as clockwork in
her duties at least. She wakes at ten and takes her absinthe. Then she
goes to a little restaurant she knows, and has her breakfast and a game
at cards with any one that will play with her. At six in the evening
she goes to the Grand Turk, a restaurant and dancing-shop in the Rue des
Poisonnieres. Ain’t it a swell ken just! You can eat; drink, dance, or
sing, just as you like; but you must have decent togs on, or they won’t
let you in.”

“Wouldn’t they let you through then?”

Toto pointed significantly to his rags as he replied,--

“This rig out wouldn’t pass muster, but I have a scheme in hand.”

Tantaine took down the address of the dancing-saloon, and then,
addressing Toto with the utmost severity,--

“Do you think,” said he, “that this report is worth a hundred francs?”

Toto made a quaint grimace.

“Do you think,” asked he, “that Caroline can lead the life she does
without money? No fear. Well, I have found out where the coin comes
from.”

The dim light in the office enabled Tantaine to hide the pleasure he
felt on hearing these words.

“Ah,” answered he carelessly, as if it was a matter of but little
moment, “and so you have found out all that, have you?

“Yes, and a heap besides. Just you listen. After her breakfast, my sweet
Carry began to play cards with some chaps who had been grubbing at the
next table. ‘Regular right down card sharpers and macemen,’ said I
to myself, as I watched the way in which they faked the pasteboards.
‘They’ll get everything out of you, old gal.’ I was in the right, for in
less than an hour she had to go up to the counter and leave one of her
rings as security for the breakfast. He said he knew her, and would give
her credit. ‘You are a trump,’ said she. ‘I’ll just trot off to my own
crib and get the money.’”

“Did she go home?”

“Not she; she went to a real swell house in a bang up part of Paris,
the Rue de Varennes. She knocked at the door, and in she went, while I
lounged about outside.”

“Do you know who lives there?”

“Of course I do. The grocer round the corner told me that it was
inhabited by the Duke--what was his blessed name? Oh, the Duke----”

“Was it the Duke de Champdoce?”

“That is the right one, a chap they say as has his cellars chock full of
gold and silver.”

“You are rather slow, my lad,” said Tantaine, with his assumed air of
indifference. “Get on a bit, do.”

Toto was much put out; for he had expected that his intelligence would
have created an immense sensation.

“Give a cove time to breathe in. Well, in half an hour out comes my
Carry as lively as a flea. She got into a passing cab and away she went.
Fortunately I can run a bit, and reached the Palais Royal in time to
see Caroline change two notes of two hundred francs each at the
money-changers.”

“How did you find out that?”

“By looking at ‘em. The paper was yellow.”

Tantaine smiled kindly. “You know a banknote then?”

“Yes, but I have precious few chances of handling them. Once I went into
a money-changer’s shop and asked them just to let me feel one, and they
said, ‘Get out sharp.’”

“Is that all?” demanded Tantaine.

“No; I have kept the best bit for a finish. I want to tell you that
there are others on the lookout after Caroline.”

Toto had no reason this time to grumble at the effect he had produced,
for the old man gave such a jump that his hat fell off.

“What are you saying?” said he.

“Simply that for the last three days a big chap with a harp on his back
has been keeping her in view. I twigged him at once, and he too saw her
go into the swell crib that you say belongs to that Duke.”

Tantaine pondered a little.

“A street musician,” muttered he. “I must find out all about this. Now,
Toto, listen to me; chuck Caroline over, and stick to the fellow with
the harp; be off with you, for you have earned your money well.”

As Chupin went off, the old man shook his head.

“Too sharp by a good bit,” said he; “he won’t have a long lease of
life.”

Beaumarchef was about to ask Tantaine to remain in the office while
he went off to put on his best clothes, but the old man stopped this
request by saying,--

“As M. Mascarin does not like to be disturbed, I will just go in without
knocking. When the other gentlemen arrive, show them in; for look you
here, my good friend, the pear is so ripe that if it is not plucked, it
will fall to the ground.”



CHAPTER XVI.

A TURN OF THE SCREW.

Dr. Hortebise was the first to arrive. It was a terrible thing for him
to get up so early; but for Mascarin’s sake he consented even to this
inconvenience. When he passed through the office, the room was full
of clients; but this did not prevent the doctor from noticing the
negligence of Beaumarchef’s costume.

“Aha!” remarked the doctor, “on the drunk again, I am afraid.”

“M. Mascarin is within,” answered the badgered clerk, endeavoring to put
on an air of dignity; “and M. Tantaine is with him.”

A brilliant idea flashed across the doctor’s mind, but it was with an
air of gravity that he said,--

“I shall be charmed to meet that most worthy old gentleman.”

When, however, he entered the inner sanctum, he found Mascarin alone,
occupied in sorting the eternal pieces of pasteboard.

“Well, what news?” asked he.

“There is none that I know of.”

“What, have you not seen Paul?”

“No.”

“Will he be here?”

“Certainly.”

Mascarin was often laconic, but he seldom gave such short answers as
this.

“What is the matter?” asked the doctor. “Your greeting is quite
funereal. Are you not well?”

“I am merely preoccupied, and that is excusable on the eve of the battle
we are about to fight,” returned Mascarin.

He only, however, told a portion of the truth; for there was more in
the background, which he did not wish to confide to his friend. Toto
Chupin’s revolt had disquieted him. Let there be but a single flaw in
the axletree, and one day it will snap in twain; and Mascarin wanted to
eliminate this flaw.

“Pooh!” remarked the doctor, playing with his locket, “we shall succeed.
What have we to fear, after all,--opposition on Paul’s part?”

“Paul may resent a little,” answered Mascarin disdainfully; “but I have
decided that he shall be present at our meeting of to-day. It will be
a stormy one, so be prepared. We might give him his medicine in minims,
but I prefer the whole dose at once.”

“The deuce you do! Suppose he should be frightened, and make off with
our secret.”

“He won’t make off,” replied Mascarin in a tone which froze his
listener’s blood. “He can’t escape from us any more than the cockchafer
can from the string that a child has fastened to it. Do you not
understand weak natures like his? He is the glove, I the strong hand
beneath it.”

The doctor did not argue this point, but merely murmured,--

“Let us hope that it is so.”

“Should we have any opposition,” resumed Mascarin, “it will come from
Catenac. I may be able to force him into co-operation with us, but his
heart will not be in the enterprise.”

“Do you propose to bring Catenac into this affair?” asked Hortebise in
great surprise.

“Assuredly.”

“Why have you changed your plan?”

“Simply because I have recognized the fact that, if we dispensed with
his services, we should be entirely at the mercy of a shrewd man of
business, because----”

He broke off, listened for a moment, and then said,--

“Hush! I can hear his footstep.”

A dry cough was heard outside, and in another moment Catenac entered the
room.

Nature, or profound dissimulation, had gifted Catenac with an exterior
which made every one, when first introduced to him, exclaim, “This is an
honest and trustworthy man.” Catenac always looked his clients boldly in
the face. His voice was pleasant, and had a certain ring of joviality
in it, and his manner was one of those easy ones which always insure
popularity. He was looked upon as a shrewd lawyer; but yet he did not
shine in court. He must therefore, to make those thirty thousand francs
a year which he was credited with doing, have some special line of
business. He assayed rather risky matters, which might bring both
parties into the clutches of the criminal law, or, at any rate, leave
them with a taint upon both their names. A sensational lawsuit is
begun, and the public eagerly await the result; suddenly the whole thing
collapses, for Catenac has acted as mediator. He has even settled the
disputes of murderers quarreling over their booty. But he has even gone
farther than this. More than once he has said of himself, “I have passed
through the vilest masses of corruption.” In his office in the Rue Jacob
he has heard whispered conferences which were enough to bring down the
roof above his head. Of course this was the most lucrative business
that passed into Catenac’s hands. The client conceals nothing from his
attorney, and he belongs to him as absolutely as the sick man belongs to
his physician or the penitent to his confessor.

“Well, my dear Baptiste,” said he, “here I am; you summoned me, and I am
obedient to the call.”

“Sit down,” replied Mascarin gravely.

“Thanks, my friend, many thanks, a thousand thanks; but I am much
hurried; indeed I have not a moment to spare. I have matters on my hands
of life and death.”

“But for all that,” remarked Hortebise, “you can sit down for a moment.
Baptiste has something to say to you which is as important as any of
your matters can be.”

With a frank and genial smile Catenac obeyed; but in his heart were
anger and an abject feeling of alarm.

“What is it that is so important?” asked he.

Mascarin had risen and locked the door. When he had resumed his seat he
said,--

“The facts are very simple. Hortebise and I have decided to put our
great plan into execution, which we have as yet only discussed generally
with you. We have the Marquis de Croisenois with us.”

“My dear sir,” broke in the lawyer.

“Wait a little; we must have your assistance, and----”

Catenac rose from his seat. “That is enough,” said he. “You have made a
very great mistake if it is on this matter that you have sent for me; I
told you this before.”

He was turning away, and looking for his hat, proposed to beat a
retreat; but Dr. Hortebise stood between him and the door, gazing upon
him with no friendly expression of countenance. Catenac was not a man to
be easily alarmed, but the doctor’s appearance was so threatening, and
the smile upon Mascarin’s lips was of so deadly a character, that he
stood still, positively frightened into immobility.

“What do you mean?” stammered he; “what is it you say now?”

“First,” replied the doctor, speaking slowly and distinctly,--“first, we
wish that you should listen to us when we speak to you.”

“I am listening.”

“Then sit down again, and hear what Baptiste has to say.”

The command Catenac had over his countenance was so great that it was
impossible to see to what conclusion he had arrived from the words and
manner of his confederates.

“Then let Baptiste explain himself,” said he.

“Before entering into matters completely,” said he coolly, “I first want
to ask our dear friend and associate if he is prepared to act with us?”

“Why should there be any doubt on that point?” asked the lawyer. “Do all
my repeated assurances count as nothing?”

“We do not want promises now; what we do want is good faith and real
co-operation.”

“Can it be that you--”

“I ought to inform you,” continued Mascarin, unheeding the interruption,
“that we have every prospect of success; and, if we carry the matter
through, we shall certainly have a million apiece.”

Hortebise had not the calm patience of his confederate, and exclaimed,--

“You understand it well enough. Say Yes or No.”

Catenac was in the agonies of indecision, and for fully a minute made no
reply.

“_No_, then!” he broke out in a manner which betrayed his intense
agitation. “After due consideration, and having carefully weighed the
chances for and against, I answer you decidedly, No.”

Mascarin and Hortebise evidently expected this reply, and exchanged
glances.

“Permit me to explain,” said Catenac, “what you consider as a cowardly
withdrawal upon my part--”

“Call it treachery.”

“I will not quibble about words. I wish to be perfectly straightforward
with you.”

“I am glad to hear it,” sneered the doctor, “though that is not your
usual form.”

“And yet I do not think that I have ever concealed my real opinion from
you. It is fully ten years ago since I spoke to you of the necessity of
breaking up this association. Can you recall what I said? I said only
our extreme need and griping poverty justified our acts. They are now
inexcusable.”

“You talked very freely of your scruples,” observed Mascarin.

“You remember my words then?”

“Yes, and I remember too that those inner scruples never hindered you
from drawing your share of the profits.”

“That is to say,” burst in the doctor, “you repudiated the work, but
shared the booty. You wished to play the game without staking anything.”

Catenac was in no way disconcerted at this trenchant argument.

“Quite true,” said he, “I always received my share; but I have done
quite as much as you in putting the agency in its present prosperous
condition. Does it not work smoothly like a perfect piece of mechanism?
Have we not succeeded in nearly all our schemes? The income comes in
monthly with extreme regularity, and I, according to my rights, have
received one-third. If you desire to throw up this perilous means of
livelihood, say so, and I will not oppose it.”

“You are really too good,” sneered the doctor, with a look of menace in
his glance.

“Nor,” continued Catenac, “will I oppose you if you prefer to let
matters stand as they are; but if you start on fresh enterprises, and
embark on the tempestuous sea of danger, then I put down my foot and
very boldly ‘halt.’ I will not take another step with you. I can see by
the looks of both of you that you think me a fool and a coward. Heaven
grant that the future may not show you only too plainly that I have been
in the right. Think over this. For twenty years fortune has favored us,
but, believe me, it is never wise to tempt her too far, for it is well
known that at some time or other she always turns.”

“Your imagery is really charming,” remarked Hortebise sarcastically.

“Good, I have nothing else to say but to repeat my warning: _reflect_.
Grand as your hopes and expectations may be, they are as nothing to the
perils that you will encounter.”

This cold flood of eloquence was more than the doctor could bear.

“It is all very well for you,” exclaimed he, “to reason like this, for
you are a rich man.”

“I have enough to live on, I allow; for in addition to the income
derived from my profession, I have saved two hundred thousand francs;
and if you can be induced to renounce your projects, I will divide this
sum with you. You have only to think.”

Mascarin, who had taken no part in the dispute, now judged it time to
interfere.

“And so,” said he, turning to Catenac, “you have only two hundred
thousand francs?”

“That or thereabouts.”

“And you offer to divide this sum with us. Really we ought to be deeply
grateful to you, but----”

Mascarin paused for a moment; then settling his spectacles more firmly,
he went on,--

“But even if you were to give us what you propose, you would still have
eleven hundred thousand francs remaining!”

Catenac burst into a pleasant laugh. “You are jesting,” said he.

“I can prove the correctness of my assertion;” and as he spoke, Mascarin
unlocked a drawer, and taking a small notebook from it, turned over the
pages, and leaving it open at a certain place, handed it to the lawyer.

“There,” said he, “that is made up to December last, and shows precisely
how you stand financially. Twice, then, you have increased your funds.
These deposits you will find in an addenda at the end of the book.”

Catenac started to his feet; all his calmness had now disappeared.

“Yes,” he said, “I have just the sum you name; and I, for that very
reason, refuse to have anything further to do with your schemes. I have
an income of sixty thousand francs; that is to say, sixty thousand good
reasons for receiving no further risks. You envy me my good fortune, but
did we not all start penniless? I have taken care of my money, while
you have squandered yours. Hortebise has lost his patients, while I have
increased the number of my clients; and now you want me to tread the
dangerous road again. Not I; go your way, and leave me to go home.”

Again he took up his hat, but a wave of the hand from Mascarin detained
him.

“Suppose,” said he coldly, “that I told you that your assistance was
necessary to me.”

“I should say so much the worse for you.”

“But suppose I insist?”

“And how can you insist? We are both in the same boat, and sink or swim
together.”

“Are you certain of that?”

“So certain that I repeat from this day I wash my hands of you.”

“I am afraid you are in error.”

“How so?”

“Because for twelve months past; I have given food and shelter to a girl
of the name of Clarisse. Do you by any chance know her?”

At the mention of this name, the lawyer started, as a man starts who,
walking peacefully along, suddenly sees a deadly serpent coiled across
his path.

“Clarisse,” stammered he, “how did you know of her? who told you?”

But the sarcastic sneer upon the lips of his two confederates
wounded his pride so deeply, that in an instant he recovered his
self-possession.

“I am getting foolish,” said he, “to ask these men how they learned my
secret. Do they not always work by infamous and underhand means?”

“You see I know all,” remarked Mascarin, “for I foresaw the day would
come when you would wish to sever our connection, and even give us up to
justice, if you could do so with safety to yourself. I therefore took my
precautions. One thing, however, I was not prepared for, and that was,
that a man of your intelligence should have played so paltry a game,
and even twelve months back thought of betraying us. It is almost
incredible. Do you ever read the _Gazette des Tribunaux_? I saw in its
pages yesterday a story nearly similar to your own. Shall I tell it to
you? A lawyer who concealed his vices beneath a mantle of joviality and
candor, brought up from the country a pretty, innocent girl to act as
servant in his house. This lawyer occupied his leisure time in leading
the poor child astray, and the moment at last came when the consequences
of her weakness were too apparent. The lawyer was half beside himself at
the approaching scandal. What would the neighbors say? Well, to cut the
story short, the infant was suppressed,--you understand, suppressed, and
the mother turned into the street.”

“Baptiste, have mercy!”

“It was a most imprudent act, for such things always leak out somehow.
You have a gardener at your house at Champigny, and suppose the idea
seized upon this worthy man to dig up the ground round the wall at the
end of the garden.”

“That is enough,” said Catenac, piteously. “I give in.”

Mascarin adjusted his spectacles, as he always did in important moments.

“You give in, do you? Not a bit. Even now you are endeavoring to find a
means of parrying my home thrusts.”

“But I declare to you----”

“Do not be alarmed; dig as deeply as he might, your gardener would
discover nothing.”

The lawyer uttered a stifled exclamation of rage as he perceived the pit
into which he had fallen.

“He would find nothing,” resumed Mascarin, “and yet the story is all
true. Last January, on a bitterly cold night, you dug a hole, and in
it deposited the body of a new-born infant wrapped in a shawl. And what
shawl? Why the very one that you purchased at the _Bon Marche_, when you
were making yourself agreeable to Clarisse. The shopman who sold it to
you has identified it, and is ready to give evidence when called upon.
You may look for that shawl, Catenac, but you will not find it.”

“Have you got that shawl?” asked Catenac hoarsely.

“Am I a fool?” asked Mascarin contemptuously. “Tantaine has it; but _I_
know where the body is, and will keep the information to myself. Do not
be alarmed; act fairly, and you are safe; but make one treacherous move,
and you will read in the next day’s papers a paragraph something to this
effect: ‘Yesterday some workmen, engaged in excavations near so-and-so,
discovered the body of a new-born infant. Every effort is being made
to discover the author of the crime.’ You know me, and that I work
promptly. To the shawl I have added a handkerchief and a few other
articles belonging to Clarisse, which will render it an easy matter to
fix the guilt on you.”

Catenac was absolutely stunned, and had lost all power of defending
himself. The few incoherent words that he uttered showed his state of
utter despair.

“You have killed me,” gasped he, “just as the prize, that I have been
looking for for twenty years, was in my grasp.”

“Work does a man no harm,” remarked the doctor sententiously.

There was, however, little time to lose; the Marquis de Croisenois and
Paul might be expected to arrive at any moment, and Mascarin hastened to
restore a certain amount of calmness to his prostrate antagonist.

“You make as much noise as if we were going to hand you over to the
executioner on the spot. Do you think that we are such a pair of fools
as to risk all these hazards without some almost certain chance of
success? Hortebise was as much startled as yourself when I first spoke
to him of this affair, but I explained everything fully to him, and now
he is quite enthusiastic in the matter. Of course you can lay aside all
fear, and, as a man of the world, will bear no malice against those who
have simply played a better game than yourself.”

“Go on,” said Catenac, forcing a smile, “I am listening.”

Mascarin made a short pause.

“What we want of you,” answered he, “will not compromise you in the
slightest degree. I wish you to draw up a document, the particulars
of which I will give you presently, and you will outwardly have no
connection with the matter.”

“Very good.”

“But there is more yet. The Duke of Champdoce has placed a difficult
task in your hands. You are engaged in a secret on his behalf.”

“You know that also?”

“I know everything that may be made subservient to our ends. I also know
that instead of coming direct to me you went to the very man that we
have every reason to dread, that fellow Perpignan, who is nearly as
sharp as we are.”

“Go on,” returned Catenac impatiently. “What do you expect from me on
this point?”

“Not much; you must only come to me first, and report any discovery you
may have made, and never give any information to the Duke without first
consulting us.”

“I agree.”

The contending parties seemed to have arrived at an amicable
termination, and Dr. Hortebise smiled complacently.

“Now,” said he, “shall we not confess, after all, that there was no use
in making such a fuss?”

“I allow that I was in the wrong,” answered Catenac meekly; and,
extending his hands to his two associates with an oily smile, he said:
“Let us forget and forgive.”

Was he to be trusted? Mascarin and the doctor exchanged glances of
suspicion. A moment afterward a knock came to the door, and Paul
entered, making a timid bow to his two patrons.

“My dear boy,” said Mascarin, “let me present you to one of my oldest
and best friends.” Then, turning to Catenac, he added: “I wish to ask
you to help and assist my young friend here. Paul Violaine is a good
fellow, who has neither father nor mother, and whom we are trying to
help on in his journey through life.”

The lawyer started as he caught the strange, meaning smile which
accompanied these words.

“Great heavens!” said he, “why did you not speak sooner?”

Catenac at once divined Mascarin’s project, and understood the allusion
to the Duke de Champdoce.



CHAPTER XVII.

SOME SCRAPS OF PAPER.

The Marquis de Croisenois was never punctual. He had received a note
asking him to call on Mascarin at eleven o’clock, and twelve had struck
some time before he made his appearance. Faultlessly gloved, his glass
firmly fixed in his eye, and a light walking cane in his hand, and with
that air of half-veiled insolence that is sometimes affected by certain
persons who wish the world to believe that they are of great importance,
the Marquis de Croisenois entered the room.

At the age of twenty-five Henry de Croisenois affected the airs and
manners of a lad of twenty, and so found many who looked upon his
escapades with lenient eyes, ascribing them to the follies of youth.
Under this youthful mask, however he concealed a most astute and cunning
intellect, and had more than once got the better of the women with whom
he had had dealings. His fortune was terribly involved, because he had
insisted on living at the same rate as men who had ten times his income.
Forming one of the recklessly extravagant band of which the Duke de
Saumeine was the head, Croisenois, too, kept his racehorses, which
was certainly the quickest way to wreck the most princely fortune. The
Marquis had found out this, and was utterly involved, when Mascarin
extended a helping hand to him, to which he clung with all the energy of
a drowning man.

Whatever Henry de Croisenois’ anxieties may have been on the day in
question, he did not allow a symptom of them to appear, and on his
entrance negligently drawled, “I have kept you waiting, I fear; but
really my time is not my own. I am quite at your service now, and will
wait until these gentlemen have finished their business with you.” And
as he concluded, he again placed the cigar which he had removed while
saying these words, to his lips.

His manner was very insolent, and yet the amiable Mascarin did not seem
offended, although he loathed the scent of tobacco.

“We had begun to despair of seeing you, Marquis,” answered he politely.
“I say so, because these gentlemen are here to meet you. Permit me to
introduce to you, Dr. Hortebise, M. Catenac of the Parisian bar, and our
secretary,” pointing as he spoke, to Paul.

As soon as Croisenois had taken his seat, Mascarin went straight to the
point, as a bullet to the target. “I do not intend,” began he, “to leave
you in doubt for a moment. Beatings about the bush would be absurd among
persons like ourselves.”

At finding himself thus classed with the other persons present, the
Marquis gave a little start, and then drawled out, “You flatter me,
really.”

“I may tell you, Marquis,” resumed Mascarin, “that your marriage has
been definitely arranged by myself and my associates. All you have to do
is to get the young lady’s consent; for that of the Count and Countess
has already been secured.”

“There will be no difficulty in that,” lisped the Marquis. “I will
promise her the best horsed carriage in the Bois, a box at the opera,
unlimited credit at Van Klopen’s, and perfect freedom. There will be
no difficulty, I assure you. Of course, however, I must be presented by
some one who holds a good position in society.”

“Would the Viscountess de Bois Arden suit you?”

“No one better; she is a relation of the Count de Mussidan.”

“Good; then when you wish, Madame de Bois Arden will introduce you as a
suitor for the young lady’s hand, and praise you up to the skies.”

The Marquis looked very jubilant at hearing this. “All right,” cried he;
“then that decides the matter.”

Paul wondered whether he was awake or dreaming. He too had been promised
a rich wife, and here was another man who was being provided for in the
same manner. “These people,” muttered he, “seem to keep a matrimonial
agency as well as a servants’ registry office!”

“All that is left, then,” said the Marquis, “is to arrange the--shall I
call it the commission?”

“I was about to come to that,” returned Mascarin.

“Well, I will give you a fourth of the dowry, and on the day of my
marriage will hand you a cheque for that amount.”

Paul now imagined that he saw how matters worked. “If I marry Flavia,”
 thought he, “I shall have to share her dowry with these highly
respectable gentlemen.”

The offer made by the Marquis did not, however, seem to please Mascarin.
“That is not what we want,” said he.

“No,--well, must I give you more? Say how much.”

Mascarin shook his head.

“Well then, I will give you a third; it is not worth while to give you
more.”

“No, no; I would not take half, nor even the whole of the dowry. You may
keep that as well as what you owe us.”

“Well, but tell me what you _do_ want.”

“I will do so,” answered Mascarin, adjusting his spectacles carefully;
“but before doing so, I feel that I must give you a short account of the
rise and progress of this association.”

At this statement Hortebise and Catenac sprang to their feet in surprise
and terror. “Are you mad?” said they at length, with one voice.

Mascarin shrugged his shoulders.

“Not yet,” answered he gently, “and I beg that you will permit me to go
on.”

“But surely we have some voice in the matter,” faltered Catenac.

“That is enough,” exclaimed Mascarin angrily, “Am not I the head of this
association? Do you think,” he continued in tones of deep sarcasm, “that
we cannot speak openly before the Marquis?”

Hortebise and the lawyer resignedly resumed their seats. Croisenois
thought that a word from him might reassure them.

“Among honest men--” began he.

“We are not honest men,” interrupted Mascarin. “Sir,” added he in a
severe tone, “nor are you either.”

This plain speaking brought a bright flush to the face of the Marquis,
who had half a mind to be angry, but policy restrained him, and he
affected to look on the matter as a joke. “Your joke is a little
personal,” said he.

But Mascarin took no heed of his remark. “Listen to me,” said he, “for
we have no time to waste, and do you,” he added, turning to Paul, “pay
the greatest attention.”

A moment of perfect silence ensued, broken only by the hum of voices in
the outer office.

“Marquis,” said Mascarin, whose whole face blazed with a gleam of
conscious power, “twenty-five years ago I and my associates were young
and in a very different position. We were honest then, and all the
illusions of youth were in full force; we had faith and hope. We all
then tenanted a wretched garret in the Rue de la Harpe, and loved each
other like brothers.”

“That was long, long ago,” murmured Hortebise.

“Yes,” rejoined Mascarin; “and yet the effluxion of times does not
hinder me from seeing things as they then were, and my heart aches as I
compare the hopes of those days with the realities of the present. Then,
Marquis, we were poor, miserably poor, and yet we all had vague hopes of
future greatness.”

Croisenois endeavored to conceal a sneer; the story was not a very
interesting one.

“As I said before, each one of us anticipated a brilliant career.
Catenac had gained a prize by his ‘Treatise on the Transfer of Real
Estate,’ and Hortebise had written a pamphlet regarding which the great
Orfila had testified approval. Nor was I without my successes. Hortebise
had unluckily quarrelled with his family. Catenac’s relatives were poor,
and I, well, I had no family. I stood alone. We were literally starving,
and I was the only one earning money. I prepared pupils for the military
colleges, but as I only earned twenty-five sous a day by cramming a dull
boy’s brain with algebra and geometry, that was not enough to feed us
all. Well, to cut a long story short, the day came when we had not a
coin among us. I forgot to tell you that I was devotedly attached to a
young girl who was dying of consumption, and who had neither food nor
fuel. What could I do? I knew not. Half mad, I rushed from the house,
asking myself if I had better plead for charity or take the money I
required by force from the first passer-by. I wandered along the
quays, half inclined to confide my sorrow to the Seine, when suddenly
I remembered it was a holiday at the Polytechnic School, and that if
I went to the _Café Semblon_ or the Palais Royal, I should most likely
meet with some of my old pupils, who could perhaps lend me a few sous.
Five francs perhaps, Marquis,--that is a very small sum, but in that day
it meant the life of my dear Marie and of my two friends. Have you ever
been hungry, M. de Croisenois?”

De Croisenois started; he had never suffered from hunger, but how could
he tell what the future might bring? for his resources were so nearly
exhausted, that even to-morrow he might be compelled to discard his
fictitious splendor and sink into the abyss of poverty.

“When I reached the _Café Semblon_,” continued Mascarin, “I could not
see a single pupil, and the waiter to whom I addressed my inquiries
looked at me with the utmost contempt, for my clothes were in tatters;
but at length he condescended to inform me that the young gentlemen had
been and gone, but that they would return. I said that I would wait for
them. The man asked me if I would take anything, and when I replied in
the negative, contemptuously pointed to a chair in a distant corner,
where I patiently took my seat. I had sat for some time, when suddenly a
young man entered the _café_, whose face, were I to live for a century,
I shall never forget. He was perfectly livid, his features rigid, and
his eyes wild and full of anguish. He was evidently in intense agony of
mind or body. Evidently, however, it was not poverty that was oppressing
him, for as he cast himself upon a sofa, all the waiters rushed forward
to receive his orders. In a voice that was almost unintelligible,
he asked for a bottle of brandy, and pen, ink, and paper. In some
mysterious manner, the sight of this suffering brought balm to my aching
heart. The order of the young man was soon executed, and pouring out a
tumbler of brandy, he took a deep draught. The effect was instantaneous,
he turned crimson, and for a moment almost fell back insensible. I kept
my eyes on him, for a voice within me kept crying out that there was
some mysterious link connecting this man and myself, and that his life
was in some manner interwoven with mine, and that the influence he would
exercise over me would be for evil. So strongly did this idea become
rooted, that I should have left the _café_, had not my curiosity been so
great. In the meantime the stranger had recovered himself, and seizing
a pen, scrawled a few lines on a sheet of paper. Evidently he was not
satisfied with his composition, for after reading it over, he lit a
match and burnt the paper. He drank more brandy, and wrote a second
letter, which, too, proved a failure, for he tore it to fragments, which
he thrust into his waistcoat pocket. Again he commenced, using
greater care. It was plain that he had forgotten where he was, for he
gesticulated, uttered a broken sentence or two and evidently believed
that he was in his own house. His last letter seemed to satisfy him, and
he recopied it with care. He closed and directed it; then, tearing the
original into pieces, he flung it under the table; then calling the
waiter, he said, ‘Here are twenty francs; take this letter to the
address on the envelope. Bring the answer to my house; here is my card.’
The man ran out of the room, and the nobleman, only waiting to pay his
bill, followed almost immediately. The morsels of white paper beneath
the table had a strange fascination for me; I longed to gather them up,
to put them together, and to learn the secret of the strange drama that
had been acted before me. But, as I have told you, then I was honest and
virtuous, and the meanness of such an act revolted all my instincts; and
I should have overcome this temptation, had it not been for one of those
trifling incidents which too often form the turning-point of a life.
A draught from a suddenly opened door caught one of these morsels of
paper, and wafted it to my feet. I stooped and picked it up, and read
on it the ominous words, ‘blow out my brains!’ I had not been mistaken,
then, and was face to face with some coming tragedy. Having once
yielded, I made no further efforts at self-control. The waiters were
running about; no one paid any attention to me; and creeping to the
place that the unknown had occupied, I obtained possession of two more
scraps of paper. Upon one I read, ‘shame and horror!’ upon the other,
‘one hundred thousand francs by to-night.’ The meaning of these few
words were as clear as daylight to me; but for all that, I managed to
collect every atom of the torn paper, and piecing them together, read
this:--

“‘CHARLES,--‘I must have one hundred thousand francs to-night, and
you are the only one to whom I can apply. The shame and horror of my
position are too much for me. Can you send it me in two hours? As you
act, so I regulate my conduct. I am either saved, or I blow out my
brains.’

“You are probably surprised, Marquis, at the accuracy of my memory, and
even now I can see this scrawl as distinctly as if it were before me. At
the end of this scrawl was a signature, one of the best known commercial
names, which, in common with other financial houses, was struggling
against a panic on the Bourse. My discovery disturbed me very much. I
forgot all my miseries, and thought only of his. Were not our positions
entirely similar? But by degrees a hideous temptation began to creep
into my heart, and, as the minutes passed by, assume more vivid color
and more tangible reality. Why should I not profit by this stolen
secret? I went to the desk and asked for some wafers and a Directory.
Then, returning, I fastened the torn fragments upon a clean sheet of
paper, discovered the address of the writer, and then left the _café_.
The house was situated in the Rue Chaussee d’Autin. For fully half an
hour I paced up and down before his magnificent dwelling-place. Was he
alive? Had the reply of Charles been in the affirmative? I decided at
last to venture, and rang the bell. A liveried domestic appeared at my
summons, and said that his master did not receive visitors at that hour;
besides, he was at dinner. I was exasperated at the man’s insolence,
and replied hotly, ‘If you want to save your master from a terrible
misfortune, go and tell him that a man has brought him the rough draft
of the letter he wrote a little time back at the _Café Semblon_.’ The
man obeyed me without a word, no doubt impressed by the earnestness of
my manner. My message must have caused intense consternation, for in
a moment the footman reappeared, and, in an obsequious manner, said,
‘Follow at once, sir; my master is waiting for you.’ He led me into a
large room, magnificently furnished as a library, and in the centre of
this room stood the man of the _Café Semblon_. His face was deadly pale,
and his eyes blazed with fury. I was so agitated that I could hardly
speak.

“‘You have picked up the scraps of paper I threw away?’ exclaimed he.

“I nodded, and showed him the fragments fastened on to the sheet of
note-paper.

“‘How much do you want for that?’ asked he. ‘I will give you a thousand
francs.’

“I declare to you, gentlemen, that up to this time I had no intention
of making money by the secret. My intention in going had been simply to
say, ‘I bring you this paper, of which some one else might have taken an
undue advantage. I have done you a service; lend me a hundred francs.’
This is what I meant to say, but his behavior irritated me, and I
answered,--

“‘No, I want two thousand francs.’

“He opened a drawer, drew out a bundle of banknotes, and threw them in
my face.

“‘Pay yourself, you villain!’ said he.

“I can, I fear, never make you understand what I felt at this undeserved
insult. I was not myself, and Heaven knows that I was not responsible
for any crime that I might have committed in the frenzy of the moment,
and I was nearly doing so. That man will, perhaps, never see death so
near him, save at his last hour. On his writing table lay one of those
Catalan daggers, which he evidently used as a paper-cutter. I snatched
it up, and was about to strike, when the recollection of Marie dying of
cold and starvation occurred to me. I dashed the knife to the ground,
and rushed from the house in a state bordering on insanity. I went into
that house an honest man, and left it a degraded scoundrel. But I must
finish. When I reached the street, the two banknotes which I had taken
from the packet seemed to burn me like coals of fire. I hastened to a
money-changer, and got coin for them. I think, from my demeanor, he
must have thought that I was insane. With my plunder weighing me down,
I regained our wretched garret in the Rue de la Harpe. Catenac and
Hortebise were waiting for me with the utmost anxiety. You remember that
day, my friends. Marquis, my story is especially intended for you. As
soon as I entered the room, my friends ran up to me, delighted at seeing
me return in safety, but I thrust them aside.

“‘Let me alone!’ cried I; ‘I am no longer fit to take an honest man’s
hand; but we have money, money!’ And I threw the bags upon the table.
One of them burst, and a flood of silver coins rolled to every part of
the room.

“Marie started from her chair with upraised hands. ‘Money!’ she
repeated, ‘money! we shall have food, and I won’t die.’

“My friends, Marquis, were not as they are now, and they started back in
horror, fearing that I had committed some crime.

“‘No,’ said I, ‘I have committed no crime, not one, at least, that will
bring me within the reach of the strong arm of the law. This money is
the price of our honor, but no one will know that fact but ourselves.’

“Marquis, there was no sleeping in the garret all that night; but when
daylight peered through the broken windows, it beamed on a table covered
with empty bottles, and round it were seated three men, who, having cast
aside all honorable scruples, had sworn that they would arrive at wealth
and prosperity by any means, no matter how foul and treacherous they
might be. That is all.”



CHAPTER XVIII.

AN INFAMOUS TRADE.

Mascarin, who was anxious to make as deep an impression as possible upon
Croisenois and Paul, broke off his story abruptly, and paced up and down
the room. Had his intention been to startle his audience, he had most
certainly succeeded. Paul was breathless with interest, and Croisenois
broke down in attempting to make one of his usual trivial remarks. He
was not particularly intelligent, except as regarded his self-interests,
and though, of course, he knew that there must be some connection
between his interests and the recital that Mascarin had just made, he
could not for the life of him make out what it was. Mascarin seemed
utterly careless of the effect that he had produced. But the next time
that his walk brought him to his desk he stopped, and, adjusting his
glasses, said, “I trust, Marquis, that you will forgive this long
preliminary address, which would really make a good sensational novel;
but we have now arrived at the really practical part of the business.”
 As he said these words, he took up an imposing attitude, with his elbow
resting on the mantelpiece.

“On the night of which I have spoken, I and my friends released
ourselves from all the bonds of virtue and honor, and freed ourselves
from all the fetters of duty to our fellow-men. The plan emanated from
my brain complete in all its details in the will I made twenty years ago
to my friends. Marquis, as the summer goes on, you know that the ripest
and reddest cherries are the fullest flavored, just so, in the noblest
and wealthiest of families in Paris there is not one that has not some
terrible and ghostly secret which is sedulously concealed. Now, suppose
that one man should gain possession of all of them, would he not be sole
and absolute master? Would he not be more powerful than a despot on
his throne? Would he not be able to sway society in any manner he might
think fit? Well, I said to myself, I will be that man!”

Ever since the Marquis had been in relation with Mascarin, he had
shrewdly suspected that his business was not conducted on really fair
principles.

“What you mention,” said he, “is nothing but an elaborate and extended
system of blackmail.”

Mascarin bowed low, with an ironical smile on his face. “Just so,
Marquis, just so; you have hit on the very name. The word is modern, but
the operation doubtless dates from the earliest ages. The day upon which
one man began to trade upon the guilty secret of another was the date
of the institution of this line of business. If antiquity makes a thing
respectable, then blackmailing is worthy of great respect.”

“But, sir,” said the Marquis, with a flush upon his face, “but, sir--”

“Pshaw!” broke in Mascarin, “does a mere word frighten you? Who has not
done some of it in his time? Why, look at yourself. Do you not recollect
this winter that you detected a young man cheating at cards? You said
nothing to him at the time, but you found out that he was rich, and,
calling upon him the next day, borrowed ten thousand francs. When do you
intend to repay that loan?”

Croisenois sank back in his chair, overcome with surprise at this
display of knowledge on Mascarin’s part. “This is too terrible,”
 muttered he, but Mascarin went on,--

“I know, at least, two thousand persons in Paris who only exist by
the exercise of this profession; for I have studied them all, from
the convict who screws money out of his former companions, in penal
servitude, to the titled villain, who, having discovered the frailty of
some unhappy woman, forces her to give him her daughter as his wife.
I know a mere messenger in the Rue Douai, who in five years amassed a
comfortable fortune. Can you guess how? When he was intrusted with
a letter, he invariably opened it, and made himself master of its
contents, and if there was a compromising word in it, he pounced down
upon either the writer or the person to whom it was addressed. I also
know of one large limited company which pays an annual income to a
scoundrel with half a dozen foreign orders, who has found out that they
have broken their statutes of association, and holds proofs of their
having done so. But the police are on the alert, and our courts deal
very severely with blackmailers.”

Mascarin went on: “The English, however, are our masters, for in London
a compromising servant is as easily negotiable as a sound bill of
exchange. There is in the city a respectable jeweller, who will advance
money on any compromising letter with a good name at the foot. His shop
is a regular pawnshop of infamy. In the States it has been elevated
to the dignity of a profession, and the citizen at New York dreads the
blackmailers more than the police, if he is meditating some dishonorable
action. Our first operations did not bring in any quick returns, and the
harvest promised to be a late one; but you have come upon us just as
we are about to reap our harvest. The professions of Hortebise and
Catenac--the one a doctor and the other a lawyer--facilitated our
operations greatly. One administered to the diseases of the body,
and the other to that of the purse, and, of course, thus they became
professors of many secrets. As for me, the head and chief, it would not
do to remain an idle looker-on. Our funds had dwindled down a good deal,
and, after mature consideration, I decided to hire this house, and open
a Servants’ Registry Office. Such an occupation would not attract any
attention, and in the end it turned out a perfect success, as my friends
can testify.”

Catenac and Hortebise both nodded assent.

“By the system which I have adopted,” resumed Mascarin, “the wealthy
and respectable man is as strictly watched in his own house as is the
condemned wretch in his cell; for no act of his escapes the eyes of the
servants whom we have placed around him. He can hardly even conceal his
thoughts from us. Even the very secret that he has murmured to his wife
with closed doors reaches our ears.”

The Marquis gave a supercilious smile.

“You must have had some inkling of this,” observed Mascarin, “for you
have never taken a servant from our establishment; but for all that,
I am as well posted up in your affairs as yourself. You have even now
about you a valet of whom you know nothing.”

“Morel was recommended to me by one of my most intimate friends--Sir
Richard Wakefield.”

“But for all that I have had my suspicions of him; but we will talk of
this later, and we will now return to the subject upon which we have
met. As I told you, I conceal the immense power I had attained through
our agency, and use it as occasion presents itself, and after twenty
years’ patient labor, I am about to reap a stupendous harvest. The
police pay enormous sums to their secret agents, while I, without
opening my purse, have an army of devoted adherents. I see perhaps fifty
servants of both sexes daily; calculate what this will amount to in a
year.”

There was an air of complacency about the man as he explained the
working of his system, and a ring of triumph in his voice.

“You must not think that all my agents are in my secrets, for the
greater part of them are quite unaware of what they are doing, and in
this lies my strength. Each of them brings me a slender thread, which I
twine into the mighty cord by which I hold my slaves. These unsuspecting
agents remind me of those strange Brazilian birds, whose presence is
a sure sign that water is to be found near at hand. When one of them
utters a note, I dig, and I find. And now, Marquis, do you understand
the aim and end of our association?”

“It has,” remarked Hortebise quietly, “brought us in some years two
hundred and fifty thousand francs apiece.”

If M. de Croisenois disliked prosy tales, he by no means underrated the
eloquence of figures. He knew quite enough of Paris to understand that
if Mascarin threw his net regularly, he would infallibly catch many
fish. With this conviction firmly implanted in his mind, he did not
require much urging to look with favor on the scheme, and, putting on a
gracious smile, he now asked, “And what must I do to deserve admission
into this association?”

Paul had listened in wonder and terror, but by degrees all feelings of
disgust at the criminality of these men faded away before the power that
they unquestionably possessed.

“If,” resumed Mascarin, “we have up to this met with no serious
obstacles, it is because, though apparently acting rashly, we are in
reality most prudent and cautious. We have managed our slaves well, and
have not driven any one to desperation. But we are beginning to weary
of our profession; we are getting old, and we have need of repose.
We intend, therefore, to retire, but before that we wish to have
all matters securely settled. I have an immense mass of documentary
evidence, but it is not always easy to realize the value they represent,
and I wait upon your assistance to enable me to do so.”

Croisenois’ face fell. Was he to take compromising letters round to
his acquaintances and boldly say, “Your purse or your honor?” He had no
objection to share the profits of this ignoble trade, but he objected
strongly to showing his connection with it openly. “No, no,” cried he
hastily, “you must not depend upon me.”

He seemed so much in earnest that Hortebise and Catenac exchanged
glances of dismay.

“Let us have no nonsense,” returned Mascarin sternly, “and wait a little
before you display so much fierceness. I told you that my documentary
evidence was of a peculiar kind. We very often had among our fish
married people who cannot deal with their personal property. A husband,
for instance, will say, ‘I can’t take ten thousand francs without my
wife, knowing of it.’ Women say, ‘Why, I get all my money through my
husband,’ and both are telling the truth. They kneel at my feet and
entreat me to have mercy, saying, ‘Find me some excuse for using a
portion of my funds and you shall have more than you ask.’ For a long
time I have sought for this means, and at last I have found it in the
Limited Company, which you, Marquis, will float next month.”

“Really!” returned the Marquis. “I do not see--”

“I beg your pardon; you see it all clearly. A husband who cannot,
without fear of disturbing his domestic peace, put in five thousand
francs, can put in ten thousand if he tells his wife, ‘It is an
investment;’ and many a wife who has not any money of her own will
persuade her husband to bring in the money we require by the proposal to
take shares. Now, what do you say to the idea?”

“I think that it is an excellent one, but what part am I to play in it?”

“In taking the part of Chairman of the Company. I could not do so, being
merely the proprietor of a Servant’s Registry Office. Hortebise, as a
doctor, and more than all a homeopath, would inspire no confidence, and
Catenac’s legal profession prevents him appearing in the matter openly.
He will act as our legal adviser.”

“But really I do not see anything about me that would induce people to
invest,” remarked De Croisenois.

“You are too modest; you have your name and rank, which, however we may
look upon them, have a great effect upon the general public. There are
many Companies who pay directors of rank and credible connection very
largely. Before starting this enterprise you can settle all your debts,
and the world will then conclude that you are possessed of great wealth,
while, at the same time, the news of your approaching marriage with
Mademoiselle du Mussidan will be the general talk of society. What
better position could you be in?”

“But I have the reputation of being a reckless spendthrift.”

“All the better. The day the prospectus comes out with your name at the
head of it, there will be a universal burst of laughter. Men will say,
‘Do you see what Croisenois is at now? What on earth possessed him to go
into Company work?’ But as this proceeding on your part will have paid
your debts and given you Mademoiselle Sabine’s dowry, I think that the
laugh will be on your side.”

The prospect dazzled Des Croisenois.

“And suppose I accept,” asked he, “what will be the end of the farce?”

“Very simple. When all the shares are taken up, you will close the
office and let the Company look after itself.”

Croisenois started to his feet angrily. “Why,” cried he, “you intend
to make a catspaw of me! Such a proceeding would send me to penal
servitude.”

“What an ungrateful man he is!” said Mascarin, appealing to his
audience, “when I am doing all I can to prevent his going there.”

“Sir!”

But Catenac now felt it time to interfere. “You do not understand,”
 remarked he, addressing Croisenois. “You will start a Company for the
development of some native product, let us say Pyrenean marble, for
instance, issue a prospectus, and the shares will be at once taken up by
Mascarin’s clients.”

“Well, what happens then?”

“Why, out of the funds thus obtained we will take care when the crash
comes to reimburse any outsiders who may have taken shares in the
concern, telling them that the thing has been a failure, and that we are
ruined; while Mascarin will take care to obtain from all his clients a
discharge in full, so the Company will quietly collapse.”

“But,” objected the Marquis, “all the shareholders will know that I am a
rogue.”

“Naturally.”

“They would hold me in utter contempt.”

“Perhaps so, but they would never venture to let you see it. I never
thought that you would make objections; and whose character, however
deep, will bear investigation?”

“Are you sure that you hold your people securely?” asked he; “and that
none of them will turn surly?”

Mascarin was waiting for this question, and taking from his desk the
pieces of cardboard which he took so much pains to arrange, he replied,
“I have here the names of three hundred and fifty people who will each
invest ten thousand francs in the Company. Listen to me, and judge for
yourself.”

He put all three pieces of cardboard together, and then drawing out one
he read,--

“‘N---, civil engineer. Five letters written by him to the gentleman
who procured his appointment for him: worth fifteen thousand francs.’

“‘P---, merchant. Absolute proof that his last bankruptcy was a
fraudulent one, and that he kept back from his creditors two hundred
thousand francs. Good for twenty thousand francs.’

“‘Madame V---. A photograph taken in very light and airy costume. Poor,
but can pay three thousand francs.’

“‘M. H---. Three letters from her mother, proving that the daughter
had compromised herself before marriage. Letter from a monthly nurse
appended. Can be made to pay ten thousand francs.’

“‘X---, a portion of his correspondence with L--- in 1848. Three
thousand francs.’

“‘Madame M. de M---. A true history of her adventure with M. J---.’”

This sample was quite sufficient to satisfy M. de Croisenois. “Enough,”
 cried he, “I yield. I bow before your gigantic power, which utterly
surpasses that of the police. Give me your orders.”

Before this Mascarin had conquered Hortebise and Paul Violaine, and now
he had the Marquis at his feet. Many times during this conversation the
Marquis had more than once endeavored to make up his mind to withdraw
entirely from the business, but he had been unable to resist the strange
fascination of that mysterious person who had been laying bare his
scheme with such extraordinary audacity. The few vestiges of honesty
that were still left in his corrupted soul revolted at the thought of
the shameful compact into which he was about to enter, but the dazzling
prospect held out before his eyes silenced his scruples, and he felt a
certain pride in being the associate of men who possessed such seemingly
illimitable power. Mascarin saw that there was no longer any necessity
for the extreme firmness with which he had before spoken, and it was
with the most studied courtesy that he replied: “I have no orders to
give you, Marquis, our interests are identical, and we must all have a
voice in the deliberations as to the best means of carrying them out.”

This change from _hauteur_ to suavity gratified Croisenois’ pride
immensely.

“Now,” continued Mascarin, “let us speak of your own circumstances. You
wrote to me recently that you had nothing, and I am aware that you have
no expectations for the future.”

“Excuse me, but there is the fortune of my poor brother George, who
disappeared so mysteriously.”

“Let me assure you,” answered Mascarin, “that we had better be perfectly
frank with each other.”

“And am I not so?” answered the Marquis.

“Why, in talking of this imaginary fortune?”

“It is not imaginary; it is real, and a very large one, too, about
twelve or fourteen hundred thousand francs, and I can obtain it, for, by
Articles 127 and 129 of the Code Napoleon---”

He interrupted himself, as he saw an expression of hardly-restrained
laughter upon the features of Dr. Hortebise.

“Do not talk nonsense,” answered Mascarin. “You could at first have
filed an affidavit regarding your brother’s disappearance, and applied
to the Court to appoint you trustee, but this is now exactly what you
wish to avoid.”

“Why not, pray? Do you think----”

“Pooh, pooh, but you have raised so much money on this inheritance that
there is nothing of it left hardly, certainly not sufficient to pay your
debts. It is the bait you used to allure your tradespeople into giving
you credit.”

At finding himself so easily fathomed, Croisenois burst into a peel of
laughter. Mascarin had by this time thrown himself into an armchair, as
though utterly worn out by fatigue.

“There is no necessity, Marquis,” said he, “to detain you here longer.
We shall meet again shortly, and settle matters. Meanwhile Catenac
will draw up the prospectus and Articles of Association of the proposed
Company, and post you up in the financial slang of which you must
occasionally make use.”

The Marquis and the lawyer at once rose and took their leave. As soon as
the door had closed behind them, Mascarin seemed to recover his energy.

“Well, Paul,” said he, “what do you think of all this?”

Like all men with weak and ductile natures, Paul, after being almost
prostrated by the first discovery of his master’s villainy, had now
succeeded in smothering the dictates of his conscience, and adopted a
cynical tone quite worthy of his companions.

“I see,” said he, “that you have need of me. Well, I am not a Marquis,
but you will find me quite as trustworthy and obedient.”

Paul’s reply did not seem to surprise Mascarin, but it is doubtful
whether he was pleased by it, for his countenance showed traces of a
struggle between extreme satisfaction and intense annoyance, while the
doctor was surprised at the cool audacity of the young man whose mind he
had undertaken to form.

Paul was a little disturbed by the long and continued silence of his
patron, and at last he ventured to say timidly,--

“Well, sir, I am anxious to know under what conditions I am to be shown
the way to make my fortune and marry Mademoiselle Flavia Rigal, whom I
love.”

Mascarin gave a diabolical smile.

“Whose dowry you love,” he observed. “Let us speak plainly.”

“Pardon me, sir, I said just what I meant.”

The doctor, who had not Mascarin’s reasons for gravity, now burst into a
jovial laugh.

“And that pretty Rose,” said he, “what of her?”

“Rose is a creature of the past,” answered Paul. “I can now see what an
idiot I was, and I have entirely effaced her from my memory, and I am
half inclined to deplore that Mademoiselle Rigal is an heiress, the more
so if it is to form a barrier between us.”

This declaration seemed to make Mascarin more easy.

“Reassure yourself, my boy,” said he, “we will remove that barrier; but
I will not conceal from you that the part you have to play is much more
difficult than that assigned to the Marquis de Croisenois; but if it is
harder and more perilous, the reward will be proportionately greater.”

“With your aid and advice I feel capable of doing everything necessary,”
 returned Paul.

“You will need great self-confidence, the utmost self-possession, and as
a commencement you must utterly destroy your present identity.”

“That I will do with the utmost willingness.”

“You must become another person entirely; you must adopt his name, his
gait, his behavior, his virtues, and even his failings. You must forget
all that you have either said or done. You must always think that you
are in reality the person you represent yourself to be, for this is the
only way in which you can lead others into a similar belief. Your task
will be a heavy one.”

“Ah, sir,” cried the young man, enthusiastically, “can you doubt me?”

“The glorious beam of success that shines ahead of you will take your
attention from the difficulties and dangers of the road that you are
treading.”

The genial Dr. Hortebise rubbed his hands.

“You are right,” cried he, “quite right.”

“When you have done this,” resumed Mascarin, “we shall not hesitate to
acquaint you with the secret of the lofty destiny that awaits you. Do
you understand me fully?”

Here the speaker was interrupted by the entrance of Beaumarchef, who had
signified his desire to come in by three distinct raps upon the door.
He was now gorgeous to look upon, for having taken advantage of a spare
half hour, he had donned his best clothes.

“What is it?” demanded Mascarin.

“Here are two letters, sir.”

“Thank you; hand them to me, and leave us.”

As soon as they were once more alone, Mascarin examined the letters.

“Ah,” cried he, “one from Van Klopen, and the other from the Hotel de
Mussidan. Let us first see what our friend the man-milliner has to say.

“DEAR SIR,--

“You may be at ease. Our mutual friend Verminet has executed your orders
most adroitly. At his instigation Gaston de Gandelu has forged the
banker Martin Rigal’s signature on five different bills. I hold them,
and awaiting your further orders regarding them, and also with respect
to Madame de Bois Arden,

“I remain your obedient servant,

“VAN KLOPEN.”


Tossing it on the table, Mascarin opened the other letter, which he also
read aloud.

“SIR,--

“I have to report to you the breaking off of the marriage between
Mademoiselle Sabine and M. de Breulh-Faverlay. Mademoiselle is very
ill, and I heard the medical man say that she might not survive the next
twenty-four hours.

“FLORESTAN.”


Mascarin was so filled with rage on learning this piece of news, which
seemed likely to interfere with his plans, that he struck his hand down
heavily on the table.

“Damnation!” cried he. “If this little fool should die now, all our work
will have to be recommenced.”

He thrust aside his chair, and paced hurriedly up and down the room.

“Florestan is right,” said he; “this illness of the girl comes on at the
date of the rupture of the engagement. There is some secret that we must
learn, for we dare not work in the dark.”

“Shall I go to the Hotel de Mussidan?” asked Hortebise.

“Not a bad idea. Your carriage is waiting, is it not? You can go in your
capacity as a medical man.”

The doctor was preparing to go, when Mascarin arrested his progress.

“No,” said he, “I have changed my mind. We must neither of us be seen
near the place. I expect that one of our mines has exploded; that the
Count and Countess have exchanged confidences, and that between the two
the daughter has been struck down.”

“How shall we find this out?”

“I will see Florestan and try and find out.”

In an instant he vanished into his inner room, and as he changed his
dress, continued to converse with the doctor.

“This blow would be comparatively trifling, if I had not so much on
hand, but I have Paul to look after. The Champdoce affair must be
pressed on, for Catenac, the traitor, has put the Duke and Perpignan
into communication. I must see Perpignan and discover how much has
been told him, and how much he has guessed. I will also see Caroline
Schimmel, and extract something from her. I wish to heaven that there
were thirty-six hours in the day instead of only twenty-four.”

By this time he had completed his change of costume and called the
doctor into his room.

“I am off, now,” whispered he; “do not lose sight of Paul for a single
instant, for we are not sufficiently sure of him to let him go about
alone with our secret in his possession. Take him to dine at Martin
Rigal’s, and then make some excuse for keeping him all night at your
rooms. See me to-morrow.”

And he went out so hurriedly that he did not hear the cheery voice of
the doctor calling after him,--

“Good luck; I wish you all good luck.”



CHAPTER XIX.

A FRIENDLY RIVAL.

On leaving the Hotel de Mussidan, M. de Breulh-Faverlay dismissed
his carriage, for he felt as a man often does after experiencing some
violent emotion, the absolute necessity for exercise, and to be alone
with his thoughts, and by so doing recover his self-possession. His
friends would have been surprised if they had seen him pacing hurriedly
along the Champs Elysees. The usual calm of his manner had vanished, and
the generally calm expression of his features was entirely absent. As he
walked, he talked to himself, and gesticulated.

“And this is what we call being a man of the world. We think ourselves
true philosophers, and a look from a pair of beautiful, pleading eyes
scatters all our theories to the winds.”

He had loved Sabine upon the day on which he had asked for her hand,
but not so fondly as upon this day when he had learned that she could no
longer be his wife, for, from the moment he had made this discovery, she
seemed to him more gifted and fascinating than ever. No one could have
believed that he, the idol of society, the petted darling of the women,
and the successful rival of the men, could have been refused by the
young girl to whom he had offered his hand.

“Yes,” murmured he with a sigh, “for she is just the companion for life
that I longed for. Where could I find so intelligent an intellect and
so pure a mind, united with such radiant beauty, so different from the
women of society, who live but for dress and gossip. Has Sabine anything
in common with those giddy girls who look upon life as a perpetual
value, and who take a husband as they do a partner, because they cannot
dance without one? How her face lighted up as she spoke of him, and how
thoroughly she puts faith in him! The end of it all is that I shall die
a bachelor. In my old age I will take to the pleasures of the table, for
an excellent authority declares that a man can enjoy his four meals a
day with comfort. Well, that is something to look forward to certainly,
and it will not impair my digestion if my heirs and expectants come and
squabble round my armchair. Ah,” he added, with a deep sigh, “my life
has been a failure.”

M. de Breulh-Faverlay was a very different type of man to that which
both his friends and his enemies popularly supposed him to be. Upon the
death of his uncle, he had plunged into the frivolous vortex of Parisian
dissipation, but of this he had soon wearied.

All that he had cared for was to see the doings of his racehorse
chronicled in the sporting journals, and occasionally to expend a few
thousand francs in presents of jewelry to some fashionable actress. But
he had secretly longed for some more honorable manner of fulfilling his
duties in life, and he had determined that before his marriage he would
sell his stud and break with his old associates entirely; and now this
wished-for marriage would never take place.

When he entered his club, the traces of his agitation were so visible
upon his face, that some of the card-players stopped their game to
inquire if Chambertin, the favorite for the Chantilly cup, had broken
down.

“No, no,” replied he, as he hurriedly made his way to the writing-room,
“Chambertin is as sound as a bell.”

“What the deuce has happened to De Breulh?” asked one of the members.

“Goodness gracious!” remarked the man to whom the question was
addressed, “he seems in a hurry to write a letter.”

The gentleman was right. M. de Breulh was writing a withdrawal from his
demand for Sabine’s hand to M. de Mussidan, and he found the task by
no means an easy one, for on reading it over he found that there was
a valid strain of bitterness throughout it, which would surely attract
attention and perhaps cause embarrassing questions to be put to him.

“No,” murmured he, “this letter is quite unworthy of me.” And tearing it
up, he began another, in which he strung together several conventional
excuses, alleging the difficulty of breaking off his former habits and
of an awkward entanglement which he had been unable to break with, as
he had anticipated. When this little masterpiece of diplomacy was
completed, he rang the bell, and, handing it to one of the club
servants, told him to take it to the Count de Mussidan’s house. When
this unpleasant duty was over, M. de Breulh had hoped to experience some
feeling of relief, but in this he was mistaken. He tried cards, but rose
from the table in a quarter of an hour; he ordered dinner, but appetite
was wanting; he went to the opera, but then he did nothing but yawn, and
the music grated on his nerves. At length he returned home. The day had
seemed interminable, and he could not sleep, for Sabine’s face was ever
before him. Who could this man be whom she so fondly loved and preferred
before all others? He respected her too much not to feel assured that
her choice was a worthy one, but his experience had taught him that when
so many men of the world fell into strange entanglements, a poor girl
without knowledge of the dangers around her might easily be entrapped.
“If he is worthy of her,” thought he, “I will do my best to aid her; but
if not, I will open her eyes.”

At four o’clock in the morning he was still seated musing before the
expiring embers of his fire; he had made up his mind to see Andre--there
was no difficulty in this, for a man of taste and wealth can find a
ready excuse for visiting the studio of a struggling artist. He had no
fixed plan as to what he would say or do, he left all to chance, and
with this decision he went to bed, and by two in the afternoon he drove
straight to the Rue de la Tour d’Auvergne.

Andre’s discreet portress was as usual leaning on her broom in the
gallery as M. de Breulh’s magnificent equipage drew up.

“Gracious me!” exclaimed the worthy woman, dazzled by the gorgeousness
of the whole turnout; “he can’t be coming here, he must have mistaken
the house.”

But her amazement reached its height when M. de Breulh, on alighting,
asked for Andre.

“Fourth story, first door to the right,” answered the woman; “but I will
show you the way.”

“Don’t trouble yourself;” and with these words M. de Breulh ascended the
staircase that led to the painter’s studio and knocked on the door. As
he did so, he heard a quick, light step upon the stairs, and a young
and very dark man, dressed in a weaver’s blouse and carrying a tin pail
which he had evidently just filled with water from the cistern, came up.

“Are you M. Andre?” asked De Breulh.

“That is my name, sir.”

“I wish to say a few words to you.”

“Pray come in,” replied the young artist, opening the door of his studio
and ushering his visitor in. Andre’s voice and expression had made
a favorable impression upon his visitor; but he was, in spite of his
having thrown aside nearly all foolish prejudices, a little startled at
his costume. He did not, however, allow his surprise to be visible.

“I ought to apologize for receiving you like this,” remarked Andre
quickly, “but a poor man must wait upon himself.” As he spoke, he threw
off his blouse and set down the pail in a corner of the room.

“I rather should offer my excuse for my intrusion,” returned M. de
Breulh. “I came here by the advice of one of my friends;” he stopped for
an instant, endeavoring to think of a name.

“By Prince Crescensi, perhaps,” suggested Andre.

“Yes, yes,” continued M. de Breulh, eagerly snatching at the rope the
artist held out to him. “The Prince sings your praises everywhere,
and speaks of your talents with the utmost enthusiasm. I am, on his
recommendation, desirous of commissioning you to paint a picture for
me, and I can assure you that in my gallery it will have no need to be
ashamed of its companions.”

Andre bowed, coloring deeply at the compliment.

“I am obliged to you,” said he, “and I trust that you will not be
disappointed in taking the Prince’s opinion of my talent.”

“Why should I be so?”

“Because, for the last four months I have been so busy that I have
really nothing to show you.”

“That is of no importance. I have every confidence in you.”

“Then,” returned Andre, “all that we have to do is to choose a subject.”

Andre’s manner had by this time so captivated De Breulh that he muttered
to himself, “I really ought to hate this fellow, but on my word I like
him better than any one I have met for a long time.”

Andre had by this time placed a large portfolio on the table. “Here,”
 said he, “are some twenty or thirty sketches; if any of them took your
fancy, you could make your choice.”

“Let me see them,” returned De Breulh politely, for having made an
estimate of the young man’s character, he now wished to see what his
artistic talents were like. With this object in view he examined all
the sketches in the portfolio minutely, and then turned to those on the
walls. Andre said nothing, but he somehow felt that this visit would
prove the turning-point of his misfortunes. But for all that the young
man’s heart was very sad, for it was two days since Sabine had left
him, promising to write to him the next morning regarding M. de
Breulh-Faverlay, but as yet he had received no communication, and he
was on the tenterhooks of expectation, not because he had any doubt
of Sabine, but for the reason that he had no means of obtaining any
information of what went on in the interior of the Hotel de Mussidan.
M. de Breulh had now finished his survey, and had come to the conclusion
that though many of Andre’s productions were crude and lacking in
finish, yet that he had the true artistic metal in him. He extended his
hand to the young man and said forcibly, “I am no longer influenced by
the opinion of a friend. I have seen and judged for myself, and am more
desirous than ever of possessing one of your pictures. I have made my
choice of a subject, and now let us discuss the details.”

As he spoke he handed a little sketch to Andre. It was a view of
everyday life, which the painter had entitled, “Outside the Barrier.”
 Two men with torn garments and wine-flushed faces were struggling in
tipsy combat, while on the right hand side of the picture lay a woman,
bleeding profusely from a cut on the forehead, and two of her terrified
companions were bending over her, endeavoring to restore her to
consciousness. In the background were some flying figures, who were
hastening up to separate the combatants. The sketch was one of real
life, denuded of any sham element of romance, and this was the one that
M. de Breulh had chosen. The two men discussed the size of the picture,
and not a single detail was omitted.

“I am sure that you will do all that is right,” remarked De Breulh. “Let
your own inspiration guide you, and all will be well.” In reality he was
dying to get away, for he felt in what a false position he was, and with
a violent effort he approached the money part of the matter.

“Monsieur,” said Andre, “it is impossible to fix a price; when
completed, a picture may only be worth the canvas that it is painted on,
or else beyond all price. Let us wait.”

“Well,” broke in M. de Breulh, “what do you say to ten thousand francs?”

“Too much,” returned Andre with a deprecatory wave of his hand; “far
too much. If I succeed in it, as I hope to do, I will ask six thousand
francs for it.”

“Agreed!” answered De Breulh, taking from his pocket an elegant
note-case with his crest and monogram upon it and extracting from it
three thousand francs. “I will, as is usual, deposit half the price in
advance.”

Andre blushed scarlet. “You are joking,” said he.

“Not at all,” answered De Breulh quietly; “I have my own way of doing
business, from which I never deviate.”

In spite of this answer Andre’s pride was hurt.

“But,” remarked he, “this picture will not be ready for perhaps six or
seven months. I have entered into a contract with a wealthy builder,
named Candele, to execute the outside decorations of his house.”

“Never mind that,” answered M. de Breulh; “take as long as you like.”

Of course, after this, Andre could offer no further opposition; he
therefore took the money without another word.

“And now,” said De Breulh, as he paused for a moment at the open
doorway, “let me wish you my good luck, and if you will come and
breakfast with me one day, I think I can show you some pictures which
you will really appreciate.” And handing his card to the artist, he went
downstairs.

At first Andre did not glance at the card, but when he did so, the
letters seemed to sear his eyeballs like a red-hot iron. For a moment
he could hardly breathe, and then a feeling of intense anger took
possession of him, for he felt that he had been trifled with and
deceived.

Hardly knowing what he was doing, he rushed out on the landing, and,
leaning over the banister, called out loudly, “Sir, stop a moment!”

De Breulh, who had by this time reached the bottom of the staircase,
turned round.

“Come back, if you please,” said Andre.

After a moment’s hesitation, De Breulh obeyed; and when he was again
in the studio, Andre addressed him in a voice that quivered with
indignation.

“Take back these notes, sir; I will not accept them.”

“What do you mean?”

“Only that I have thought the matter over, and that I will not accept
your commission.”

“And why this sudden change?”

“You know perfectly well, M. de Breulh-Faverlay.”

The gentleman at once saw that Sabine had mentioned his name to the
young artist, and with a slight lacking of generous feeling said,--

“Let me hear your reasons, sir.”

“Because, because----” stammered the young man.

“Because is not an answer.”

Andre’s confusion became greater. He would not tell the whole truth, for
he would have died sooner than bring Sabine’s name into the discussion;
and he could only see one way out of his difficulty.

“Suppose I say that I do not like your manner or appearance,” returned
he disdainfully.

“Is it your wish to insult me, M. Andre?”

“As you choose to take it.”

M. de Breulh was not gifted with an immense stock of patience. He turned
livid, and made a step forward; but his generous impulses restrained
him, and it was in a voice broken by agitation that he said,--

“Accept my apologies, M. Andre; I fear that I have played a part
unworthy of you and of myself. I ought to have given you my name at
once. I know everything.”

“I do not comprehend you,” answered Andre in a glacial voice.

“Why doubt, then, if you do not understand? However, I have given you
cause to do so. But, let me reassure you, Mademoiselle Sabine has spoken
to me with the utmost frankness; and, if you still distrust me, let me
tell you that this veiled picture is her portrait. I will say
more,” continued De Breulh gravely, as the artist still kept silent;
“yesterday, at Mademoiselle de Mussidan’s request, I withdrew from my
position as a suitor for her hand.”

Andre had already been touched by De Breulh’s frank and open manner, and
these last words entirely conquered him.

“I can never thank you enough,” began he.

But De Breulh interrupted him.

“A man should not be thanked for performing his duty. I should lie to
you if I said that I am not painfully surprised at her communication;
but tell me, had you been in my place, would you not have acted in the
same manner?”

“I think that I should.”

“And now we are friends, are we not?” and again De Breulh held out his
hand, which Andre clasped with enthusiasm.

“Yes, yes,” faltered he.

“And now,” continued De Breulh, with a forced smile, “let us say no more
about the picture, which was, after all, merely a pretext. As I came
here I said to myself, ‘If the man to whom Mademoiselle de Mussidan has
given her heart is worthy of her, I will do all I can to advance his
suit with her family!’ I came here to see what you were like; and now
I say to you, do me a great honor, and permit me to place myself, my
fortune, and the influence of my friends, at your disposal.”

The offer was made in perfect good faith, but Andre shook his head.

“I shall never forget your kindness in making this offer, but----“; he
paused for a moment, and then went on: “I will be as open as you have
been, and will tell you the whole truth. You may think me foolish; but
remember, though I am poor, I have still my self-respect to maintain. I
love Sabine, and would give my life for her. Do not be offended at what
I am about to say. I would, however, sooner give up her hand than be
indebted for it to you.”

“But this is mere madness.”

“No, sir, it is the purest wisdom; for were I to accede to your wishes,
I should feel deeply humiliated by the thought of your self-denial; for
I should be madly jealous of the part you were playing. You are of high
birth and princely fortune, while I am utterly friendless and unknown;
all that I am deficient in you possess.”

“But I have been poor myself,” interposed De Breulh, “and perhaps
endured even greater miseries than ever you have done. Do you know what
I was doing at your age? I was slowly starving to death at Sonora, and
had to take the humblest position in a cattle ranch. Do you think that
those days taught me nothing?”

“You will be able to judge me all the more clearly then,” returned
Andre. “If I raise myself up to Sabine’s level, as she begged me to,
then I shall feel that I am your equal; but if I accept your aid, I am
your dependent; and I will obey her wishes or perish in the effort.”

Up to this moment the passion which stirred Andre’s inmost soul had
breathed in every word he uttered; but, checking himself by a mighty
effort, he resumed in a tone of greater calmness,--

“But I ought to remember how much we already owe you, and I hope that
you will allow me to call myself your friend?”

M. de Breulh’s noble nature enabled him to understand Andre’s scruples;
his feelings, however, would not for the instant enable him to speak.
He slowly put the notes back in their receptacle, and then said in a low
voice,--

“Your conduct is that of an honorable man; and remember this, at all
times and seasons you may rely upon De Breulh-Faverlay. Farewell!”

As soon as he was alone, Andre threw himself into an armchair, and mused
over this unexpected interview, which had proved a source of such solace
to his feelings. All that he now longed for was a letter from Sabine.
At this moment the portress entered with a letter. Andre was so occupied
with his thoughts that he hardly noticed this act of condescension on
the part of the worthy woman.

“A letter!” exclaimed he; and, tearing it open, he glanced at the
signature. But Sabine’s name was not there; it was signed Modeste.
What could Sabine’s maid have to say to him? He felt that some great
misfortune was impending, and, trembling with excitement, he read the
letter.

“SIR,--

“I write to tell you that my mistress has succeeded in the matter she
spoke of to you; but I am sorry to say that I have bad news to give you,
for she is seriously ill.”

“Ill!” exclaimed Andre, crushing up the letter in his hands, and dashing
it upon the floor. “Ill! ill!” he repeated, not heeding the presence
of the portress; “why, she may be dead;” and, snatching up his hat, he
dashed downstairs into the street.

As soon as the portress was left alone, she picked up the letter,
smoothed it out, and read it.

“And so,” murmured she, “the little lady’s name was Sabine--a pretty
name; and she is ill, is she? I expect that the old gent who called this
morning, and asked so many questions about M. Andre, would give a good
deal for this note; but no, that would not be fair.”



CHAPTER XX.

A COUNCIL OF WAR.

Mad with his terrible forebodings, Andre hurried through the streets in
the direction of the Hotel de Mussidan, caring little for the attention
that his excited looks and gestures caused. He had no fixed plan as to
what to do when he arrived there, and it was only on reaching the Rue
de Matignon that he recovered sufficient coolness to deliberate and
reflect.

He had arrived at the desired spot; how should he set to work to obtain
the information that he required? The evening was a dark one, and the
gas-lamps showed a feeble light through the dull February fog. There
were no signs of life in the Rue de Matignon, and the silence was only
broken by the continuous surge of carriage wheels in the Faubourg Saint
Honore. This gloom, and the inclemency of the weather, added to the
young painter’s depression. He saw his utter helplessness, and felt
that he could not move a step without compromising the woman he so
madly adored. He walked to the gate of the house, hoping to gain some
information even from the exterior aspect of the house; for it seemed to
him that if Sabine were dying, the very stones in the street would utter
sounds of woe and lamentation; but the fog had closely enwrapped the
house, and he could hardly see which of the windows were lighted. His
reasoning faculties told him that there was no use in waiting, but an
inner voice warned him to stay. Would Modeste, who had written to him,
divine, by some means that he was there, in an agony of suspense, and
come out to give him information and solace? All at once a thought
darted across his mind, vivid as a flash of lightning.

“M. de Breulh will help me,” cried he; “for though I cannot go to the
house, he will have no difficulty in doing so.”

By good luck, he had M. de Breulh’s card in his pocket, and hurried
off to his address. M. de Breulh had a fine house in the Avenue de
l’Imperatrice, which he had taken more for the commodiousness of the
stables than for his own convenience.

“I wish to see M. de Breulh,” said Andre, as he stopped breathless at
the door, where a couple of footmen were chatting.

The men looked at him with supreme contempt. “He is out,” one of them at
last condescended to reply.

Andre had by this time recovered his coolness, and taking out De
Breulh’s card, wrote these words on it in pencil: “One moment’s
interview. ANDRE.”

“Give this to your master as soon as he comes in,” said he.

Then he descended the steps slowly. He was certain that M. de Breulh was
in the house, and that he would send out after the person who had left
the card almost at once. His conclusion proved right; in five minutes
he was overtaken by the panting lackey, who, conducting him back to
the house, showed him into a magnificently furnished library. De Breulh
feared that some terrible event had taken place.

“What has happened?” said he.

“Sabine is dying;” and Andre at once proceeded to inform De Breulh of
what had happened since his departure.

“But how can I help you?”

“You can go and make inquiries at the house.”

“Reflect; yesterday I wrote to the Count, and broke off a marriage,
the preliminaries of which had been completely settled; and within
twenty-four hours to send and inquire after his daughter’s health would
be to be guilty of an act of inexcusable insolence; for it would look
as if I fancied that Mademoiselle de Mussidan had been struck down by my
rupture of the engagement.”

“You are right,” murmured Andre dejectedly.

“But,” continued De Breulh, after a moment’s reflection, “I have a
distant relative, a lady who is also a connection of the Mussidan
family, the Viscountess de Bois Arden, and she will be glad to be of
service to me. She is young and giddy, but as true as steel. Come with
me to her; my carriage is ready.”

The footmen were surprised at seeing their master on such terms of
intimacy with the shabbily dressed young man, but ventured, of course,
on no remarks.

Not a word was exchanged during the brief drive to Madame de Bois
Arden’s house.

“Wait for me,” exclaimed De Breulh, springing from the vehicle as soon
as it drew up; “I will be back directly.”

Madame de Bois Arden is justly called one of the handsomest women in
Paris. Very fair, with masses of black hair, and a complexion to which
art has united itself to the gifts of nature, she is a woman who has
been everywhere, knows everything, talks incessantly, and generally very
well. She spends forty thousand francs per annum on dress. She is always
committing all sorts of imprudent acts, and scandal is ever busy with
her name. Half a dozen of the opposite sex have been talked of in
connection with her, while in reality she is a true and faithful wife,
for, in spite of all her frivolity, she adores her husband, and is
in great awe of him. Such was the character of the lady into whose
apartment M. de Breulh was introduced. Madame de Bois Arden was engaged
in admiring a very pretty fancy costume of the reign of Louis XV., one
of Van Klopen’s masterpieces, when M. de Breulh was announced, which she
was going to wear, on her return from the opera, at a masquerade ball at
the Austrian Ambassador’s. Madame de Bois Arden greeted her visitor with
effusion, for they had been acquaintances from childhood, and always
addressed each other by their Christian names.

“What, you here at this hour, Gontran!” said the lady. “Is it a vision,
or only a miracle?” But the smile died away upon her lips, as she caught
a glimpse of her visitor’s pale and harassed face. “Is there anything
the matter?” asked she.

“Not yet,” answered he, “but there may be, for I hear that Mademoiselle
de Mussidan is dangerously ill.”

“Is she really? Poor Sabine! what is the matter with her?”

“I do not know; and I want you, Clotilde, to send one of your people to
inquire into the truth of what we have heard.”

Madame de Bois Arden opened her eyes very wide.

“Are you joking?” said she. “Why do you not send yourself?”

“It is impossible for me to do so; and if you have any kindness of
heart, you do as I ask you; and I want you also to promise me not to say
a word of this to any one.”

Excited as she was by this mystery, Madame de Bois Arden did not ask
another question.

“I will do exactly what you want,” replied she, “and respect your
secret. I would go at once, were it not that Bois Arden will never sit
down to dinner without me; but the moment we have finished I will go.”

“Thanks, a thousand times; and now I will go home and wait for news from
you.”

“Not at all,--you will remain here to dinner.”

“I must,--I have a friend waiting for me.”

“Do as you please, then,” returned the Viscountess, laughing. “I will
send round a note this evening.”

De Breulh pressed her hand, and hurried down, and was met by Andre at
the door, for he had been unable to sit still in the carriage.

“Keep up your courage. Madame de Bois Arden had not heard of
Mademoiselle Sabine’s illness, and this looks as if it was not a very
serious matter. We shall have the real facts in three hours.”

“Three hours!” groaned Andre, “what a lapse of time!”

“It is rather long, I admit; but we will talk of her while we wait, for
you must stay and dine with me.”

Andre yielded, for he had no longer the energy to contest anything. The
dinner was exquisite, but the two men were not in a condition of mind
to enjoy it, and scarcely consumed anything. Vainly did they endeavor
to speak on indifferent subjects, and when the coffee had been served in
the library, they relapsed into utter silence. As the clock struck ten,
however, a knock was heard at the door, then whisperings, and the rustle
of female attire, and lastly Madame de Bois Arden burst upon them like a
tornado.

“Here I am,” cried she.

It was certainly rather a hazardous step to pay such a late visit to a
bachelor’s house, but then the Viscountess de Bois Arden did exactly as
she pleased.

“I have come here, Gontran,” exclaimed she, with extreme vehemence, “to
tell you that I think your conduct is abominable and ungentlemanly.”

“Clotilde!”

“Hold your tongue! you are a wretch! Ah! now I can see why you did not
wish to write and inquire about poor Sabine. You well knew the effect
that your message would have on her.”

M. de Breulh smiled as he turned to Andre and said,--

“You see that I was right in what I told you.”

This remark for the first time attracted Madame de Bois Arden’s
attention to the fact that a stranger was present, and she trembled lest
she had committed some grave indiscretion.

“Gracious heavens!” exclaimed she, with a start, “why, I thought that we
were alone!”

“This gentleman has all my confidence,” replied M. de Breulh seriously;
and as he spoke he laid his hand upon Andre’s shoulder. “Permit me to
introduce M. Andre to you, my dear Clotilde; he may not be known to-day,
but in a short time his reputation will be European.”

Andre bowed, but for once in her life the Viscountess felt embarrassed,
for she was surprised at the extremely shabby attire of this
confidential friend, and then there seemed something wanting to the
name.

“Then,” resumed De Breulh, “Mademoiselle de Mussidan is really ill, and
our information is correct.”

“She is.”

“Did you see her?”

“I did, Gontran; and had you seen her, your heart would have been filled
with pity, and you would have repented your conduct toward her. The
poor girl did not even know me. She lay in her bed, whiter than the very
sheets, cold and inanimate as a figure of marble. Her large black eyes
were staring wildly, and the only sign of life she exhibited was when
the great tears coursed down her cheeks.”

Andre had determined to restrain every token of emotion in the presence
of the Viscountess, but her recital was too much for him.

“Ah!” said he, “she will die; I know it.”

There was such intense anguish in his tone that even the practised woman
of the world was softened.

“I assure you, sir,” said she, “that you go too far; there is no present
danger; the doctors say it is catalepsy, which often attacks persons of
a nervous temperament upon the receipt of a sudden mental shock.”

“But what shock has she received?” asked Andre.

“No one told me,” answered she after a short pause, “that Sabine’s
illness was caused by the breaking off of her engagement; but, of
course, I supposed that it was.”

“That was not the reason, Clotilde; but you have told us nothing; pray,
go on,” interposed De Breulh.

The extreme calmness of her cousin, and a glance which she observed
passing between him and Andre, enlightened the Viscountess somewhat.

“I asked as much as I dared,” she replied, “but I could only get the
vaguest answers. Sabine looked as if she were dead, and her father and
mother hovered around her couch like two spectres. Had they slain her
with their own hands, they could not have looked more guilty; their
faces frightened me.”

“Tell me precisely what answers were given to your questions,” broke in
he impatiently.

“Sabine had seemed so agitated all day, that her mother asked her if she
was suffering any pain.”

“We know that already.”

“Indeed!” replied the Viscountess, with a look of surprise. “It seems,
cousin, that you saw Sabine that afternoon, but what became of her
afterward no one appears to know; but there is positive proof that she
did not leave the house, and received no letters. At all events, it was
more than an hour after her maid saw her enter her own room. Sabine said
a few unintelligible words to the girl, who, seeing the pallor upon her
mistress’s face, ran up to her. Just as she did so, Sabine uttered a
wild shriek, and fell to the ground. She was raised up and laid upon the
bed, but since then she has neither moved nor spoken.”

“That is not all,” said De Breulh, who had watched his cousin keenly.

The Viscountess started, and avoided meeting her cousin’s eye.

“I do not understand,” she faltered. “Why do you look at me like that?”

De Breulh, who had been pacing up and down the room, suddenly halted in
front of the Viscountess.

“My dear Clotilde,” said he, “I am sure when I tell you that the tongue
of scandal has often been busy with your name, I am telling you nothing
new.”

“Pooh!” answered the Viscountess. “What do I care for that?”

“But I always defended you. You are indiscreet--your presence here
tonight shows this; but you are, after all, a true woman,--brave and
true as steel.”

“What do you mean by this exordium, Gontran?”

“This, Clotilde,--I want to know if I dare venture to intrust to you a
secret which involves the honor of two persons, and, perhaps, the lives
of more.”

“Thank you, Gontran,” answered she calmly. “You have formed a correct
judgment of me.”

But here Andre felt that he must interpose, and, taking a step forward,
said, “Have you the right to speak?”

“My dear Andre,” said De Breulh, “this is a matter in which my honor is
as much concerned as yours. Will you not trust me?” Then turning to the
Viscountess, he added, “Tell us all you heard.”

“It is only something I heard from Modeste. You had hardly left the
house, when the Baron de Clinchain made his appearance.”

“An eccentric old fellow, a friend of the Count de Mussidan’s. I know
him.”

“Just so; well, they had a stormy interview, and at the end of it, the
Baron was taken ill, and it was with difficulty that he regained his
carriage.”

“That seems curious.”

“Wait a bit. After that Octave and his wife had a terrible scene
together, and Modeste thinks that her mistress must have heard
something, for the Count’s voice rang through the house like thunder.”

Every word that the Viscountess uttered strengthened De Breulh’s
suspicions. “There is something mysterious in all this, Clotilde,”
 said he, “as you will say when you know the whole truth,” and, without
omitting a single detail, he related the whole of Sabine and Andre’s
love story.

Madame de Bois Arden listened attentively, sometimes thrilled with
horror, and at others pleased with this tale of innocent love.

“Forgive me,” said she, when her cousin had concluded; “my reproaches
and accusations were equally unfounded.”

“Yes, yes; never mind that; but I am afraid that there is some hidden
mystery which will place a fresh stumbling-block in our friend Andre’s
path.”

“Do not say that,” cried Andre, in terror. “What is it?”

“That I cannot tell; for Mademoiselle de Mussidan’s sake, I have
withdrawn all my pretensions to her hand,--not to leave the field open
to any other intruder, but in order that she may be your wife.”

“How are we to learn what has really happened?” asked the Viscountess.

“In some way or other we shall find out, if you will be our ally.”

Most women are pleased to busy themselves about a marriage, and the
Viscountess was cheered to find herself mixed up in so romantic a drama.

“I am entirely at your beck and call,” answered she. “Have you any
plan?”

“Not yet, but I will soon. As far as Mademoiselle de Mussidan is
concerned, we must act quite openly. Andre will write to her, asking
for an explanation, and you shall see her to-morrow, and if she is well
enough, give her his note.”

The proposal was a startling one, and the Viscountess did not entertain
it favorably.

“No,” said she, “I think that would not do at all.”

“Why not? However, let us leave it to Andre.”

Andre, thus addressed, stepped forward, and said,--

“I do not think that it would be delicate to let Mademoiselle de
Mussidan know that her secret is known to any one else than ourselves.”

The Viscountess nodded assent.

“If,” continued Andre, “the Viscountess will be good enough to ask
Modeste to meet me at the corner of the Avenue de Matignon; I shall be
there.”

“A capital idea, sir,” said the lady, “and I will give your message to
Modeste.” She broke off her speech suddenly, and uttered a pretty little
shriek, as she noticed that the hands of the clock on the mantelpiece
pointed to twenty to twelve. “Great heavens!” cried she, “and I am going
to a ball at the Austrian Embassy, and now not even dressed.” And, with
a coquettish gesture, she drew her shawl around her, and ran out of
the room, exclaiming as she descended the stairs, “I will call here
to-morrow, Gontran, on my way to the Bois,” and disappeared like
lightning.

Andre and his host sat over the fire, and conversed for a long time. It
seemed strange that two men who had met that morning for the first time
should now be on such intimate terms of friendship; but such was the
case, for a mutual feeling of admiration and respect had sprung up in
their hearts.

M. de Breulh wished to send Andre home in his carriage, but this the
young man declined, and merely borrowed an overcoat to protect him from
the inclemency of the weather.

“To-morrow,” said he, as he made his way home, “Modeste shall tell all
she knows, provided always that that charming society dame does not
forget all about our existence before then.”

Madame de Bois Arden, however, could sometimes be really in earnest.
Upon her return from the ball she would not even go to bed, lest she
should oversleep herself, and the next day Andre found Modeste waiting
at the appointed spot, and learnt, to his great grief, that Sabine had
not yet regained consciousness.

The family doctor betrayed no uneasiness, but expressed a wish for a
consultation with another medical man. Meanwhile, the girl promised
to meet Andre morning and evening in the same place, and give him such
scraps of information as she had been able to pick up. For two whole
days Mademoiselle de Mussidan’s condition remained unchanged, and Andre
spent his whole time between his own studio, the Avenue de Matignon, and
M. de Breulh’s, where he frequently met Madame de Bois Arden.

But on the third day Modest informed him, with tears in her eyes, that
though the cataleptic fit had passed away, Sabine was struggling with
a severe attack of fever. Modeste and Andre were so interested in their
conversation, that they did not perceive Florestan, who had gone out to
post a letter to Mascarin.

“Listen, Modeste,” whispered Andre, “you tell me that she is in
danger,--very great danger.”

“The doctor said that the crisis would take place to-day; be here at
five this evening.”

Andre staggered like a madman to De Breulh’s house; and so excited was
he that his friend insisted upon his taking some repose, and would not,
when five o’clock arrived, permit Andre to go to the appointment alone.
As they turned the corner, they saw Modeste hurrying toward them.

“She is saved, she is saved!” said she, “for she has fallen into a
tranquil sleep, and the doctor says that she will recover.”

Andre and De Breulh were transported by this news; but they did not know
that they were watched by two men, Mascarin and Florestan, who did not
let one of their movements escape them. Warned by a brief note from
Florestan, Mascarin had driven swiftly to Father Canon’s public-house,
where he thought he was certain to find the domestic, but the man was
not there, and Mascarin, unable to endure further suspense, sent for him
to the Hotel de Mussidan. When the servant informed Mascarin that the
crisis was safely passed, he drew a deep breath of relief; for he no
longer feared that the frail structure that he had built up with such
patient care for twenty long years would be shattered at a blow by
the chill hand of death. He bent his brow, however, when he heard of
Modeste’s daily interviews with the young man whom Florestan termed
“Mademoiselle’s lover.”

“Ah,” muttered he, “if I could only be present at one of those
interviews!”

“And, as you say,” returned Florestan, drawing out, as he spoke, a
neat-looking watch, “it is just the hour of their meeting; and as the
place is always the same, you--”

“Come, then,” broke in his patron. They went out accordingly, and
reached the Champs Elysees by a circuitous route. The place was
admirably suited to their purpose, for close by were several of those
little wooden huts, occupied in summer by the vendors of cakes and
playthings.

“Let us get behind one of these,” said Florestan. Night was drawing
in, but objects could still be distinguished, and in about five minutes
Florestan whispered, “Look, there comes Modeste, and there is the lover,
but he has a pal with him to-night. Why, what can she be telling him? He
seems quite overcome.”

Mascarin divined the truth at once, and found that it would be a
difficult task to interfere with the love of a man who displayed so much
intensity of feeling.

“Then,” remarked Mascarin, savagely, “that great booby, staggering about
on his friend’s arm, is your young lady’s lover?”

“Just so, sir.”

“Then we must find out who he is.”

Florestan put on a crafty air, and replied in gentle accents.

“The day before yesterday, as I was smoking my pipe outside, I saw this
young bantam swaggering down the street--not but what he seemed rather
crestfallen; but I knew the reason for that, and should look just as
much in the dumps if my young woman was laid up. I thought, as I had
nothing to do, I might as well see who he was and where he lived; so,
sticking my hands in my pockets, after him I sloped. He walked such a
long way, that I got precious sick of my job, but at last I ran him
to earth in a house. I went straight up to the lodge, and showed the
portress my tobacco pouch, and said, ‘I picked up this; I think that the
gentleman who has just gone in dropped it. Do you know him?’ ‘Of course
I do,’ said she. ‘He is a painter; lives on the fourth floor; and his
name is M. Andre.’”

“Was the house in the Rue de la Tour d’Auvergne?” broke in Mascarin.

“You are right, sir,” returned the man, taken a little aback. “It seems,
sir, that you are better informed than I am.”

Mascarin did not notice the man’s surprise, but he was struck with the
strange persistency with which this young man seemed to cross his plans,
for he found that the acquaintance of Rose and the lover of Mademoiselle
de Mussidan were one and the same person, and he had a presentiment that
he would in some way prove a hindrance to his plans.

The astute Mascarin concentrated all his attention upon Andre.

The latter said something to Modeste, which caused that young woman to
raise her hands to heaven, as though in alarm.

“But who is the other?” asked he,--“the fellow that looks like an
Englishman?”

“Do you not know?” returned the lackey. “Why, that is M. de
Breulh-Faverlay.”

“What, the man who was to marry Sabine?”

“Certainly.”

Mascarin was not easily disconcerted, but this time a blasphemous oath
burst from his lips.

“Do you mean,” said he, “that De Breulh and this painter are friends?”

“That is more than I can tell. You seem to want to know a lot,” answered
Florestan, sulkily.

Modeste had now left the young men, who walked arm in arm in the
direction of the Avenue de l’Imperatrice.

“M. de Breulh takes his dismissal easily enough,” observed Mascarin.

“He was not dismissed; it was he that wrote and broke off the
engagement.”

This time Mascarin contrived to conceal the terrible blow that this
information caused to him, and even made some jesting remark as he took
leave of Florestan; but he was in truth completely staggered, for after
thoroughly believing that the game was won, he saw that, though perhaps
not lost, his victory was postponed for an indefinite period.

“What!” said he, as he clenched his hand firmly, “shall the headstrong
passion of this foolish boy mar my plans? Let him take care of himself;
for if he walks in my path, he will find it a road that leads to his own
destruction.”



CHAPTER XXI.

AN ACADEMY OF MUSIC.

Dr. Hortebise had for some time back given up arguing with Mascarin as
to the advice the latter gave him. He had been ordered not to let Paul
out of his sight, and he obeyed this command literally. He had taken him
to dine at M. Martin Rigal’s, though the host himself was absent; from
there he took Paul to his club, and finally wound up by forcing the
young man to accept a bed at his house. They both slept late, and were
sitting down to a luxurious breakfast, when the servant announced M.
Tantaine, and that worthy man made his appearance with the same smile
upon his face which Paul remembered so well in the Hotel de Perou.
The sight of him threw the young man into a state of fury. “At last we
meet,” cried he. “I have an account to settle with you.”

“You have an account to settle with me?” asked Daddy Tantaine with a
puzzled smile.

“Yes; was it not through you that I was accused of theft by that old
hag, Madame Loupins?”

Tantaine shrugged his shoulders.

“Dear me,” said he; “I thought that M. Mascarin had explained
everything, and that you were anxious to marry Mademoiselle Flavia, and
that, above all, you were a young man of intelligence and tact.”

Hortebise roared with laughter, and Paul, seeing his folly, blushed
deeply and remained silent.

“I regret having disturbed you, doctor,” resumed Tantaine, “but I had
strict orders to see you.”

“Is there anything new then?”

“Yes; Mademoiselle de Mussidan is out of danger, and M. de Croisenois
can commence proceedings at once.”

The doctor drank off a glass of wine. “To the speedy marriage of our
dear friend the Marquis and Mademoiselle Sabine,” said he gayly.

“So be it,” said Tantaine; “I am also directed to beg M. Paul not to
leave this house, but to send for his luggage and remain here.”

Hortebise looked so much annoyed that Tantaine hastened to add: “Only as
a temporary measure, for I am on the lookout for rooms for him now.”

Paul looked delighted at the idea of having a home of his own.

“Good!” exclaimed the doctor merrily. “And now, my dear Tantaine, as you
have executed all your commissions, you can stay and breakfast with us.”

“Thanks for the honor; but I am very busy with affairs of the Duke de
Champdoce and must see Perpignan at once.” As he spoke he rose, making
a little sign which Paul did not catch, and Hortebise accompanied him to
the door of the vestibule. “Don’t leave that lad alone,” said Tantaine;
“I will see about him to-morrow; meanwhile prepare him a little.”

“I comprehend,” answered Hortebise; “my kind regards to that dear
fellow, Perpignan.”

This Perpignan was well known--some people said too well known--in
Paris. His real name was Isidore Crocheteau, and he had started life
as a cook in a Palais Royal restaurant. Unfortunately a breach of the
Eighth Commandment had caused him to suffer incarceration for a period
of three years, and on his release he bloomed out into a private inquiry
agent. His chief customers were jealous husbands, but as surely as one
of these placed an affair in his hands, he would go to the erring wife
and obtain a handsome price from her for his silence.

Mascarin and Perpignan had met in an affair of this kind; and as they
mutually feared each other, they had tacitly agreed not to cross
each other’s path in that great wilderness of crime--Paris. But while
Perpignan knew nothing of Mascarin’s schemes and operations, the
former was very well acquainted with the ex-cook’s doings. He knew,
for instance, that the income from the Inquiry Office would not cover
Perpignan’s expenses, who dressed extravagantly, kept a carriage,
affected artistic tastes, played cards, betted on races, and liked good
dinners at the most expensive restaurants. “Where can he get his money
from?” asked Mascarin of himself; and, after a long search, he succeeded
in solving the riddle.

Daddy Tantaine, after leaving the doctor’s, soon arrived at the
residence of M. Perpignan, and rang the bell.

A fat woman answered the door. “M. Perpignan is out,” said she.

“When will he be back?”

“Some time this evening.”

“Can you tell me where I can find him, as it is of the utmost importance
to both of us that I should see him at once?”

“He did not say where he was going to.”

“Perhaps he is at the factory,” said Tantaine blandly.

The fat woman was utterly taken aback by this suggestion. “What do you
know about that?” faltered she.

“You see I _do_ know, and that is sufficient for you. Come, is he
there?”

“I think so.”

“Thank you, I will call on him then. An awfully long journey,” muttered
Tantaine, as he turned away; “but, perhaps, if I catch the worthy man
in the midst of all his little business affairs, he will be more free in
his language, and not so guarded in his actual admissions.”

The old man went to his task with a will. He passed down the Rue
Toumenon, skirted the Luxemburg, and made his way into the Rue Guy
Lussac; from thence he walked down the Rue Mouffetard, and thence direct
into one of those crooked lanes which run between the Gobelins Factory
and the Hopital de l’Oursine. This is a portion of the city utterly
unknown to the greater number of Parisians. The streets are narrow and
hardly afford room for vehicles. A valley forms the centre of the place,
down which runs a muddy, sluggish stream, the banks of which are densely
crowded with tanyards and iron works. On the one side of this valley is
the busy Rue Mouffetard, and on the other one of the outer boulevards,
while a long line of sickly-looking poplars mark the course of the
semi-stagnant stream. Tantaine seemed to know the quarter well, and
went on until he reached the Champs des Alouettes. Then, with a sigh of
satisfaction, he halted before a large, three-storied house, standing on
a piece of ground surrounded by a mouldering wooden fence. The aspect of
the house had something sinister and gloomy about it, and for a moment
Tantaine paused as if he could not make up his mind to enter it; but
at last he did so. The interior was as dingy and dilapidated as the
outside. There were two rooms on the ground floor, one of which was
strewn with straw, with a few filthy-looking quilts and blankets spread
over it. The next room was fitted up as a kitchen; in the centre was a
long table composed of boards placed on trestles, and a dirty-looking
woman with her head enveloped in a coarse red handkerchief, and grasping
a big wooden spoon, was stirring the contents of a large pot in which
some terrible-looking ingredients were cooking. On a small bed in a
corner lay a little boy. Every now and then a shiver convulsed his
frame, his face was deadly pale, and his hands almost transparent,
while his great black eyes glittered with the wild delirium of fever.
Sometimes he would give a deep groan, and then the old beldame would
turn angrily and threaten to strike him with her wooden spoon.

“But I am so ill,” pleaded the boy.

“If you had brought home what you were told, you would not have been
beaten, and then you would have had no fever,” returned the woman
harshly.

“Ah, me! I am sick and cold, and want to go away,” wailed the child; “I
want to see mammy.”

Even Tantaine felt uneasy at this scene, and gave a gentle cough to
announce his presence. The old woman turned round on him with an angry
snarl. “Who do you want here?” growled she.

“Your master.”

“He has not yet arrived, and may not come at all, for it is not his day;
but you can see Poluche.”

“And who may he be?”

“He is the professor,” answered the hag contemptuously.

“And where is he?”

“In the music-room.”

Tantaine went to the stairs, which were so dingy and dilapidated as to
make an ascent a work of danger and difficulty. As he ascended higher,
he became aware of a strange sound, something between the grinding
of scissors and the snarling of cats. Then a moment’s silence, a loud
execration, and a cry of pain. Tantaine passed on, and coming to a
rickety door, he opened it, and in another moment found himself in what
the old hag downstairs had called the music-room. The partitions of
all the rooms on the floor had been roughly torn down to form this
apartment; hardly a pane of glass remained intact in the windows; the
dingy, whitewashed walls were covered with scrawls and drawings in
charcoal. A suffocating, nauseous odor rose up, absolutely overpowering
the smell from the neighboring tanyards. There was no furniture except a
broken chair, upon which lay a dog whip with plaited leather lash. Round
the room, against the wall, stood some twenty children, dirty, and in
tattered clothes. Some had violins in their hands, and others stood
behind harps as tall as themselves. Upon the violins Tantaine noticed
there were chalk marks at various distances. In the middle of the room
was a man, tall and erect as a dart, with flat, ugly features and lank,
greasy hair hanging down on his shoulders. He, too, had a violin, and
was evidently giving the children a lesson. Tantaine at once guessed
that this was Professor Poluche.

“Listen,” said he; “here, you Ascanie, play the chorus from the _Chateau
de Marguerite_.” As he spoke he drew his bow across his instrument,
while the little Savoyard did his best to imitate him, and in a
squeaking voice, in nasal tone, he sang:

“Ah! great heavens, how fine and grand Is the palace!”

“You young rascal!” cried Poluche. “Have I not bid you fifty times that
at the word ‘palace’ you are to place your bow on the fourth chalkmark
and draw it across? Begin again.”

Once again the boy commenced, but Poluche stopped him.

“I believe, you young villain, that you are doing it on purpose. Now, go
through the whole chorus again; and if you do not do it right, look out
for squalls.”

Poor Ascanie was so muddled that he forgot all his instructions. Without
any appearance of anger, the professor took up the whip and administered
half a dozen severe cuts across the bare legs of the child, whose shouts
soon filled the room.

“When you are done howling,” remarked Poluche, “you can try again;
and if you do not succeed, no supper for you to-night, my lad. Now,
Giuseppe, it is your turn.”

Giuseppe, though younger than Ascanie, was a greater proficient on the
instrument, and went through his task without a single mistake.

“Good!” said Poluche; “if you get on like that, you will soon be fit to
go out. You would like that, I suppose?”

“Yes,” replied the delighted boy, “and I should like to bring in a few
coppers too.”

But the Professor did not waste too much time in idle converse.

“It is your turn now, Fabio,” said he.

Fabio, a little mite of seven, with eyes black and sparkling as those of
a dormouse, had just seen Tantaine in the doorway and pointed him out to
the professor.

Poluche turned quickly round and found himself face to face with
Tantaine, who had come quickly forward, his hat in his hand.

Had the professor seen an apparition, he could not have started more
violently, for he did not like strangers.

“What do you want?” asked he.

“Reassure yourself, sir,” said Tantaine, after having for a few seconds
enjoyed his evident terror; “I am the intimate friend of the gentleman
who employs you, and have come here to discuss an important matter of
business with him.”

Poluche breathed more freely.

“Take a chair, sir,” said he, offering the only one in the room. “My
master will soon be here.”

But Daddy Tantaine refused the offer, saying that he did not wish to
intrude, but would wait until the lesson was over.

“I have nearly finished,” remarked Poluche; “it is almost time to let
these scamps have their soup.”

Then turning to his pupils, who had not dared to stir a limb, he said,--

“There, that is enough for to-day; you can go.”

The children did not hesitate for a moment, but tumbled over each other
in their eagerness to get away, hoping, perhaps, that he might omit to
execute certain threats that he had held out during the lesson. The hope
was a vain one, for the equitable Poluche went to the head of the stairs
and called out in a loud voice,--

“Mother Butor, you will give no soup to Monte and put Ravillet on half
allowance.”

Tantaine was much interested, for the scene was an entirely new one.

The professor raised his eyes to heaven.

“Would,” said he, “that I might teach them the divine science as I would
wish; but the master would not allow me; indeed, he would dismiss me if
I attempted to do so.”

“I do not understand you.”

“Let me explain to you. You know that there are certain old women who,
for a consideration, will train a linnet or a bullfinch to whistle any
air?”

Tantaine, with all humility, confessed his ignorance of these matters.

“Well,” said the professor, “the only difference between those old women
and myself is, that they teach birds and I boys; and I know which I had
rather do.”

Tantaine pointed to the whip.

“And how about this?” asked he.

Poluche shrugged his shoulders.

“Put yourself in my place for a little while,” remarked he. “You see my
master brings me all sorts of boys, and I have to cram music into them
in the briefest period possible. Of course the child revolts, and I
thrash him; but do not think he cares for this; the young imps thrive on
blows. The only way that I can touch them is through their stomachs. I
stop a quarter, a half, and sometimes the whole of their dinner. That
fetches them, and you have no idea how a little starvation brings them
on in music.”

Daddy Tantaine felt a cold shiver creep over him as he listened to this
frank exposition of the professor’s mode of action.

“You can now understand,” remarked the professor, “how some airs become
popular in Paris. I have forty pupils all trying the same thing. I am
drilling them now in the _Marguerite_, and in a little time you will
have nothing else in the streets.”

Poluche was proceeding to give Tantaine some further information, when a
step was heard upon the stairs, and the professor remarked,--

“Here is the master; he never comes up here, because he is afraid of the
stairs. You had better go down to him.”



CHAPTER XXII.

DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND.

The ex-cook appeared before Tantaine in all his appalling vulgarity as
the latter descended the stairs. The proprietor of the musical academy
was a stout, red-faced man, with an insolent mouth and a cynical eye.
He was gorgeously dressed, and wore a profusion of jewelry. He was
much startled at seeing Tantaine, whom he knew to be the redoubtable
Mascarin’s right-hand man. “A thousand thunders!” muttered he. “If these
people have sent him here for me, I must take care what I am about,” and
with a friendly smile he extended his hand to Tantaine.

“Glad to see you,” said he. “Now, what can I do for you, for I hope you
have come to ask me to do something?”

“The veriest trifle,” returned Tantaine.

“I am sorry that it is not something of importance, for I have the
greatest respect for M. Mascarin.”

This conversation had taken place in the window, and was interrupted
every moment by the shouts and laughter of the children; but beneath
these sounds of merriment came an occasional bitter wail of lamentation.

“What is that?” inquired Perpignan, in a voice of thunder. “Who presumes
to be unhappy in this establishment?”

“It is two of the lads that I have put on half rations,” returned
Poluche. “I’ll make them learn somehow or----”

A dark frown on the master’s face arrested his further speech. “What do
I hear?” roared Perpignan. “Do you dare, under my roof, to deprive those
poor children of an ounce of food? It is scandalous, I may say, infamous
on your part, M. Poluche.”

“But, sir,” faltered the professor, “have you not told me hundreds of
times--”

“That you were an idiot, and would never be anything better. Go and tell
Mother Butor to give these poor children their dinner.”

Repressing further manifestations of rage, Perpignan took Tantaine by
the arm and led him into a little side-room, which he dignified by the
name of his office. There was nothing in it but three chairs, a common
deal table, and a few shelves containing ledgers. “You have come on
business, I presume,” remarked Perpignan.

Tantaine nodded, and the two men seated themselves at the table, gazing
keenly into each other’s eyes, as though to read the thoughts that moved
in the busy brain.

“How did you find out my little establishment down here?” asked
Perpignan.

“By a mere chance,” remarked Tantaine carelessly. “I go about a
good deal, and hear many things. For instance, you have taken every
precaution here, and though you are really the proprietor, yet the
husband of your cook and housekeeper, Butor, is supposed to be the owner
of the house--at least it stands in his name. Now, if anything untoward
happened, you would vanish, and only Butor would remain a prey for the
police.”

Tantaine paused for a moment, and then slowly added, “Such tactics
usually succeed unless a man has some secret enemy, who would
take advantage of his knowledge, to do him an injury by obtaining
irrefragable proofs of his complicity.”

The ex-cook easily perceived the threat that was hidden under these
words. “They know something,” muttered he, “and I must find out what it
is.”

“If a man has a clear conscience,” said he aloud, “he is all right. I
have nothing to conceal, and therefore nothing to fear. You have now
seen my establishment; what do you think of it?”

“It seems to me a very well-conducted one.”

“It may have occurred to you that a factory at Roubaix might have been a
better investment, but I had not the capital to begin with.”

Tantaine nodded. “It is not half a bad trade,” said he.

“I agree with you. In the Rue St. Marguerite you will find more than
one similar establishment; but I never cared for the situation of the
Faubourg St. Antoine. My little angels find this spot more salubrious.”

“Yes, yes,” answered Tantaine amicably, “and if they howl too much when
they are corrected, there are not too many neighbors to hear them.”

Perpignan thought it best to take no notice of this observation. “The
papers are always pitching into us,” continued he. “They had much better
stick to politics. The fact is, that the profits of our business are
tremendously exaggerated.”

“Well, you manage to make a living out of it?”

“I don’t lose, I confess, but I have six little cherubs in hospital,
besides the one in the kitchen, and these, of course, are a dead loss to
me.”

“That is a sad thing for you,” answered Tantaine gravely.

Perpignan began to be amazed at his visitor’s coolness.

“Damn it all,” said he, “if you and Mascarin think the business such
a profitable one, why don’t you go in for it. You may perhaps think it
easy to procure the kids; just try it. You have to go to Italy for most
of them, then you have to smuggle them across the frontier like bales of
contraband goods.”

Perpignan paused to take a breath, and Tantaine asked,--

“What sum do you make each of the lads bring in daily?”

“That depends,” answered Perpignan hesitatingly.

“Well, you can give an average?”

“Say three francs then.”

“Three francs!” repeated Tantaine with a genial smile, “and you have
forty little cherubs, so that makes one hundred and twenty francs per
day.”

“Absurd!” retorted Perpignan; “do you think each of the lads bring in
such a sum as that?”

“Ah! you know the way to make them do so.”

“I don’t understand you,” answered Perpignan, in whose voice a shade of
anxiety now began to appear.

“No offence, no offence,” answered Tantaine; “but the fact is, the
newspapers are doing you a great deal of harm, by retailing some of the
means adopted by your colleague to make the boys do a good day’s work.
Do you recollect the sentence on that master who tied one of his lads
down on a bed, and left him without food for two days at a stretch?”

“I don’t care about such matters; no one can bring a charge of cruelty
against me,” retorted Perpignan angrily.

“A man with the kindest heart in the world may be the victim of
circumstances.”

Perpignan felt that the decisive moment was at hand.

“What do you mean?” asked he.

“Well, suppose, to punish one of your refractory lads, you were to shut
him in the cellar. A storm comes on during the night, the gutter gets
choked up, the cellar fills with water, and next morning you find the
little cherub drowned like a rat in his hole?”

Perpignan’s face was livid.

“Well, and what then?” asked he.

“Ah! now the awkward part of the matter comes. You would not care to
send for the police, that might excite suspicion; the easiest thing is
to dig a hole and shove the body into it.”

Perpignan got up and placed his back against the door.

“You know too much, M. Tantaine,--a great deal too much,” said he.

Perpignan’s manner was most threatening; but Tantaine still smiled
pleasantly, like a child who had just committed some simply mischievous
act, the results of which it cannot foresee.

“The sentence isn’t heavy,” he continued; “five years’ penal servitude,
if evidence of previous good conduct could be put in; but if former
antecedents were disclosed, such as a journey to Nancy----”

This was the last straw, and Perpignan broke out,--

“What do you mean?” said he; “and what do you want me to do?”

“Only a trifling service, as I told you before. My dear sir, do not put
yourself in a rage,” he added, as Perpignan seemed disposed to speak
again. “Was it not you who first began to talk of your, ‘em--well, let
us say business?”

“Then you wanted to make yourself agreeable by talking all this rot to
me. Well, shall I tell you in my turn what I think?”

“By all means, if it will not be giving you too much trouble.”

“Then I tell you that you have come here on an errand which no man
should venture to do alone. You are not of the age and build for
business like this. It is a misfortune--a fatal one perhaps--to put
yourself in my power, in such a house as this.”

“But, my dear sir, what is likely to happen to me?”

The features of the ex-cook were convulsed with fury; he was in that mad
state of rage in which a man has no control over himself. Mechanically
his hand slipped into his pocket; but before he could draw it out again,
Tantaine who had not lost one of his movements, sprang upon him and
grasped him so tightly by the throat that he was powerless to adopt any
offensive measures, in spite of his great strength and robust build.
The struggle was not a long one; the old man hurled his adversary to the
ground, and placed his foot on his chest, and held him down, his whole
face and figure seemingly transfigured with the glories of strength and
success.

“And so you wished to stab me,--to murder a poor and inoffensive old
man. Do you think that I was fool enough to enter your cut-throat door
without taking proper precautions?” And as he spoke he drew a revolver
from his bosom. “Throw away your knife,” added he sternly.

In obedience to this mandate, Perpignan, who was now entirely
demoralized, threw the sharp-pointed weapon which he had contrived to
open in his pocket into a corner of the room.

“Good,” said Tantaine. “You are growing more reasonable now. Of course I
came alone, but do you think that plenty of people did not know where I
was going to? Had I not returned to-night, do you think that my master,
M. Mascarin, would have been satisfied? and how long do you think it
would have been before he and the police would have been here. If you do
not do all that I wish for the rest of your life, you will be the most
ungrateful fellow in the world.”

Perpignan was deeply mortified; he had been worsted in single combat,
and now he was being found out, and these things had never happened to
him before.

“Well, I suppose that I must give in,” answered he sulkily.

“Quite so; it is a pity that you did not think of that before.”

“You vexed me and made me angry.”

“Just so; well, now, get up, take that chair, and let us talk
reasonably.”

Perpignan obeyed without a word.

“Now,” said Tantaine, “I came here with a really magnificent proposal.
But I adopted the course I pursued because I wished to prove to you
that _you_ belonged more absolutely to Mascarin than did your wretched
foreign slaves to you. You are absolutely at his mercy, and he can crush
you to powder whenever he likes.”

“Your Mascarin is Satan himself,” muttered the discomfited man. “Who can
resist him?”

“Come, as you think thus, we can talk sensibly at last.”

“Well,” answered Perpignan ruefully, as he adjusted his disordered
necktie, “say what you like, I have no answer to make.”

“Let us begin at the commencement,” said Tantaine. “For some days past
your people have been following a certain Caroline Schimmel. A fellow of
sixteen called Ambrose, a lad with a harp, was told off for this duty.
He is not to be trusted. Only a night or two ago one of my men made him
drunk; and fearing lest his absence might create surprise, drove him
here in a cab, and left him at the corner.”

The ex-cook uttered an oath.

“Then you too are watching Caroline,” said he. “I knew well that there
was some one else in the field, but that was no matter of mine.”

“Well, tell me why you are watching her?”

“How can you ask me? You know that my motto is silence and discretion,
and that this is a secret intrusted to my honor.”

Tantaine shrugged his shoulders.

“Why do you talk like that, when you know very well that you are
following Ambrose on your own account, hoping by that means to penetrate
a secret, only a small portion of which has been intrusted to you?”
 remarked he.

“Are you certain of this statement?” asked the man, with a cunning look.

“So sure that I can tell you that the matter was placed in your hands by
a certain M. Catenac.”

The expression in Perpignan’s face changed from astonishment to fear.

“Why, this Mascarin knows everything,” muttered he.

“No,” replied Tantaine, “my master does not know everything, and the
proof of this is, that I have come to ask you what occurred between
Catenac’s client and yourself, and this is the service that we expect
from you.”

“Well, if I must, I must. About three weeks ago, one morning, I had just
finished with half a dozen clients at my office in the Rue de Fame, when
my servant brought me Catenac’s card. After some talk, he asked me if I
could find out a person that he had utterly lost sight of. Of course I
said, yes, I could. Upon this he asked me to make an appointment for ten
the next morning, when some one would call on me regarding the affair.
At the appointed time a shabbily dressed man was shown in. I looked at
him up and down, and saw that, in spite of his greasy hat and threadbare
coat, his linen was of the finest kind, and that his shoes were the work
of one of our best bootmakers. ‘Aha,’ said I to myself, ‘you thought to
take me in, did you!’ I handed him a chair, and he at once proceeded
to let me into his reasons for coming. ‘Sir,’ said he, ‘my life has not
been a very happy one, and once I was compelled to take to the Foundling
Asylum a child that I loved very dearly, the son of a woman whom I
adored. She is dead now, and I am old and solitary. I have a small
property, and would give half of it to recover the child. Tell me,
is there any chance of my doing so?’ You must imagine, my dear sir,”
 continued he, after a slight pause, “that I was much interested in this
story, for I said to myself, that the man’s fortune must be a very small
one if half of it would not amply repay me for making a journey to the
Foundling Hospital. So I agreed to undertake the business, but the old
fellow was too sharp for me. ‘Stop a bit, and let me finish,’ said he,
‘and you will see that your task will not be so easy as you seem to
think it.’ I, of course, bragged of my enormous sources of information,
and the probability of ultimate success.”

“Keep to your story,” said Tantaine impatiently, “I know all about
that.”

“I will leave you, then, to imagine all I said to the old man, who
listened to me with great satisfaction. ‘I only hope that you are as
skilful as M. Catenac says you are, and have as much influence and power
as you assert, for no man has a finer chance than you now have. I have
tried all means up to this, but I have failed.’ I went first to the
hospital where the child had been placed, and they showed me the
register containing the date of his admission, but no one knew what had
become of him, for at twelve years of age he had left the place, and no
one had heard of him since; and in spite of every effort, I have been
unable to discover whether he is alive or dead.”

“A pretty riddle to guess,” remarked Tantaine.

“An enigma that it is impossible to solve,” returned Perpignan. “How is
one to get hold of a boy who vanished ten years ago, and who must now be
a grown-up man?”

“We could do it.”

Tantaine’s tone was so decided, that the other man looked sharply at
him with a vague suspicion rising in his breast that the affair had also
been placed in Mascarin’s hands; and if so, whether he had worked it
with more success than himself.

“You might, for all I know; but I felt that the clue was absolutely
wanting,” answered Perpignan sulkily. “I put on a bold face, however,
and asked for the boy’s description. The man told me that he could
provide me with an accurate one, for that many people, notably the lady
superior, remembered the lad. He could also give other details which
might be useful.”

“And these you obtained, of course?”

“Not yet.”

“Are you joking?”

“Not a bit. I do not know whether the old man was sharp enough to read
in the expression of my features that I had not the smallest hope of
success; be that as it may, he could give me no further information that
day, declaring that he came in only to consult me, and that everything
must be done in a most confidential way. I hastened to assure him that
my office was a perfect tomb of secrets. He told me that he took that
for granted. Then telling me that he wished me to draw up a _precis_ of
my intended course, he took out a note for five hundred francs, which
he handed to me for my time. I refused to take it, though it cost me
a struggle to do so, for I thought that I should make more out of him
later on. But he insisted on my taking it, saying that he would see me
again soon, and that Catenac would communicate with me. He left me less
interested in the search than in who this old man could possibly be.”

Tantaine felt that Perpignan was telling the truth.

“Did you not try and find out that?” asked he.

Perpignan hesitated; but feeling convinced that there was no loophole
for escape, he answered, “Hardly had my visitor left than, slipping on
a cap and a workman’s blouse, I followed him in his track, and saw him
enter one of the finest houses in the Rue de Varennes.”

“He lived there then?”

“He did, and he was a very well-known man--the Duke de Champdoce.”

“Yes, I know all that,” answered Tantaine, placidly, “but I can’t, for
the life of me, imagine the connection between the Duke and Caroline
Schimmel.”

Perpignan raised his eyebrows.

“Why did you put a man to watch her?” asked Tantaine.

“My reasons for doing so were most simple. I made every inquiry
regarding the Duke; learned that he was very wealthy, and lived a very
steady life. He is married, and loves his wife dearly. They had one son,
whom they lost a year ago, and have never recovered from the shock. I
imagine that this Duke, having lost his legitimate heir, wished me to
find his other son. Do you not think that I am right?”

“There is something in it; but, after all, you have not explained your
reasons for watching Caroline.”

Perpignan was no match for Mascarin’s right-hand man, but he was keen
enough to discern that Tantaine was putting a string of questions to him
which had been prepared in advance. This he, however, was powerless to
resent.

“As you may believe,” said he, “I made every inquiry into the past as
well as the present of the Duke, and also tried to discover who was the
mother of the child, but in this I entirely failed.”

“What! not with all your means?” cried Tantaine, with a sneer.

“Laugh at me as much as you like; but out of the thirty servants in the
Champdoce establishment, not one has been there more than ten years.
Nor could I anywhere lay my hands upon one who had been in the Duke’s
service in his youth. Once, however, as I was in the wineshop in the Rue
de Varennes, I quite by chance heard allusion made to a woman who had
been in the service of the Duke twenty-five years ago, and who was
now in receipt of a small allowance from him. This woman was Caroline
Schimmel. I easily found out her address, and set a watch on her.”

“And of what use will she be to you?”

“Very little, I fear. And yet the allowance looks as if she had at one
time done something out of the way for her employers. Can it be that she
has any knowledge of the birth of this natural child?”

“I don’t think much of your idea,” returned Tantaine carelessly.

“Since then,” continued Perpignan, “the Duke has never put in an
appearance in my office.”

“But how about Catenac?”

“I have seen him three times.”

“Has he told you nothing more? Do you not even know in which hospital
the child was placed?”

“No; and on my last visit I plainly told him that I was getting sick of
all this mystery; and he said that he himself was tired, and was sorry
that he had ever meddled in the affair.”

Tantaine was not surprised at hearing this, and accounted for Catenac’s
change of front by the threats of Mascarin.

“Well, what do you draw from this?” asked he.

“That Catenac has no more information than I have. The Duke most likely
proposes to drop the affair; but, were I in his place, I should be
afraid to find the boy, however much I might at one time have desired
to do so. He may be in prison--the most likely thing for a lad who, at
twelve years of age, ran away from a place where he was well treated. I
have, however, planned a mode of operation, for, with patience, money,
and skill, much might be done.”

“I agree with you.”

“Then let me tell you. I have drawn an imaginary circle round Paris. I
said to myself, ‘I will visit every house and inn in the villages round
within this radius; I will enter every isolated dwelling, and will say
to the inhabitants, “Do any of you remember at any time sheltering and
feeding a child, dressed in such and such a manner?”’ giving at the
same time a description of him. I am sure that I should find some one
who would answer in the affirmative. Then I should gain a clue which I
would follow up to the end.”

This plan appeared so ingenious to Tantaine, that he involuntarily
exclaimed,--

“Good! excellent!”

Perpignan hardly knew whether Tantaine was praising or blaming him. His
manner might have meant either.

“You are very fast,” returned he dismally. “Perhaps presently you will
be good enough to allow that I am not an absolute fool. Do you really
think that I am an idiot? At any rate, I sometimes hit upon a judicious
combination. For example, with regard to this boy, I have a notion
which, if properly worked might lead to something.”

“Might I ask what it is?”

“I speak confidentially. If it is impossible to lay our hands upon the
real boy, why should we not substitute another?”

At this suggestion, Tantaine started violently.

“It would be most dangerous, most hazardous,” gasped he.

“You are afraid, then?” said Perpignan, delighted at the effect his
proposal had made.

“It seems it is you who were afraid,” retorted Tantaine.

“You do not know me when you say that,” said Perpignan.

“If you were not afraid,” asked Tantaine, in his most oily voice, “why
did you not carry out your plan?”

“Because there was one obstacle that could not be got over.”

“Well, I can’t see it myself,” returned Tantaine, desirous of hearing
every detail.

“Ah, there is one thing that I omitted in my narrative. The Duke
informed me that he could prove the identity of the boy by certain
scars.”

“Scars? And of what kind, pray?”

“Now you are asking me too much. I do not know.”

On receiving this reply, Tantaine rose hastily from his chair, and thus
concealed his agitation from his companion.

“I have a hundred apologies to make for taking up so much of your
valuable time. My master has got it into his head that you were after
the same game as ourselves. He was mistaken, and now we leave the field
clear to you.”

Before Perpignan could make any reply, the old man had passed through
the doorway. On the threshold he paused, and said,--

“Were I in your place, I would stick to my first plan. You will never
find the boy, but you will get several thousand francs out of the Duke,
which I am sure will come in handy.”

“There are scars now, then,” muttered Tantaine, as he moved away from
the house, “and that Master Catenac never said a word about them!”



CHAPTER XXIII.

FATHER AND SON.

Two hours after Andre had left the Avenue de Matignon, one of Mascarin’s
most trusty emissaries was at his heels, who could watch his actions
with the tenacity of a bloodhound. Andre, however, now that he had heard
of Sabine’s convalescence, had entirely recovered the elasticity of his
spirits, and would never have noticed that he was being followed. His
heart, too, was much rejoiced at the friendship of M. de Breulh and the
promise of assistance from the Viscountess de Bois Arden; and with the
assistance of these two, he felt that he could end his difficulties.

“I must get to work again,” muttered he, as he left M. de Breulh’s
hospitable house. “I have already lost too much time. To-morrow, if you
look up at the scaffolding of a splendid house in the Champs Elysees,
you will see me at work.”

Andre was busy all night with his plans for the rich contractor, M.
Gandelu, who wanted as much ornamental work on the outside of his house
as he had florid decorations within. He rose with the lark, and having
gazed for a moment on Sabine’s portrait, started for the abode of M.
Gandelu, the proud father of young Gaston. This celebrated contractor
lived in a splendid house in the Rue Chasse d’Antin, until his more
palatial residence should be completed.

When Andre presented himself at the door, an old servant, who knew him
well, strongly urged him not to go up.

“Never,” said he, “in all the time that I have been with master, have I
seen him in such a towering rage. Only just listen!”

It was easy to hear the noise alluded to, mingled with the breaking of
glass and the smashing of furniture.

“The master has been at this game for over an hour,” remarked the
servant, “ever since his lawyer, M. Catenac, has left him.”

Andre, however, decided not to postpone his visit. “I must see him in
spite of everything; show me up,” said he.

With evident reluctance the domestic obeyed, and threw open the door of
a room superbly furnished and decorated, in the centre of which stood M.
Gandelu waving the leg of a chair frantically in his hand. He was a man
of sixty years of age, but did not look fifty, built like a Hercules,
with huge hands and muscular limbs which seemed to fret under the
restraint of his fashionable garments. He had made his enormous fortune,
of which he was considerably proud, by honest labor, and no one could
say that he had not acted fairly throughout his whole career. He was
coarse and violent in his manner, but he had a generous heart and never
refused aid to the deserving and needy. He swore like a trooper, and his
grammar was faulty; but for all that, his heart was in the right place,
and he was a better man than many who boast of high birth and expensive
education.

“What idiot is coming here to annoy me?” roared he, as soon as the door
was opened.

“I have come by appointment,” answered Andre, and the contractor’s brow
cleared as he saw who his visitor was.

“Ah, it is you, is it? Take a seat; that is, if there is a sound chair
left in the room. I like you, for you have an honest face and don’t
shirk hard work. You needn’t color up, though; modesty is no fault. Yes,
there is something in you, and when you want a hundred thousand
francs to go into business with, here it is ready for you; and had I a
daughter, you should marry her, and I would build your house for you.”

“I thank you much,” said Andre; “but I have learned to depend entirely
on myself.”

“True,” returned Gandelu, “you never knew your parents; you never knew
what a kind father would do for his child. Do you know my son?” asked
he, suddenly turning upon Andre.

This question at once gave Andre the solution of the scene before him.
M. Gandelu was irritated at some folly that his son had committed. For
a moment Andre hesitated; he did not care to say anything that might
revive the old man’s feeling of anger, and therefore merely replied that
he had only met his son Gaston two or three times.

“Gaston,” cried the old man, with a bitter oath; “do not call him that.
Do you think it likely that old Nicholas Gandelu would ever have been
ass enough to call his son Gaston? He was called Peter, after his
grandfather, but it wasn’t a good enough one for the young fool; he
wanted a swell name, and Peter had too much the savor of hard work in
it for my fine gentleman. But that isn’t all; I could let that pass,”
 continued the old man. “Pray have you seen his cards? Over the name of
Gaston de Gandelu is a count’s coronet. He a count indeed! the son of a
man who has carried a hod for years!”

“Young people will be young people,” Andre ventured to observe; but the
old man’s wrath would not be assuaged by a platitude like this.

“You can find no excuse for him, only the fellow is absolutely ashamed
of his father. He consorts with titled fools and is in the seventh
heaven if a waiter addresses him as ‘Count,’ not seeing that it is not
he that is treated with respect, but the gold pieces of his old father,
the working man.”

Andre’s position was now a most painful one, and he would have given a
good deal not to be the recipient of a confidence which was the result
of anger.

“He is only twenty, and yet see what a wreck he is,” resumed Gandelu.
“His eyes are dim, and he is getting bald; he stoops, and spends his
nights in drink and bad company. I have, however, only myself to blame,
for I have been far too lenient; and if he had asked me for my head, I
believe that I should have given it to him. He had only to ask and have.
After my wife’s death, I had only the boy. Do you know what he has in
this house? Why, rooms fit for a prince, two servants and four horses. I
allow him monthly, fifteen hundred francs, and he goes about calling
me a niggard, and has already squandered every bit of his poor mother’s
fortune.” He stopped, and turned pale, for at that moment the door
opened, and young Gaston, or rather Peter, slouched into the room.

“It is the common fate of fathers to be disappointed in their offspring,
and to see the sons who ought to have been their honor and glory the
scourge to punish their worldly aspirations,” exclaimed the old man.

“Good! that is really a very telling speech,” murmured Gaston
approvingly, “considering that you have not made a special study of
elocution.”

Fortunately his father did not catch these words, and continued in a
voice broken by emotion, “That, M. Andre, is my son, who for twenty
years has been my sole care. Well, believe it or not, as you like, he
has been speculating on my death, as you might speculate on a race-horse
at Vincennes.”

“No, no,” put in Gaston, but his father stopped him with a disdainful
gesture.

“Have at least the courage to acknowledge your fault. You thought me
blind because I said nothing, but your past conduct has opened my eyes.”

“But, father!”

“Do not attempt to deny it. This very morning my man of business, M.
Catenac, wrote to me, and with that real courage which only true
friends possess, told me all. I must tell you, M. Andre,” resumed the
contractor, “I was ill. I had a severe attack of the gout, such as a man
seldom recovers from, and my son was constant in his attendance at my
sick couch. This consoled me. ‘He loves me after all,’ said I. But it
was only my testamentary arrangements that he wanted to discover, and
he went straight to a money-lender called Clergot and raised a hundred
thousand francs assuring the blood-sucker that I had not many hours to
live.”

“It is a lie!” cried Gaston, his face crimsoning with shame.

The old man raised the leg of the chair in his hand, and made so
threatening a movement that Andre flung himself between father and son.
“Great heavens!” cried he, “think what you are doing, sir, and forbear.”

The old man paused, passed his hand round his brow, and flung the weapon
into a remote corner of the room. “I thank you,” said he, grasping
Andre’s hand; “you have saved me from a great crime. In another moment I
should have murdered him.”

Gaston was no coward, and he still retained the position he had been in
before.

“This is quite romantic,” muttered he. “The governor seems to be going
in for infanticide.”

Andre did not allow him to finish the sentence, for, grasping the young
man’s wrist, he whispered fiercely, “Not another word; silence!”

“But I want to know what it all means?” answered the irrepressible
youth.

“I had in my hands,” said the old man, addressing Andre, and ignoring
the presence of his son, “the important paper he had copied. Yes; not
more than an hour ago I read it. These were the terms: if I died within
eight days from the date of signature, my son agreed to pay a bonus of
thirty thousand francs; but if I lived for one month, he would take up
the bill by paying one hundred and fifty thousand. If, however, by any
unforeseen chance, I should recover entirely, he bound himself to pay
Clergot the hundred thousand francs.”

The old man tore the cravat from his swelling throat, and wiped the
beads of cold sweat that bedewed his brow.

“When this man recovers his self-command,” thought Andre, “he will never
forgive me for having been the involuntary listener to this terrible
tale.” But in this Andre was mistaken, for unsophisticated nature
requires sympathy, and Nichols Gandelu would have said the same to the
first comer.

“Before, however, delivering the hundred thousand francs, the usurer
wished to make himself more secure, and asked for a certificate from
some one who had seen me. This person was his friend. He spoke to me of
a medical man, a specialist, who would understand my case at once. Would
I not see him? Never had I seen my son so tender and affectionate. I
yielded to his entreaties at last, and one evening I said to him, ‘Bring
in this wonderful physician, if you really think he can do anything for
me,’ and he did bring him.

“Yes, M. Andre, he found a medical man base and vile enough to become
the tool of my son, and a money-lender; and if I choose, I can expose
him to the loathing of the world, and the contempt of his brethren.

“The fellow came, and his visit lasted nearly an hour. I can see him
now, asking questions and feeling my pulse. He went away at last, and my
son followed him. They both met Clergot, who was waiting in the street.
‘You can pay him the cash; the old man won’t last twenty-four hours
longer,’ said the doctor; and then my son came back happy and radiant,
and assured me that I should soon be well again. And strange as it may
seem, a change for the better took place that very night. Clergot had
asked for forty-eight hours in which to raise the sum required. He heard
of my convalescence, and my son lost the money.

“Was it courage you lacked?” asked the old man, turning for the first
time to his son. “Did you not know that ten drops instead of one of the
medicine I was taking would have freed you from me for ever?”

Gaston did not seem at all overwhelmed. Indeed, he was wondering how the
matter had reached his father’s ears, and how Catenac had discovered the
rough draft of the agreement.

The contractor had imagined that his son would implore forgiveness; but
seeing that he remained obdurate, his violence burst forth again. “And
do you know what use my son would make of my fortune? He would squander
it on a creature he picked up out of the streets,--a woman he called
Madame de Chantemille,--a fit companion for a noble count!”

The shaft had penetrated the impassability which Gaston had up to this
displayed. “You should not insult Zora,” said he.

“I shall not,” returned his father with a grim laugh, “take the trouble
to do that; you are not of age, and I shall clap your friend Madame de
Chantemille into prison.”

“You would not do that!”

“Would I not? You are a minor; but your Zora, whose real name is Rose,
is much older; the law is wholly on my side.”

“But father--”

“There is no use in crying; my lawyer has the matter in hand, and by
nightfall your Zora will be securely caged.”

This blow was so cruel and unexpected, that the young man could only
repeat,--

“Zora in prison!”

“Yes, in the House of Correction, and from thence to Saint Lazare.
Catenac told me the very things to be done.”

“Shameful!” exclaimed Gaston, “Zora in prison! Why, I and my friends
will lay siege to the place. I will go to the Court, stand by her side,
and depose that this all comes from your devilish malignity. I will say
that I love and esteem her, and that as soon as I am of age I will marry
her; the papers will write about us. Go on, go on; I rather like the
idea.”

However great a man’s self-control may be, it has its limits. M. Gandelu
had restrained himself even while he told his son of his villainous
conduct; but these revolting threats were more than he could endure,
and Andre seeing this, stepped forward, opened the door, and thrust the
foolish youth into the corridor.

“What have you done” cried the contractor; “do you not see that he will
go and warn that vile creature, and that she will escape from justice?”

And as Andre, fearing he knew not what, tried to restrain him, the old
man, exerting all his muscular strength, thrust him on one side with
perfect ease, and rushed from the room, calling loudly to his servants.

Andre was horrified at the scene at which, in spite of himself, he had
been compelled to assist as a witness. He was not a fool, and had lived
too much in the world of art not to have witnessed many strange scenes
and met with many dissolute characters; but, as a rule, the follies of
the world had amused rather than disgusted him. But this display of want
of feeling on the part of a son toward a father absolutely chilled his
blood. In a few minutes M. Gandelu appeared with a calmer expression
upon his face.

“I will tell you how matters now stand,” said he, in a voice that
quivered in spite of his efforts. “My son is locked up in his room,
and a trustworthy servant whom he cannot corrupt has mounted guard over
him.”

“Do you not fear, sir, that in his excitement and anger he may----?”

The contractor shrugged his shoulders.

“You do not know him,” answered he, “if you imagine that he resembles
me in any way. What do you think that he is doing now? Lying on his bed,
face downward, yelling for his Zora. Zora, indeed! As if that was a name
fit for a Christian. How is it that these creatures are enabled to drug
our boys and lead them anywhere? Had his mother not been a saint on
earth, I should scarcely believe that he was my son.”

The contractor sank into a chair and buried his face in his hands.

“You are in pain, sir?” said Andre.

“Yes; my heart is deeply wounded. Up to this time I have only felt as a
father; now I feel as a man. To-morrow I send for my family and consult
with them; and I shall advertise that for the future I will not be
responsible for any debts that my son may contract. He shall not have a
penny, and will soon learn how society treats a man with empty pockets.
As to the girl, she will disappear in double quick time. I have
thoroughly weighed the consequences of sending this girl to gaol, and
they are very terrible. My son will do as he has threatened, I am sure
of that; and I can picture him tied to that infamous creature for life,
looking into her face, and telling her that he adores her, and glorying
in his dishonor, which will be repeated by every Parisian newspaper.”

“But is there no other way of proceeding?” asked Andre.

“No, none whatever. If all modern fathers had my courage, we should not
have so many profligate sons. It is impossible that this conferring with
the doctor and the money-lender could have originated in my son’s weak
brain. He is a mere child, and some one must have put him up to it.”

The poor father was already seeking for some excuse for the son’s
conduct.

“I must not dwell on this longer,” continued Gandelu, “or I shall get as
mad as I was before. I will look at your plans another day. Now, let us
get out of the house. Come and look at the new building in the Champs
Elysees.”

The mansion in question was situated at the corner of the Rue de
Chantilly, near the Avenue des Champs Elysees, and the frontage of it
was still marked by scaffolding, so that but little of it could be
seen. A dozen workmen, engaged by Andre, were lounging about. They had
expected to see him early, and were surprised at his non-appearance,
as he was usually punctuality itself. Andre greeted them in a friendly
manner, but M. Gandelu, though he was always on friendly terms with his
workmen, passed by them as if he did not even notice their existence. He
walked through the different rooms and examined them carelessly, without
seeming to take any interest in them, for his thoughts were with his
son,--his only son.

After a short time he returned to Andre.

“I cannot stay longer,” said he; “I am not feeling well; I will be here
to-morrow;” and he went away with his head bent down on his chest.

The workmen noticed his strange and unusual manner.

“He does not look very bright,” remarked one to his comrade. “Since
his illness he has not been the same man. I think he must have had some
terrible shock.”



CHAPTER XXIV.

AN ARTFUL TRICK.

Andre had removed his coat and donned his blouse, the sleeves of which
were rolled up to his shoulders. “I must get to business,” murmured he,
“to make up for lost time.” He set to work with great vigor, but had
hardly got into the swing, when a lad came actively up the ladder and
told him that a gentleman wished to see him, “and a real swell, too,”
 added the boy. Andre was a good deal put out at being disturbed, but
when he reached the street and saw that it was M. de Breulh-Faverlay
who was waiting for him, his ill-humor disappeared like chaff before the
wind.

“Ah, this is really kind of you,” cried he; for he could never forget
the debt of gratitude he owed to the gentleman. “A thousand thanks for
remembering me. Excuse my not shaking hands, but see;” and he exhibited
his palms all white with plaster. As he did so the smile died away on
his lips, for he caught sight of his friend’s face.

“What is the matter?” exclaimed he, anxiously. “Is Sabine worse? Has she
had a relapse?”

De Breulh shook his head, but the expression of his face clearly said,--

“Would to heavens it were only that!”

But the news that Sabine was not worse relieved Andre at once, and he
patiently waited for his friend to explain.

“I have seen her twice for you,” answered De Breulh; “but it is
absolutely necessary that you should come to a prompt decision on an
important affair.”

“I am quite at your service,” returned Andre a good deal surprised and
troubled.

“Then come with me at once, I did not drive here, but we shall not be
more than a quarter of an hour in reaching my house.”

“I will follow you almost immediately. I only ask five minutes’ grace to
go up to the scaffold again.”

“Have you any orders to give?”

“No, I have none.”

“Why should you go, then?”

“To make myself a little more presentable.”

“Is it an annoyance or inconvenience for you to go out in that dress?”

“Not a bit, I am thoroughly used to it; but it was for your sake.”

“If that is all, come along.”

“But people will stare at seeing you in company with a common workman.”

“Let them stare.” And drawing Andre’s arm through his, M. de Breulh set
off.

Andre was right; many persons did turn round to look at the fashionably
dressed gentleman walking arm in arm with a mason in his working attire,
but De Breulh took but little heed, and to all Andre’s questions simply
said, “Wait till we reach my house.”

At length they arrived, without having exchanged twenty words, and
entering the library closed the door. M. de Breulh did not inflict
the torture of suspense upon his young friend a moment longer than was
necessary.

“This morning, about twelve o’clock, as I was crossing the Avenue de
Matignon, I saw Modeste, who had been waiting for you more than an
hour.”

“I could not help it.”

“I know that. As soon as she saw me, she ran up to me at once. She was
terribly disappointed at not having seen you; but knowing our intimacy,
she intrusted me with a letter for you from Mademoiselle de Mussidan.”

Andre shuddered; he felt that the note contained evil tidings, with
which De Breulh was already acquainted. “Give it to me,” said he, and
with trembling hands he tore open the letter and perused its contents.

“DEAREST ANDRE,--

“I love you, and shall ever continue to do so, but I have duties--most
holy ones--which I must fulfil; duties which my name and position demand
of me, even should the act cost me my life. We shall never meet again in
this world, and this letter is the last one you will ever receive from
me. Before long you will see the announcement of my marriage. Pity me,
for great as your wretchedness will be, it will be as nothing compared
to mine. Heaven have mercy upon us both! Andre, try and tear me out
of your heart. I have not even the right to die, and oh, my darling,
this--this is the last word you will ever receive from your poor unhappy

“SABINE.”


If M. de Breulh had insisted upon taking Andre home with him before he
handed him the letter, it was because Modeste had given him some inkling
of its contents. He feared that the effect would be tremendous upon
nerves so highly strung and sensitive as those of Andre. But he need
not have been alarmed on this point. As the young painter mastered the
contents of the letter his features became ghastly pale, and a shudder
convulsed every nerve and muscle of his frame. With a mechanical gesture
he extended the paper to M. de Breulh, uttering the one word, “Read.”

His friend obeyed him, more alarmed by Andre’s laconism than he could
have been by some sudden explosion of passion.

“Do not lose heart,” exclaimed he.

But Andre interrupted him. “Lose heart!” said he; “you do not know me.
When Sabine was ill, perhaps dying, far away from me, I did feel cast
down; but now that she tells me that she loves me, my feelings are of an
entirely different nature.”

M. de Breulh was about to speak, but Andre went on.

“What is this marriage contract which my poor Sabine announces to me, as
if it was her death-warrant? Her parents must all along have intended
to break with you, but you were beforehand with them. Can they have
received a more advantageous offer of marriage already? It is scarcely
likely. When she confided the secret of her life to you, she certainly
knew nothing of this. What terrible event has happened since then? My
brave Sabine would never have submitted unless some coercion had been
used that she could not struggle against; she would rather have quitted
her father’s house for ever.”

As Andre uttered these words De Breulh’s mind was busy with similar
reflections, for Modeste had given him some hint of the approaching
marriage, and had begged him to be most careful how he communicated the
facts to Andre.

“You must have noticed,” continued the young painter, “the strange
coincidence between Sabine’s illness and this note. You left her happy
and full of hope, and an hour afterward she falls senseless, as though
struck by lightning; as soon as she recovers a little she sends me this
terrible letter. Do you remember that Madame de Bois Arden told us that
during Sabine’s illness her father and mother never left her bedside?
Was not this for fear lest some guilty secret of theirs might escape her
lips in a crisis of delirium?”

“Yes, I remember that, and I have long had reason to imagine that there
is some terrible family secret in the Mussidans’ family, such as we too
often find among the descendants of noble houses.”

“What can it be?”

“That I have no means of ascertaining, but that there is one I am sure.”

Andre turned away and paced rapidly up and down the room. “Yes,” said
he, suddenly, “there is a mystery; but you and I will leave no stone
unturned until we penetrate it.” He drew a chair close to the side
of his friend, who was reclining on a couch. “Listen,” said he, “and
correct me if you fancy that I am not right in what I am saying. Do you
believe that the most terrible necessity alone has compelled Sabine to
write this letter?”

“Most certainly.”

“Both the Count and Countess were willing to accept you as their
son-in-law?”

“Exactly so.”

“Could M. de Mussidan have found a more brilliant match for his
daughter, one who could unite so many advantages of experience and
education to so enormous a fortune?”

De Breulh could hardly repress a smile.

“I am not wishing to pay you a compliment,” said Andre impatiently.
“Reply to my question.”

“Very well then, I admit that according to the opinion of the world, I
was a most eligible suitor, and that M. de Mussidan would find it hard
to replace me.”

“Then tell me how it comes about that neither the Count nor the Countess
has made any effort to prevent this rupture?”

“Their pride, perhaps, has been wounded.”

“Not so, for Modeste tells us that on the very day you sent the letter
the Count was going to call on you to break off the engagement.”

“Yes, that is so, if we are to believe Modeste.”

As if to give more emphasis to his words, Andre started to his feet.
“This,” cried he, “this man, who has so suddenly appeared upon the
scene, will marry Sabine, not only against her own will, but against
that of her parents, and for what reason? Who is this man, and what is
the mysterious power that he possesses? His power is too great to spring
from an honorable source. Sabine is sacrificing herself to this man for
some reason or other, and he, like a dastardly cur, is ready to take
advantage of the nobleness of her heart.”

“I admit the correctness of your supposition,” said he; “and now, how do
you propose to act?”

“I shall do nothing as yet,” answered the young man, with a fierce gleam
in his eyes. “Sabine asks me to tear her from my heart. I will affect
to do so for the time. Modeste believes in me, and will help me. I have
patience. The villain who has wrecked my life does not know me, and
I will only reveal myself upon the day that I hold him helpless in my
hand.”

“Take care, Andre,” urged De Breulh; “a false step would ruin your hopes
for ever.”

“I will make none; as soon as I have this man’s name, I will insult him;
there will be a duel, and I shall kill him--or he me.”

“A duel will be the height of madness, and would ruin all your hopes of
marriage with Sabine.”

“The only thing that holds me back is that I do not wish that there
should be a corpse between Sabine and myself. Blood on a bridal dress,
they say, brings misery; and if this man is what I suspect him to be, I
should be doing him too much honor if I crossed swords with him. No, I
must have a deeper vengeance than this, for I can never forget that he
nearly caused Sabine’s death.”

He paused for a few seconds, and once again broke the silence which
reigned in the room.

“To abuse the power that he must possess shows what a miserable wretch
he must be; and men do not attain such a height of infamy by a single
bound. The course of his life must be full of similar crimes, growing
deeper and deadlier as he moves on. I will make it my business to unmask
him and to hold him up to the scorn and contempt of his fellow-men.”

“Yes; that is the plan to pursue.”

“And we will do so, sir. Ah! heaven help me! I say ‘we,’ for I have
relied on you. The generous offer that you made to me I refused, and I
was in the right in doing so; but I should now be a mere madman if I
did not entreat you to grant me your aid and advice. We have both known
hardship and are capable of going without food or sleep, if necessity
requires it of us. We have both graduated in the school of poverty and
sorrow. We can keep our plans to ourselves and act.”

Andre paused, as if waiting for a reply, but his friend remained silent.

“My plan is most simple,” resumed the young painter. “As soon as we know
the fellow’s name we shall be able to act. He will never suspect us,
and we can follow him like his very shadow. There are professional
detectives who, for a comparatively small sum, will lay bare a man’s
entire life. Are we not as clever as this fine fellow? We can work well
together in our different circles; you, in the world of fashion, can
pick up intelligence that I could not hope to gain; while I, from my
lowly position, will study the hidden side of his life, for I can
talk to the servants lounging at the front doors or the grooms at the
public-houses without suspicion.”

M. de Breulh was delighted at finding that he could have some occupation
which would fill up the dreary monotony of his life.

“I am yours!” cried he; “and will work with you heart and soul!”

Before the artist could reply a loud blow was struck upon the library
door, and a woman’s voice exclaimed,--

“Let me in, Gontran, at once.”

“It is Madame de Bois Arden,” remarked De Breulh, drawing the bolt back;
and the Viscountess rushed hastily into the room and threw herself into
a low chair.

Her beautiful face was bedewed with tears, and she was in a terrible
state of excitement.

“What is the matter, Clotilde?” asked De Breulh kindly, as he took her
hand.

“Something terrible,” answered she with a sob; “but you may be able to
help me. Can you lend me twenty thousand francs?”

De Breulh smiled; a heavy weight had been lifted from his heart.

“If that is all you require, do not shed any more tears.”

“But I want them at once.”

“Can you give me half an hour?”

“Yes; but lose no time.”

De Breulh drew a check and despatched his valet for the money.

“A thousand thanks!” said the Viscountess; “but money is not all that I
require, I want your advice.”

Andre was about to leave the cousins together, but the lady stopped him.

“Pray remain, M. Andre,” said she; “you are not at all in the way;
besides, I shall have to speak of some one in whom you take a very deep
interest--of Mademoiselle de Mussidan, in short.

“I never knew such a strange occurrence,” continued the Viscountess,
recovering her spirits rapidly, “as that to which, my dear Gontran,
you owe my visit. Well, I was just going up to dress, for I had been
detained by visitor after visitor, when at two o’clock another came
before I could give my order, ‘Not at home.’ This was the Marquis de
Croisenois, the brother of the man who twenty years ago disappeared in
so mysterious a manner. I hardly knew him at all, though of course we
have met in society, and he bows to me in the Bois, but that is all.”

“And yet he called on you to-day?” remarked De Breulh.

“Don’t interrupt me,” said the Viscountess. “Yes, he called, and that
is enough. He is good-looking, faultlessly dressed, and talks well. He
brought a letter from an old friend of my grandmother’s, the Marchioness
d’Arlanges. She is a dear old thing, she uses awful language, and some
of her stories are quite too--you know what I mean. In the letter the
old lady said that the Marquis was one of her friends, and begged me for
her sake to do him the service he required. Of course I asked him to be
seated, and assured him that I would do anything that lay in my power.
Then he began talking about M. de Clinchain, and told me a funny story
about that eccentric man and a little actress, when I heard a great
noise in the anteroom. I was about to ring and inquire the cause, when
the door flew open and in came Van Klopen, the ladies’ tailor, with a
very inflamed countenance. I thought that he had come in a hurry because
he had hit on something extremely fetching and wished me to be the first
to see it. But do you know what the impudent fellow wanted?”

A smile shone in De Breulh’s eyes, as he answered,--

“Money, perhaps!”

“You are right,” returned the Viscountess, gravely; “he brought my bill
into my very drawing-room, and handed it in before a stranger. I never
thought that a man who supplies the most aristocratic portion of society
could have been guilty of such a piece of impertinence. I ordered him
to leave the room, taking it for granted that he would do so with an
apology, but I was wrong. He flew into a rage and threatened me, and
swore that if I did not settle the bill on the spot, he would go to my
husband. The bill was nearly twenty thousand francs; imagine my horror!
I was so thunderstruck at the amount that I absolutely entreated him to
give me time. But my humility added to his annoyance, and taking a seat
in an armchair, he declared that he would not move from it until he
received his money, or had seen my husband.”

“What was Croisenois doing all this time?” asked M. de Breulh.

“He did nothing at first, but at this last piece of audacity he took
out his pocketbook, and throwing it in Van Klopen’s face, said: ‘Pay
yourself, you insolent scoundrel, and get out of this.’”

“And the tailor went off?”

“No. ‘I must give you a receipt,’ said he, and taking writing materials
from his pocket, he wrote at the foot of the bill, ‘Received from the
Marquis de Croisenois, on account of money owing by the Viscountess de
Bois Arden, the sum of twenty thousand francs.’”

“Well,” said De Breulh, looking very grave, “and after Van Klopen’s
departure, I suppose Croisenois remained to ask the favor regarding
which he had called?”

“You are mistaken,” answered his cousin. “I had great difficulty in
making him speak; but at last he confessed that he was deeply in love
with Mademoiselle de Mussidan, and entreated me to present him to her
parents and exert all my influence in his behalf.”

Both the young men started.

“That is the man!” cried they.

“What do you mean?” asked the Viscountess, looking from one to the
other.

“That your Marquis de Croisenois is a despicable scoundrel, who had
imposed upon the Marchioness d’Arlanges. Just you listen to our reasons
for coming to this conclusion.” And with the most perfect clearness De
Breulh had the whole state of the case before the Viscountess.

The lady listened attentively, and then said,--

“Your premises are wrong; just let me say a word on the matter. You say
that there is some man who by means of the influence that he exercises
over the Count and Countess, can coerce them into granting him Sabine’s
hand. But, my dear Gontran, an utter stranger to the family could not
exercise this power. Now M. de Croisenois has never entered the doors of
the house, and came to me to ask for an introduction.”

The justness of this remark silenced De Breulh, but Andre took another
view of the matter.

“This seems all right at a first glance, but still, after the
extraordinary scene that the Viscountess has described, I should like to
ask a few questions. Was not Van Klopen’s behavior very unexpected?”

“It was brutal and infamous.”

“Are you not one of his best customers?”

“I am, and I have spent an enormous sum with him.”

“But Van Klopen is nasty sometimes; did he not sue Mademoiselle de
Riversac?” asked De Breulh.

“But he did not, I expect, force his way into her drawing-room and
behave outrageously before a perfect stranger. Do you know M. de
Croisenois?” returned Andre.

“Very slightly; he is of good family, and his brother George was much
esteemed by all who knew him.”

“Has he plenty of money?”

“I do not think so, but in time he will inherit a large fortune; very
likely he is over head and ears in debt.”

“And yet he had twenty thousand francs in his pocketbook; is not that
rather a large sum to carry when you are simply making a morning call?
and it is curious, too, that it should have been the exact sum wanted.
Then there is another point; the pocketbook was hurled into Van Klopen’s
face. Did he submit without a word to such treatment?”

“He certainly said nothing,” replied Madame de Bois Arden.

“One question more, if you please. Did Van Klopen open the book and
count the notes before he gave the receipt?”

The Viscountess thought for a moment.

“I was a good deal excited,” said she at length, “but I am almost sure
that I saw no notes in Van Klopen’s hands.”

Andre’s face grew radiant.

“Good, very good; he was told to pay himself, and yet he never looked
to see if the money was there, but gave a receipt at once. Of course, as
Van Klopen kept the pocketbook, the Marquis could have had nothing in it
besides the exact sum that was required.”

“It does seem odd,” muttered De Breulh.

“But,” said Andre, “your bill was not exactly twenty thousand francs,
was it?”

“No,” answered the Viscountess. “I ought to have had change to the
amount of a hundred or a hundred and twenty francs, but I suppose he was
too much excited to give it me.”

“But for all that he could remember that he had writing materials with
him, and gave you a receipt?”

The Viscountess was utterly bewildered.

“And,” continued Andre, “how is it that Van Klopen knew De Croisenois’
name? And now, lastly, where is the receipt?”

Madame de Bois Arden turned very pale and trembled violently.

“Ah,” said she, “I felt sure that something was going to happen, and it
was on this very point that I wanted your advice. Well, I have not got
the receipt. M. de Croisenois crumpled it up in his hand and threw it
on the table. After a while, however, he took it up and put it in his
pocket.”

“It is all perfectly clear,” said Andre in jubilant tones; “M. de
Croisenois had need of your aid, he saw that he could not easily obtain
it, and so sought to bind you by the means of a loan made to you at a
time of great need.”

“You are right,” said De Breulh.

The Viscountess’ giddy mode of action had brought her into many scrapes,
but never into so terrible a one as this.

“Great heavens!” cried she, “what do you think that M. de Croisenois
will do with this receipt?”

“He will do nothing,” answered M. de Breulh, “if you do everything to
advance his suit; but pause for an instant, and he will show the hand of
steel which has up to now been covered by the velvet glove.”

“I am not alarmed at a new slander?” returned the Viscountess.

“And why not?” answered De Breulh. “You know very well that in these
days of lavish expenditure and unbridled luxury there are many women
in society who are so basely vile that they ruin their lovers with
as little compunction as their frailer sisters. To-morrow even De
Croisenois may say at the club, ‘On my word that little Bois Arden costs
me a tremendous lot,’ and hands about this receipt for twenty thousand
francs. What do you imagine that people will think then?”

“The world knows me too well to think so ill of me.”

“No, no, Clotilde, there is no charity in society; they will simply
say that you are his mistress, and finding that the allowance from your
husband is not enough for your needs, you are ruining your lover. There
will be a significant laugh among the members, and in time, a very short
time, the scandal in a highly sensational form will come to the ears of
your husband.”

The Viscountess wrung her hands.

“It is too horrible,” wailed she. “And do you know that Bois Arden would
put the worst construction on the whole affair, for he declares that a
woman will sacrifice anything in order to outshine her sex in dress. Ah,
I will never run up another bill anywhere; tell me, Gontran, what I had
better do. Can you not get the receipt from De Croisenois?”

M. de Breulh paused for a moment and then replied, “Of course I could do
so, but such a step would be very damaging to your reputation. I have no
proof; and if I went to him, he would deny everything of course, and it
would make him your enemy for life.”

“Besides,” added Andre, “you would put him on his guard, and he would
escape us.”

The unhappy woman glanced from one to the other in utter despair.

“Then I am lost,” she exclaimed. “Am I to remain for the rest of my days
in this villain’s power?”

“Not so,” returned Andre, “for I hope soon to put it out of M. de
Croisenois’ power to injure any one. What did he say when he asked you
to introduce him to the Mussidans?”

“Nothing pointed.”

“Then, madame, do not disturb yourself to-night. So long as he hopes you
will be useful, so long he will stay his hand. Do as he wishes; never
allude to the receipt; introduce him and speak well of him, while I,
aided by M. de Breulh, will do my utmost to unmask this scoundrel; and
as long as he believes himself to be in perfect security, our task will
be an easy one.”

Just then the servant returned from the bank, and as soon as the man had
left the room De Breulh took the notes and placed them in his cousin’s
hand.

“Here is the money for De Croisenois,” said he. “Take my advice, and
give it to him this evening with a polite letter of thanks.”

“A thousand thanks, Gontran; I will act as you advise.”

“Remember you must not allude in your letter to his introduction to the
Mussidans. What do you think, Andre?”

“I think a receipt for the money would be a great thing,” answered he.

“But such a demand would arouse his suspicions.”

“I think not, madame, and I see a way of doing it; have you a maid upon
whom you could rely?”

“Yes, I have one.”

“Good, then give the girl a letter and the notes done up in a separate
parcel, and tell her exactly what she is to do. When she sees the
Marquis, let her pretend to be alarmed at the great responsibility that
she is incurring in carrying this large sum, and insist upon a receipt
for her own protection.”

“There is sound sense in that,” said De Breulh.

“Yes, yes,” said the Viscountess, “Josephine will do--as sharp a girl as
you could find in a day’s journey--and will manage the thing admirably.
Trust to me,” she continued, as a smile of hope spread over her face;
“I will keep De Croisenois in a good humor; he will confide in me, and
I will tell you everything. But, oh dear! what shall I do without Van
Klopen? Why, there is not another man in Paris fit to stand in his
shoes.”

With these words the Viscountess rose to leave.

“I am completely worn out,” remarked she; “and I have a dinner-party
to-night. Good-bye then, until we meet again;” and with her spirits
evidently as joyous as ever, she tripped into her carriage.

“Now,” said Andre, as soon as they were once more alone, “we are on
the track of De Croisenois. He evidently holds Madame de Mussidan as he
holds Madame de Bois Arden. His is a really honorable mode of action; he
surprises a secret, and then turns extortioner.”



CHAPTER XXV.

A NEW SKIN.

Dr. Hortebise’s private arrangements were sadly upset by his being
compelled to accede to the desire of Tantaine and Mascarin, and in
granting hospitality to Paul Violaine; and in spite of the brilliant
visions of the future, he often devoutly wished that Mascarin and his
young friend were at the other side of the world; but for all that
he never thought of attempting to evade the order he had received. He
therefore set himself steadily to his task, endeavoring to form Paul’s
mind, blunt his conscience, and prepare him for the inevitable part that
he would soon have to play.

Paul found in him a most affable companion, pleasant, witty, and gifted
with great conversational powers. Five days were thus spent breakfasting
at well-known restaurants, driving in the Bois, and dining at clubs of
which the doctor was a member, while the evenings were passed at the
banker’s. The doctor played cards with his host, while Paul and
Flavia conversed together in low whispers, or else hung over the piano
together. But every kind of agreeable existence comes to an end, and one
day Daddy Tantaine entered the room, his face radiant with delight.

“I have secured you the sweetest little nest in the world,” cried he
merrily. “It is not so fine as this, but more in accordance with your
position.”

“Where is it?” asked Paul.

Tantaine waited. “You won’t wear out much shoe leather,” said he,
“in walking to a certain banker’s, for your lodgings are close to his
house.”

That Tantaine had a splendid talent for arrangement Paul realized
as soon as he entered his new place of abode, which was in the Rue
Montmartre, and consisted of some neat, quiet rooms, just such as an
artist who had conquered his first difficulties would inhabit. The
apartments were on the third floor, and comprised a tiny entrance hall,
sitting-room, bed and dressing room. A piano stood near the window in
the sitting-room. The furniture and curtains were tasteful and in good
order, but nothing was new. One thing surprised Paul very much; he had
been told that the apartments had been taken and furnished three days
ago, and yet it seemed as if they had been inhabited for years, and that
the owner had merely stepped out a few minutes before. The unmade
bed, and the half-burnt candles in the sleeping-room added to this
impression, while on the rug lay a pair of worn slippers. The fire had
not gone out entirely, and a half-smoked cigar lay on the mantelpiece.

On the table in the sitting-room was a sheet of music paper, with a few
bars jotted down upon it. Paul felt so convinced that he was in another
person’s rooms, that he could not help exclaiming, “But surely some one
has been living in these chambers.”

“We are in your own home, my dear boy,” said Tantaine.

“But you took over everything, I suppose, and the original proprietor
simply walked out?”

Tantaine smiled, as though an unequivocal compliment had been paid him.

“Why, do you not know your own home?” asked he; “you have been living
here for the last twelve months.”

“I can’t understand you,” answered Paul, opening his eyes in
astonishment; “you must be jesting.”

“I am entirely in earnest; for more than a year you have been
established here. If you want a proof of the correctness of my
assertion, call up the porter.” He ran to the head of the staircase and
called out, “Come up, Mother Brigaut.”

In a few moments a stout old woman came panting into the room.

“And how are you, Mother Brigaut?” said Tantaine gayly. “I have a word
or two to say to you. You know that gentleman, do you not?”

“What a question? as if I did not know one of the gentlemen lodging
here?”

“What is his name?”

“M. Paul.”

“What, plain M. Paul, and nothing else?”

“Well, sir, it is not his fault if he did not know his father or
mother.”

“What does he do?”

“He is a musician; he gives lessons on the piano, and composes music.”

“Does he do a good business?”

“I can’t say, sir, but I should guess about two or three hundred francs
a month; and he makes that do, for he is economical and quiet, and as
modest as a young girl.”

Tantaine’s face shone all over with satisfaction.

“You must have known M. Paul for some time, as you seem so thoroughly
acquainted with his habits?” said he.

“Well, I ought to, for he has been here nearly fifteen months, and all
that time I have looked after his room.”

“Do you know where he lived before he came here?”

“Of course I do, for I went to inquire about him in the Rue Jacob. The
people there were quite cut up at his leaving, but you see this was more
handy for the music publisher in the Rue Richelieu, for whom he works.”

“Good, Mother Brigaut; that will do; you can leave us now.”

As Paul listened to this brief conversation, he wondered if he was awake
or asleep. Tantaine stood at the door and watched the woman down stairs;
then he closed it carefully, and coming up to Paul, said,--

“Well, what do you think of all this?”

At first Paul was so astounded that he could hardly find words in which
to express himself; but he remembered the words that Dr. Hortebise had
so often dinned into his ears during the last five days,--

“Let nothing astonish you.”

“I suppose,” said he at last, “that you had taught this old woman her
lesson beforehand.”

“Merciful powers!” exclaimed Tantaine in tones of extreme disgust. “If
these are all the ideas you have gained from what you have heard, our
task will not be by any means an easy one.”

Paul was wounded by Tantaine’s contemptuous manner.

“I understand well enough, sir,” answered he sulkily, “that this is
merely a prologue to a romantic drama.”

“You are right, my lad,” cried he, in a more satisfied voice; “and it is
one that is quite indispensable. The plot of the drama will be revealed
to you later on, and also the reward you will receive if you play your
part well.”

“But why cannot you tell me everything now?”

Tantaine shook his head.

“Have patience, you rash boy!” said he. “Rome was not built in a day. Be
guided by me, and follow blindly the orders of those interested in you.
This is your first lesson; think it over seriously.”

“My first lesson! What do you mean?”

“Call it a rehearsal if you like. All that the good woman told you,”
 continued Tantaine, “you must look upon as true; nay, it is true, and
when you believe this thoroughly, you are quite prepared for the fray,
but until then you must remain quiescent. Remember this, you cannot
impress others unless you firmly believe yourself. The greatest
impostors of all ages have ever been their own dupes.”

At the word impostor, Paul seemed about to speak, but a wave of
Tantaine’s hand silenced him.

“You must cast aside your old skin, and enter that of another. Paul
Violaine, the natural son of a woman who kept a small drapery shop at
Poitiers, Paul Violaine, the youthful lover of Rose, no longer exists.
He died of cold and hunger in a garret in the Hotel de Perou, as M. de
Loupins will testify when necessary.”

The tone in which Tantaine spoke showed his intense earnestness, and
with emphatic gestures he drove each successive idea into Paul’s brain.

“You will rid yourself of your former recollections as you do of an old
coat, which you throw aside, and forget the very existence of. And not
only that, but you must lose your memory, and that so entirely, that if
any one in the street calls out Violaine, you will never even dream of
turning round.”

Paul’s brain seemed to tremble beneath the crime that his companion was
teaching him.

“Who am I then?” asked he.

A sardonic smile crossed Tantaine’s face.

“You are just what the portress told you, Paul, and nothing more. Your
first recollections are of a Foundling Hospital, and you never knew your
parents. You have lived here fifteen months, and before that you resided
in the Rue Jacob. The portress knows no more; but if you will come with
me to the Rue Jacob, the people there can tell you more about your life
when you were a lodger in the house. Perhaps, if you are careful, we may
take you back to your more childish days, and even find you a father.”

“But,” said Paul, “I might be questioned regarding my past life: what
then? M. Rigal or Mademoiselle Flavia might interrogate me at any
moment?”

“I see; but do not disquiet yourself. You will be furnished with all
necessary papers, so that you can account for all your life during the
twenty-five years you spent in this world.”

“Then I presume that the person into whose shoes I have crept was a
composer and a musician like myself?”

Again Tantaine’s patience gave way, and it was with an oath that he
exclaimed,--

“Are you acting the part of a fool, or are you one in reality? No one
has ever been here except you. Did you not hear what the old woman said?
She told you that you are a musician, a self-made one, and while waiting
until your talents are appreciated, you give lessons in music.”

“And to whom do I _give_ them?”

Tantaine took three visiting cards from a china ornament on the
mantelshelf.

“Here are three pupils of yours,” said he, “who can pay you one hundred
francs per month for two lessons a week, and two of them will assure you
that you have taught them for some time. The third, Madame Grandorge, a
widow, will vow that she owes all her success, which is very great, to
your lessons. You will go and give these pupils their lessons at the
hours noted on their cards, and you will be received as if you had often
been to the house before; and remember to be perfectly at your ease.”

“I will do my best to follow your instructions.”

“One last piece of information. In addition to your lessons, you are in
the habit of copying for certain wealthy amateurs the fragments of old
and almost obsolete operas, and on the piano lies the work that you
are engaged on for the Marquis de Croisenois, a charming composition
by Valserra. You see,” continued Tantaine, taking Paul by the arm, and
showing him round the room, “that nothing has been forgotten, and that
you have lived here for years past. You have always been a steady young
man, and have saved up a little money. In this drawer you will find
eight certificates of scrip from the Bank of France.”

Paul would have put many more questions, but the visitor was already on
the threshold, and only paused to add these words,--

“I will call here to-morrow with Dr. Hortebise.” Then, with a strange
smile playing on his lips, he added, as Mascarin had before, “You will
be a duke yet.”

The old portress was waiting for Tantaine, and as soon as she saw him
coming down the stairs immersed in deep thought, out she ran toward him
with as much alacrity as her corpulency would admit.

“Did I do it all right?” asked she.

“Hush!” answered he, pushing her quickly into her lodge, the door of
which stood open. “Hush! are you mad or drunk, to talk like this, when
you do not know who is listening?”

“I hope you were pleased with my success,” continued the woman, aghast
at his sudden anger.

“You did well--very well; you piled up the evidence perfectly. I shall
have an excellent report to make of you to M. Mascarin.”

“I am so glad; and now my husband and I are quite safe?”

The old man shook his head with an air of doubt.

“Well, I can hardly say that yet; the master’s arm is long and strong;
but you have numerous enemies. All the servants in the house hate you,
and would be glad to see you come to grief.”

“Is that really so, sir? How can that be, for both I and my husband have
been very kind to all of them?”

“Yes, perhaps you have been lately, but how about the times before? You
and your husband both acted very foolishly. Article 386 cannot be got
now, and two women can swear that they saw you and your husband, with a
bunch of keys in your hand, on the second floor.”

The fat woman’s face turned a sickly yellow, she clasped her hands, and
whined in tones of piteous entreaty,--

“Don’t speak so loud, sir, I beg of you.”

“You made a terrible mistake in not coming to my master earlier, for
there had been then so much talk that the matter had reached the ears of
the police.”

“But for all that, if M. Mascarin pleased----”

“He does please, my good woman, and is quite willing to serve you. I am
sure that he will manage to break the inquiry; or if it must go on, he
has several witnesses who will depose in your favor; but, you know, he
gives nothing for nothing, and must have implicit obedience.”

“Good, kind man that he is, my husband and I would go through fire and
water for him, while my daughter, Euphenice, would do anything in the
world for him.”

Tantaine recoiled uneasily, for the old woman’s gratitude was so
demonstrative that he feared she was about to embrace him.

“All you have to do is to stick firmly to what you have said about
Paul,” continued he, when he found himself at a safe distance; “and if
ever you breathe a word of what you have been doing, he will hand you
over to the law, and then take care of Article 386.”

It was evident that this portion of the Code, that had reference to the
robbery of masters by servants, struck terror into the woman’s soul.

“If I stood on the scaffold,” said she, “I would tell the story about M.
Paul exactly as I have been taught.”

Her tone was so sincere, that Tantaine addressed her in a kindlier
voice.

“Stick to that,” said he, “and I can say to you, ‘Hope.’ Upon the day on
which the young man’s business is settled you will get a paper from me,
which will prove your complete innocence, and enable you to say, ‘I have
been grossly maligned.’”

“May the dear young man’s business be settled sharp,” said she.

“It will not be long before it is so; but, remember, in the meantime you
must keep an eye upon him.”

“I will do so.”

“And, remember, report to me whoever comes to see him, no matter who it
may be.”

“Not a soul can go upstairs without my seeing or hearing him.”

“Well, if any one, save the master, Dr. Hortebise, or myself comes, do
not lose a moment, but come and report.”

“You shall know in five minutes.”

“I wonder if that is all I have to say?” mused Tantaine. “Ah! I
remember: note exactly the hour at which this young man comes and goes.
Do not have any conversation with him; answer all questions he addresses
you with a simple ‘Yes,’ or ‘No,’ and, as I said before, watch his every
movement.”

And Tantaine turned to go away, paying no attention to the woman’s eager
protestations.

“Keep a strict watch,” were his last words, “and, above all, see that
the lad gets into no scrape.”

In Tantaine’s presence Paul had endeavored to assume an air of bravado,
but as soon as he was left alone he was seized with such mortal terror,
that he sank in a half fainting condition into an easy-chair. He felt
that he was not going to put on a disguise for a brief period, but for
life, and that now, though he rose in life, wealth, title, even a
wife would all have been obtained by a shameful and skilfully planned
deception, and this deception he must keep up until the day of his
death. He shuddered as he recalled Tantaine’s words, “Paul Violaine is
dead.” He recalled the incidents in the life of the escaped galley-slave
Coignard, who, under the name of Pontis de St. Helene, absolutely
assumed the rank of a general officer, and took command of a domain.
Coignard was recognized and betrayed by an old fellow-prisoner, and
this was exactly the risk that Paul knew he must run, for any of his old
companions might recognize and denounce him. Had he on such an occasion
sufficient presence of mind to turn laughingly to his accuser, and say,
“Really, my good fellow, you are in error, for I never set eyes on you
before?”

He felt that he could not do it, and had he any means of existence, he
would have solved the difficulty by taking to flight. But he knew that
men like Mascarin, Hortebise, and Tantaine were not easily eluded,
and his heart sank within him as he remembered the various crumbs of
information that each of these men had dropped before him. To agree to
their sordid proposals, and to remain in the position in which he was,
was certainly to incur a risk, but it was one that was a long way off,
and might never eventually come to pass; while to change his mind would
be as sure to bring down swift and condign punishment upon his head; and
the weak young man naturally chose the more remote contingency, and with
this determination the last qualms of his conscience expired.

The first night he slept badly in his new abode, for it seemed to him as
if the spectre of the man whose place he was to usurp was hovering
over his couch. But with the dawn of day, and especially when the hour
arrived for him to go out and give his lessons, he felt his courage
return to him, though rashness perhaps would be the more correct word.
And with a mien of perfect confidence he repaired to the house of
Mademoiselle Grandorge, the oldest of his pupils. Impelled by the same
feeling of curiosity as to how Paul would comport himself, both Dr.
Hortebise and Father Tantaine had been hanging about the Rue Montmartre,
and taking advantage of a heavy dray that was passing, caught a good
glimpse of the young man.

“Aha,” chuckled Tantaine, delighted at seeing Paul look so brisk and
joyous, “our young cock is in full feather; last night he was decidedly
rather nervous.”

“Yes,” answered the doctor, “he is on the right road, and I think that
we shall have no further trouble with him.”

They then thought it would be as well to see Mother Brigaut, and were
received by the old woman with slavish deference.

“No one has been near the dear young gentleman,” said she, in reply to
their questions. “Last night he came down about seven o’clock, and asked
where the nearest eating-house was. I directed him to Du Val’s, and he
was back by eight, and by eleven I saw that he had put out his light.”

“How about to-day?”

“I went up stairs at nine, and he had just finished dressing. He told
me to get his breakfast ready, which I did. He ate well, and I said to
myself, ‘Good; the bird is getting used to its cage.’”

“And then?”

“Then he commenced singing like a very bird, the dear fellow. His voice
is as sweet as his face; any woman would fall in love with him. I’m
precious glad that my girl, Euphenice is nowhere near.”

“And after that he went out?” continued Tantaine. “Did he say how long
he would be away?”

“Only to give his lessons. I suppose he expected that you would call.”

“Very good,” remarked the old man; then, addressing Dr. Hortebise, he
said, “Perhaps, sir, you are going to the Registry Office?”

“Yes; I want to see Mascarin.”

“He is not there; but if you want to see him on any special matter, you
had better come to our young friend’s apartment, and await his arrival.”

“Very well, I will do so,” answered the doctor.

Hortebise was much more impressed than Paul with the skill of the hand
which had imparted such a look of long occupation to the rooms.

“On my word, the quiet simplicity of these rooms would induce any father
to give his daughter to this young fellow.”

The old man’s silence surprised him, and turning sharply round, he was
struck by the gloomy look upon his features.

“What is the matter?” asked Hortebise, with some anxiety. “What is
troubling you?”

Tantaine had thrown himself into a chair, and for a moment made no
reply; then, springing to his feet, he gave the expiring embers a
furious kick, and faced the doctor with folded arms.

“I see much trouble before us,” said he at last.

The doctor’s face grew as gloomy as that of his companion.

“Is it Perpignan who interferes?” asked he.

“No, Perpignan is only a fool; but he will do what I tell him.”

“Then I really do not see--”

“Do not see,” exclaimed Tantaine; “but luckily for us all, I am not so
blind. Have you forgotten this marriage of De Croisenois? There lies the
danger. All had gone so smoothly, every combination had been arranged,
and every difficulty foreseen, and now----”

“Well, you had made too sure, that was all; and you were unprepared for
the slightest check.”

“Not so, but I had made no attempt to guard against the impossible.”

“Of course, there are limits to all human intelligence, but pray explain
yourself.”

“This is it, then, doctor. The most adroit energy could never have
put in our way such an obstacle as now threatens us. Have you in
your experience of society ever come across a wealthy heiress who
is indifferent to all the allurements of luxury, and is capable of
disinterested love?”

The doctor smiled an expressive denial.

“But such an heiress does exist,” said Tantaine, “and her name is Sabine
de Mussidan. She loves--and whom do you think?--why a mere painter, who
has crossed my path three times already. He is full, too, of energy and
perseverance, and for these qualities I have never met his equal.”

“What, a man without friends, money, or position, what can--”

A rapid gesture of Tantaine’s checked his companion’s speech.

“Unfortunately he is not without friends,” remarked the genial Tantaine.
“He has one friend at least; can you guess who it is? No less
a personage than the man who was to have married Sabine, M. de
Breulh-Faverlay.”

At this unexpected news Hortebise remained silent and aghast.

“How on earth those two met I cannot imagine. It must have been Sabine
that brought them together, but the facts remain the same. They are
close friends anyhow. And these two men have in their interests the very
woman that I had selected to push De Croisenois’ suit.”

“Is it possible?”

“That is my present belief. At any rate, these three had a long
interview last night, and doubtless came to a decision hostile to the
interests of the Marquis.”

“What do you mean?” asked Hortebise, his lips tightly compressed with
anxiety. “Do you mean that they are aware of the manner by which De
Croisenois hopes to succeed?”

“Look here?” answered Tantaine. “A general, on the eve of a battle,
takes every precaution, but among his subordinates there are always
fools, if not traitors. I had arranged a pretty little scene between
Croisenois and Van Klopen, by which the Viscountess would be securely
trapped. Unfortunately, though the rehearsal was excellent, the
representation was simply idiotic. Neither of the actors took the least
trouble to enter into the spirit of his part. I had arranged a scene
full of delicacy and _finesse_, and they simply made a low, coarse
exhibition of it and themselves. Fools! they thought it was the easiest
thing in the world to deceive a woman; and finally the Marquis, to whom
I had recommended the most perfect discretion, opened fire, and actually
spoke of Sabine and his desire to press his suit. The Viscountess found,
with a woman’s keen perceptions, that there was something arranged
between Van Klopen and her visitor, and hurried off to her cousin, M. de
Breulh-Faverlay for advice and assistance.”

The doctor listened to this recital, pallid and trembling.

“Who told you all this?” gasped he.

“No one; I discovered it; and it was easy to do so. When we have a
result, it is easy to trace it back to the cause. Yes, this is what took
place.”

“Why don’t you say at once that the whole scheme is knocked on the
head?” asked the doctor.

“Because I do not think that it is; I know that we have sustained a very
severe check; but when you are playing _ecarte_ and your adversary has
made five points to your one, you do not necessarily throw down the
cards and give up the game? Not a bit; you hold on and strive to better
your luck.”

The worthy Dr. Hortebise did not know whether the most to admire the
perseverance or deplore the obstinacy of the old man, and exclaimed,--

“Why, this is utter madness; it is like plunging headlong into a deep
pit, which you can easily see in your path.”

Tantaine gave a long, low whistle.

“My friend,” said he, “what in your opinion would be the best course to
pursue?”

“I should say, without a moment’s hesitation, turn up the whole scheme,
and look out for another one, which, if less lucrative, would not be so
full of danger. You had hoped to win the game, and with good reason too.
Now throw aside all feelings of wounded vanity, and accept your defeat.
After all, it does not matter to us who Mademoiselle de Mussidan
marries. The great enterprise fortunately does not lie in this alliance.
We have still the idea of the Company to which all old people must
subscribe remaining to us, and we can work it up at once.”

He stopped short, abashed by the look on Tantaine’s face.

“It strikes me,” resumed the doctor, a little mortified, “that my
proposal is not utterly ridiculous, and certainly deserves some
consideration.”

“Perhaps so; but is it a practical one?”

“I see no reason why it should not be.”

“Indeed, then, you look at the thing in a very different manner to
myself. We are too far advanced, my dear doctor, to be our own masters.
We must go on, and have no option to do otherwise. To beat a retreat
would simply be to invite our enemies to fall upon our disorganized
battalions. We must give battle; and as the first to strike has always
the best chance of victory, we must strive to take the initiative.”

“The idea is good, but these are mere words.”

“Was the secret that we confided to De Croisenois only words?”

This thrust went home.

“Do you mean that you think he would betray us?” said he.

“Why should he not if it were to his interests to do so? Reflect,
Croisenois is almost at the end of his tether. We have dangled the line
of a princely fortune before his eyes. Do you think he would do nothing
if we were to say, ‘Excuse us, but we made a mistake; poor as you are,
so you must remain, for we do not intend to help you?’”

“But is it necessary to say that at all?”

“Well, at any rate, whatever we choose to say, what limit do you think
he will place upon his extortions now that he holds our secret? We have
taught him his music, and he will make us do our part in the chorus, and
can blackmail us as well as we can others.”

“We played a foolish game,” answered Dr. Hortebise moodily.

“No; we had to confide in some one. Besides, the two affairs, that of
Madame de Mussidan and the Duke de Champdoce, ran so well together. They
were the simultaneous emanations of my brain. I worked them up together,
and together they must stand or fall.”

“Then you are determined to go on?”

“Yes; more determined than ever.”

The doctor had been playing with his locket for some time, and the
contact of the cold metal seemed to have affected his nerves; for it was
in a trembling voice that he replied,--

“I vowed long ago that we should sink or swim together.” He paused,
and then, with a melancholy smile upon his face, continued,--“I have
no intention of breaking my oath, you see; but I repeat, that your road
seems to be a most perilous one, and I will add that I consider you
headstrong and self-opinionated; but for all that I will follow you,
even though the path you have chosen leads to the grave. I have at this
moment a something between my fingers that will save me from shame and
disgrace--a little pill to be swallowed, a gasp, a little dizziness, and
all is over.”

Tantaine did not seem to care for the doctor’s explanation.

“There, that will do,” said he. “If things come to the worst, you can
use the contents of your locket as much as you like, but in the meantime
leave it alone, and do not keep jingling it in that distracting manner.
For people of our stamp a danger well known is a comparatively slight
peril, for threats furnish us with means of defence. Woe, I say, woe to
the man who crosses my path, for I will hold my hand from nothing!” He
stopped for a little, opened every door, and assured himself that there
were no eavesdroppers, and then, in a low whisper, he said to Hortebise,
“Do you not see that there is but one obstacle to our success, and
that is Andre? Remove him, and the whole of our machinery will work as
smoothly as ever.”

Hortebise winced, as if suffering from a sudden pain.

“Do you mean----?” asked he.

But Tantaine interrupted him with a low laugh, terrible to listen to.

“And why not?” said he. “Is it not better to kill than to be killed?”

Hortebise trembled from head to foot. He had no objection to extorting
money by the basest threats, but he drew the line at murder.

“And suppose we were found out?” muttered he.

“Nonsense! How could we be discovered? Justice always looks for a
motive; how, then could they bring it home to us? They could only find
out that a young lady adored by De Breulh had thrown him over in order
to marry Andre.”

“Horrible!” murmured the doctor, much shocked.

“I daresay that it is horrible, and I have no wish to proceed to
extremities. I only wish to speak of it as a remote possibility, and one
that we may be compelled to adopt. I hate violence just as much as you
do, and trust that it may not be necessary.”

Just then the door opened, and Paul entered, a letter in his hand. He
seemed in excellent spirits, and shook hands with both his visitors.

Tantaine smiled sarcastically as he contrasted Paul’s high spirits with
the state of depression in which he had left him not many hours ago.

“Things are evidently going well with you,” remarked the doctor, forcing
a smile.

“Yes; I cannot find any reason for complaint.”

“Have you given your lesson?”

“Yes; what a delightful woman Madame Grandorge is! she has treated me so
kindly.”

“That is a good reason for your being so happy,” remarked the doctor,
with a tinge of irony in his voice.

“Ah, that is not the only reason,” returned Paul.

“Shall I be indiscreet if I ask the real cause, then?”

“I am not quite sure whether I ought to speak on this matter,” said he
fatuously.

“What! a love adventure already?” laughed the doctor.

The vanity of Paul’s nature beamed out in a smile.

“Keep your secret, my boy,” said Tantaine, in louder accents.

This, of course, was enough to loosen Paul’s tongue.

“Do you think, sir,” said he, “that I would keep anything from you?” He
opened the letter he held in his hand, continuing: “The portress handed
this to me as I came in; she said it was left by a bank messenger. Can
you guess where it came from? Let me tell you--it is from Mademoiselle
Flavia Rigal, and leaves no room to doubt of her sentiments toward me.”

“Is that a fact?”

“It is so; and whenever I choose, Mademoiselle Flavia will be only too
ready to become Madame Paul.”

For an instant a bright flush crimsoned old Tantaine’s wrinkled face,
but it faded away almost as soon as it appeared.

“Then you feel happy?” asked he, with a slight quiver in his voice.

Paul threw back his coat, and, placing his fingers in the armholes of
his waistcoat, remarked carelessly,--

“Yes, of course, I am happy, as you may suppose; but the news is not
particularly startling to me. On my third visit to M. Rigal’s, the girl
let me know that I need not sigh in vain.”

Tantaine covered his face with his hands as Paul passed his fingers
through his hair, and, striking what he considered an imposing attitude,
read as follows:--

“MY DEAR PAUL,--

“I was very naughty, and I repent of it. I could not sleep all night,
for I was haunted by the look of sorrow I saw in your face when you took
leave of me. Paul, I did it to try you. Can you forgive me? You might,
for I suffered much more than you could have done. Some one who loves
me--perhaps more than you do--has told me that when a girl shows all the
depths of her heart to a man she runs the risk of his despising her. Can
this be true? I hope not, Paul, for never--no, never--can I conceal my
feelings; and the proof of my faith in you is that I am going now
to tell you all. I am sure that if your good friend and mine, Dr.
Hortebise, came to my father with a certain request from you, it would
not be rejected.

“Your own

“FLAVIA.”


“Did not this letter go straight to your heart?” asked Tantaine.

“Of course it did. Why, she will have a million for her wedding
portion!”

On hearing these words, Tantaine started up with so threatening an
aspect that Paul recoiled a step, but a warning look from the doctor
restrained the old man’s indignation.

“He is a perfect sham!” muttered he; “even his vices are mere pretence.”

“He is our pupil, and is what we have made him,” whispered Tantaine.

Meanwhile Tantaine had gone up to Paul, and, placing his hand
caressingly on his shoulder, said,--

“My boy, you will never know how much you owe to Mademoiselle Flavia.”

Paul could not understand the meaning of this scene. These men had
done their best to pervert his morals, and to deaden the voice of
his conscience, and now that he had hoped to earn their praise by an
affectation of cynicism they were displeased with him. Before,
however, he could ask a question, Tantaine had completely recovered his
self-command.

“My dear boy,” said he, “I am quite satisfied with you. I came here
to-day expecting to find you still undecided, and I am pleased with the
change.”

“But, sir--” said Paul.

“On the contrary, you are firm and strong.”

“Yes, he has got on so well,” said the doctor, “that we should now treat
him as one of ourselves, and confide more in him. To-night, my young
friend, M. Mascarin will get from Caroline Schimmel the solution of the
riddle that has for so long perplexed us. Be at the office to-morrow at
ten o’clock, and you shall be told everything.”

Paul would have asked more questions, but Tantaine cut him short with a
brief good-morning, and went off hurriedly, taking the doctor with him,
and seemingly wishing to avoid a hazardous and unpleasant explanation.

“Let us get out of this,” whispered he. “In another moment I should
have knocked the conceited ass down. Oh, my Flavia! my poor Flavia! your
weakness of to-day will yet cost you very dear!”

Paul remained rooted to the ground, with an expression of surprise and
confusion upon every line of his face. All his pride and vanity had
gone. “I wonder,” muttered he, “what these disagreeable persons are
saying about me? Perhaps laughing at my inexperience and ridiculing my
aspirations.” The idea made him grind his teeth with rage; but he was
mistaken, for neither Tantaine nor the doctor mentioned his name after
they had left his apartment. As they walked up the Rue Montmartre,
all their ideas were turning upon how it would be easiest to checkmate
Andre.

“I have not yet got sufficient information to act on,” remarked Tantaine
meditatively. “My present plan is to remain perfectly quiescent, and I
have told Croisenois not to make a move of any kind. I have an eye
and ear watching and listening when they think themselves in perfect
privacy. Very soon I shall fathom their plans, and then--, but in the
meantime have faith in me, and do not let the matter worry you.”

On the boulevard Tantaine took leave of his friend.

“I shall very likely not see you to-night, for I have an appointment at
the Grand Turk with that precious young rascal, Toto Chupin. I _must_
find Caroline, for I am sure that with her lies the Champdoce secret.
She is very cunning, but has a weakness for drink, and, with Satan’s
help, I hope to find out the special liquor which will make her open her
lips freely.”



CHAPTER XXVI.

AT THE GRAND TURK.

Tantaine took a cab, and, promising the cabman a handsome gratuity if he
would drive fast, stopped at the spot where the Rue Blanche intersects
the Rue de Douai, and told the coachman to wait for him, and entered
the house where the younger Gandelu had installed the fair Madame de
Chantemille. It was some time before his ring at the door was answered,
but at last the door was opened by a stout, red-faced girl, with an
untidy cap. Upon seeing Tantaine, she uttered an exclamation of delight,
for it was the cook that had been placed in Zora’s employment by M.
Mascarin’s agency.

“Ah, Daddy Tantaine,” said she, “you are as welcome as the sun in
winter.”

“Hush, hush,” returned the old man, gazing cautiously round him.

“Don’t be frightened,” returned the girl. “Madame has gone to a place
from whence there is no return ticket, at least, for some time. You know
the greater the value of an article the closer we keep it under lock and
key.”

Tantaine gathered from this that Rose had been arrested, and his
astonishment appeared to be unmeasured.

“Surely you don’t mean that she has gone to quod?” said he.

“It is as I tell you,” answered she; “but come in, and have a glass of
wine, while you hear all about it.”

She led the old man into the dining-room, round the table in which
a half dozen guests were seated, just concluding a late breakfast.
Tantaine at once recognized four of the several guests as servants whom
he knew from their having applied for situations at the office, and
there were two men of a very unprepossessing exterior.

“We are having a regular spree to-day,” observed the cook, handing a
bottle to Tantaine; “but yesterday there was not much of a jollification
here, for just as I was setting about getting the dinner two fellows
came in and asked for my mistress, and as soon as they saw her they
clapped their hands on her and said that she must come to the stone jug.
When madame heard this she shrieked so loud as to have been heard in the
next street. She would not go a foot with them, clung to the furniture
and banisters, so they just took her up by the head and feet, and
carried her down to a cab that was standing at the door. I seem to bring
ill luck wherever I go, for this is the fourth mistress I have seen
taken off in this way; but come, you are taking nothing at all.”

But Tantaine had had enough, and making an excuse, retired from a
debauch which he saw would continue as long as the wine held out.

“All is going well,” muttered he, as he climbed into the cab; “and now
for the next one.”

He drove straight to the house that the elder Gandelu was building in
the Champs Elysees, and putting his head out of the window, he accosted
a light, active young fellow who was warning the foot passengers not to
pass under the scaffolding.

“Anything new, La Cordille?” enquired the old man.

“No, nothing; but tell the master I am keeping a good watch.”

From there Tantaine visited a footman in De Breulh’s employment, and a
woman in the service of Madame de Bois Arden. Then, paying his fare,
he started on foot for Father Canon’s wine shop, in the Rue St. Honore,
where he met Florestan, who was as saucy and supercilious to Tantaine
as he was obsequious to Mascarin. But although he paid for Florestan’s
dinner, all that he could extort from him was, that Sabine was terribly
depressed. It was fully eight o’clock before Tantaine had got rid of
Florestan, and hailing another cab, he ordered the driver to take him to
the Grand Turk, in the Rue des Poissonniers.

The magnificent sign of the Grand Turk dances in the breeze, and invites
such youths as Toto Chupin and his companions. The whole aspect of the
exterior seemed to invite the passers-by to step in and try the good
cheer provided within,--a good _table d’hote_ at six p.m., coffee, tea,
liquors, and a grand ball to complete the work of digestion. A long
corridor leads to this earthly Eden, and the two doors at the end of
it open, the one into the dining, and the other into the ball-room. A
motley crew collected there for the evening meal, and on Sundays it is
next to impossible to procure a seat. But the dining-room is the Grand
Turk’s greatest attraction, for as soon as the dessert is over the head
waiter makes a sign, and dishes and tablecloths are cleared away in
a moment. The dining-room becomes a _café_, and the click of dominoes
gives way to the rattle of forks, while beer flows freely. This,
however, is nothing, for, at a second signal, huge folding doors are
thrown open, and the strains of an orchestra ring out as an invitation
to the ball, to which all diners are allowed free entrance. Nothing is
danced but round dances, polkas, mazurkas, and waltzes.

The German element was very strong at the Grand Turk, and if a gentleman
wished to make himself agreeable to his fair partners, it was necessary
for him, at any rate, to be well up in the Alsatian dialect. The master
of the ceremonies had already called upon the votaries of Terpsichore to
take their places for the waltz as Daddy Tantaine entered the hall. The
scene was a most animated one, and the air heavy with the scent of beer
and tobacco, and would have asphyxiated any one not used to venture into
such places.

It was the first time that he had ever visited the Grand Turk, and
yet any one observing would have sworn that he was one of the regular
frequenters as he marched idly through the rooms, making constant pauses
at the bar. But glance around him as he might, he could see neither Toto
Chupin nor Caroline Schimmel.

“Have I come here for nothing,” muttered he, “or is the hour too early?”

It was hard to waste time thus, but at last he sat down and ordered some
beer. His eyes wandered to a large picture on the wall, representing a
fat, eastern-looking man, with a white turban and loose, blue garments,
seated in a crimson chair, with his feet resting upon a yellow carpet.
One hand was caressing his protuberant paunch, while the other was
extended toward a glass of beer. Evidently this is the Grand Turk. And
finally by an odalisque, who fills his goblet with the foaming infusion
of malt and hops. This odalisque is very fair and stout, and some fair
Alsatian damsel has evidently sat as the model. As Tantaine was gazing
upon this wondrous work of art he heard a squeaking voice just behind
him.

“That is certainly that young rogue Chupin,” muttered he.

He turned sharply round, and two tables off, in a dark corner, he
discovered the young gentleman that he had been looking for. As he
gazed on the lad, he was not surprised that he had not recognized him
at first, for Toto had been strangely transmogrified, and in no degree
resembled the boy who had shivered in a tattered blouse in the archway
near the Servants’ Registry Office. He was now gorgeous to behold. From
the moment that he had got his hundred francs he had chalked out a new
line of life for himself, and was busy pursuing it. He had found that
he could make all his friends merry, and he had succeeded. He had made a
selection from the most astounding wares that the Parisian tailor keeps
on hand. He had sneered at young Gaston de Gandelu, and called him
an ape; but he had aped the ape. He wore a very short, light coat, a
waistcoat that was hideous from its cut and brilliancy, and trousers
strapped tightly under his feet. His collar was so tall and stiff, that
he had the greatest difficulty in turning his head. He had gone to a
barber, and his lank hair had been artistically curled. The table in
front of him was covered with glasses and bottles. Two shocking
looking scamps of the true barrier bully type, with loose cravats and
shiny-peaked caps, were seated by him, and were evidently his guests.
Tantaine’s first impulse was to catch the debauched youth by the ear,
but he hesitated for an instant and reflection conquered the impulse.
With the utmost caution so that he might not attract Toto’s attention,
he crept down to him, concealing himself as best he could behind one
of the pillars that supported the gallery, and by this manoeuvre found
himself so close to the lad that he could catch every word he said.

Chupin was talking volubly.

“Don’t you call me a swell, nor yet say that I brag,” said he. “I
shall always make this kind of appearance, for to work in the manner I
propose, a man must pay some attention to dress.”

At this his companions roared with laughter.

“All right,” returned Toto. “I’m precious sharp, though you may not
think so, and shall go in for all kinds of elegant accomplishments, and
come out a regular masher.”

“Wonders will never cease,” answered one of the men. “When you go on
your trip for action in the Bois among the toffs, will you take me with
you?”

“Any one can go to the Bois who has money: and just tell me who are
those who make money. Why, those who have plenty of cheek and a good
sound business. Well, I have learned my business from some real downy
cards, who made it pay well. Why should I not do the same?”

With a sickening feeling of terror, Tantaine saw that the lad was half
drunk. What could he be going to say? and how much did he know? Toto’s
guests evidently saw that he had taken too much; but as he seemed ready
to let them into a secret, they paid great attention, and exchanged a
look of intelligence. The young rogue’s new clothes and his liberality
all proved that he had found a means of gaining money; the only question
was what the plan could be. To induce him to talk they passed the bottle
rapidly and flattered him up. The younger man of the two shook his head
with a smile.

“I don’t believe you have any business at all,” said he.

“Nor have I, if by business you mean some low handicraft. It is brain
work I mean, my boy; and that’s what I do.”

“I don’t doubt that a bit,” answered the elder guest coaxingly.

“Come on! Tell us what it is,” broke in the other. “You don’t expect us
to take your word.”

“It is as easy as lying,” replied Toto. “Listen a bit, and you shall
have the whole bag of tricks. Suppose I saw Polyte steal a couple of
pairs of boots from a trotter-case seller’s stall----”

Polyte interrupted the narrator, protesting so strongly that he would
not commit such an act, that Tantaine perceived at once that some such
trifling act of larceny weighed heavily on his conscience.

“You needn’t kick up such a row,” returned Toto. “I am only just putting
it as a thing that might happen. We will say you had done the trick, and
that I had twigged you. Do you know what I should go? Well, I would hunt
up Polyte, and say quietly, ‘Halves, old man, or I will split.’”

“And I should give you a crack in the jaw,” returned Polyte angrily.

Forgetting his fine dress, Toto playfully put his thumb to his nose and
extended his fingers.

“You would not be such an ass,” said he. “You would say to yourself, ‘If
I punch this chap, he will kick up no end of a row, and I shall be taken
up, and perhaps sent to the mill.’ No; you would be beastly civil, and
would end by doing just as I wished.”

“And this is what you call your business, is it?”

“Isn’t it a good one--the mugs stand the racket, and the downy cards
profit by it?”

“But there is no novelty in this; it is only blackmail after all.”

“I never said it wasn’t; but it is blackmailing perfected into a
system.”

As Toto made this reply he hammered on the table, calling for more
drink.

“But,” remarked Polyte, with an air of disappointment, “you don’t get
chances every day, and the business is often a precious poor one. You
can’t always be seeing chaps prigging boots.”

“Pooh! pooh!” answered Toto, “if you want to make money in this
business, you must keep your eyes about you. Our customers don’t come
to you, but there is nothing to prevent you going to them. You can hunt
until you find them.”

“And where are you to hunt, if you please?”

“Ah, that’s tellings.”

A long silence ensued, during which Tantaine was half tempted to come
forward. By doing so he would assuredly nip all explanations in the bud;
but, on the other hand, he wanted to hear all the young rascal had
to say. He therefore only moved a little nearer, and listened more
intently.

Forgetting his curls, Toto was abstractedly passing his fingers through
his hair, and reflecting with all the wisdom of a muddled brain.
Finally, he came to the conclusion that he might speak, and, leaning
forward, he whispered,--

“You won’t peach if I tell you the dodge?”

His companions assured him that he might have every confidence in them.

“Very well; I make my money in the Champs Elysees, and sometimes get a
harvest twice a day.”

“But there are no shoemakers’ shops there.”

“You are a fool,” answered Toto contemptuously. “Do you think I
blackmail thieves? That wouldn’t be half good enough. Honest people, or
at least people who call themselves honest, are my game. These are the
ones who can be made to pay up.”

Tantaine shuddered; he remembered that Mascarin had made use of the same
expression, and at once surmised that Toto must have had an occasional
ear to the keyhole.

“But,” objected Polyte, “honest people have no occasion to pay up.”

Toto struck his glass so heavily on the table that it flew to shivers.

“Will you let me speak?” said he.

“Go on, go on, my boy,” returned his friend.

“Well, when I’m hard up for cash, I go into the Champs Elysees, and take
a seat on one of the benches. From there I keep an eye on the cabs and
see who gets out of them. If a respectable woman does so, I am sure of
my bird.”

“Do you think you know a respectable woman when you see her?”

“I should think that I did. Well, when a respectable woman gets out of a
cab where she ought not to have been, she looks about her on all sides,
first to the right and then to the left, settles her veil, and, as soon
as she is sure that no one is watching her, sets off as if old Nick was
behind her.”

“Well, what do you do then?”

“Why, I take the number of the cab, and follow the lady home. Then
I wait until she has had time to get to her own rooms, and go to the
porter and say, ‘Will you give me the name of the lady who has just come
in?’”

“And do you think the porter is fool enough to do so?”

“Not a bit; I always take the precaution of having a delicate little
purse in my pocket; and when the man says, as he always does, ‘I don’t
know,’ I pull out the purse, and say, ‘I am sorry for that, for she
dropped this as she came in, and I wanted to return it to her.’ The
porter at once becomes awfully civil; he gives the name and number,
and up I go. The first time I content myself with finding out if she is
married or single. If she is single, it is no go; but if the reverse, I
go on with the job.”

“Why, what do you do next?”

“Next morning I go there, and hang about until I see the husband go out.
Then I go upstairs, and ask for the wife. It is ticklish work then, my
lads; but I say, ‘Yesterday, madame, I was unlucky enough to leave my
pocketbook in cab number so-and-so. Now, as I saw you hail the vehicle
immediately after I had left it, I have come to ask you if you saw my
pocketbook.’ The lady flies into a rage, denies all knowledge of
the book, and threatens to have me turned out. Then, with the utmost
politeness, I say, ‘I see, madame, that there is nothing to be done
but to communicate the matter to your husband.’ Then she gets alarmed,
and--she pays.”

“And you don’t see any more of her?”

“Not that day; but when the funds are low, I call and say, ‘It is I
again, madame; I am the poor young man who lost his money in such and
such a cab on a certain day of the month.’ And so the game goes on. A
dozen such clients give a fellow a very fair income. Now, perhaps, you
understand why I am always so well dressed, and always have money in my
pocket. When I was shabbily attired, they offered me a five-franc piece,
but now they come down with a flimsy.”

The young wretch spoke the truth; for to many women, who in a mad moment
of passion may have forgotten themselves, and been tracked to their
homes by some prowling blackmailer, life has been an endless journey of
agony. Every knock at the door makes them start, and every footfall on
the staircase causes a tremor as they think that the villain has come to
betray their guilty secret.

“That is all talk,” said Polyte; “such things are never done.”

“They _are_ done,” returned Toto sulkily.

“Have you ever tried the dodge yourself, then?” sneered Polyte.

At another time Chupin would have lied, but the fumes of the drink he
had taken, added to his natural self-conceit, had deprived him of all
judgment.

“Well,” muttered he, “if I have not done it myself exactly, I have seen
others practise it often enough--on a much larger scale, it is true;
but one can always do things in a more miniature fashion with perhaps a
better chance of success.”

“What! _you_ have seen this done?”

“Of course I have.”

“And had you a share in the swag?”

“To a certain extent. I have followed the cabs times without number, and
have watched the goings on of these fine ladies and gentlemen; only I
was working for others, like the dog that catches the hare, and never
has a bit of it to eat. No, all I got was dry bread, with a kick or a
cuff for dessert. I sha’n’t put up with it any longer, and have made up
my mind to open on my own account.”

“And who has been employing you?”

A flash of sense passed through Chupin’s muddled brain. He had never
wished to injure Mascarin, but merely to increase his own importance by
extolling the greatness of his employer.

“I worked for people who have no equal in Paris,” said he proudly. “They
don’t mince matters either, I can tell you; and they have more money
than you could count in six months. There is not a thing they cannot do
if they desire; and if I were to tell you----”

He stopped short, his mouth wide open, and his eyes dilated with terror,
for before him stood old Daddy Tantaine.

Tantaine’s face had a most benign expression upon it, and in a most
paternal voice he exclaimed,--

“And so here you are at last, my lad; and, bless me, how fine! why, you
look like a real swell.”

But Toto was terribly disconcerted. The mere appearance of Tantaine
dissipated the fumes of liquor which had hitherto clouded the boy’s
brain, and by degrees he recollected all that he had said, and,
becoming conscious of his folly, had a vague idea of some swift-coming
retribution. Toto was a sharp lad, and he was by no means deceived by
Tantaine’s outward semblance of friendliness, and he almost felt as if
his life depended on the promptness of his decision. The question was,
had the old man heard anything of the preceding conversation?

“If the old rogue has been listening,” said he to himself, “I am in a
hole, and no mistake.”

It was, therefore, with a simulated air of ease that he answered,--

“I was waiting for you, sir, and it was out of respect to you that I put
on my very best togs.”

“That was very nice of you; I ought to thank you very much. And now,
will you--”

Toto’s courage was coming back to him rapidly.

“Will you take a glass of beer, or a liquor of brandy, sir?” said he.

But Daddy Tantaine excused himself on the plea that he had just been
drinking.

“That is all the more reason for being thirsty,” remarked Toto. “My
friends and I have drunk the contents of all these bottles since
dinner.”

Tantaine raised his shabby hat at this semi-introduction, and the
two roughs bowed smoothly. They were not entirely satisfied with the
appearance of the new-comer, and thought that this would be a good
moment for taking leave of their host. The waltz had just concluded, and
the master of the ceremonies was repeating his eternal refrain of--“Take
your places, ladies and gentlemen;” and taking advantage of the noise,
Toto’s friends shook hands with their host and adroitly mixed with the
crowd.

“Good fellows! jolly fellows;” muttered Toto, striving to catch a last
glimpse of them.

Tantaine gave a low, derisive whistle. “My lad,” said he, “you keep
execrable company, and one day you will repent it.”

“I can look after myself, sir.”

“Do as you like, my lad; it is no business of mine. But, take my word
for it, you will come to grief some day. I have told you that often
enough.”

“If the old rascal suspected anything,” thought Toto, “he would not talk
in this way.”

Wretched Toto! he did not know that when his spirits were rising
the danger was terribly near, for Tantaine was just then saying to
himself,--

“Ah! this lad is much too clever--too clever by half. If I were going
on with the business, and could make it worth his while, how useful he
would be to me! but just now it would be most imprudent to allow him to
wander about and jabber when he gets drunk.”

Meanwhile Toto had called a waiter, and, flinging a ten-franc piece on
the table, said haughtily: “Take your bill out of that.” But Tantaine
pushed the money back toward the lad, and, drawing another ten-franc
piece from his pocket, gave it to the waiter.

This unexpected act of generosity put the lad in the best possible
humor. “All the better for me,” exclaimed he; “and now let us hunt up
Caroline Schimmel.”

“Is she here? I could not find her.”

“Because you did not know where to look for her. She is at cards in the
coffee-room. Come along, sir.”

But Tantaine laid his hand upon the boy’s arm.

“One moment,” said he. “Did you tell the woman just what I ordered you
to say?”

“I did not omit a single word.”

“Tell me what you said, then.”

“For five days,” began the lad solemnly, “your Toto has been your
Caroline’s shadow. We have played cards until all sorts of hours, and
I took care that she should always win. I confided to her that I had a
jolly old uncle,--a man not without means, a widower, and crazy to be
married again,--who had seen her and had fallen in love with her.”

“Good! my lad, good! and what did she say?”

“Why, she grinned like half a dozen cats; only she is a bit artful, and
I saw at once that she thought I was after her cards, but the mention of
my uncle’s property soon chucked her off that idea.”

“Did you give my name?”

“Yes, at the end, I did. I knew that she had seen you, and so I kept it
back as long as I could; but as soon as I mentioned it she looked rather
confused, and cried out: ‘I know him quite well.’ So you see, sir, all
you have now is to settle a day for the marriage. Come on; she expects
you.”

Toto was right. The late domestic of the Duke de Champdoce was playing
cards; but as soon as she caught sight of Toto and his pretended uncle,
in spite of her holding an excellent hand, she threw up her cards, and
received him with the utmost civility. Toto looked on with delight.
Never had he seen the old rascal (as he inwardly called him in his
heart) so polite, agreeable, and talkative. It was easy to see that
Caroline Schimmel was yielding to his fascinations, for she had never
had such extravagant compliments whispered in her ear in so persuasive a
tone. But Tantaine did not confine his attentions to wine only: he first
ordered a bowl of punch, and then followed that up by a bottle of the
best brandy. All the old man’s lost youth seemed to have come back
to him: he sang, he drank, and he danced. Toto watched them in utter
surprise, as the old man whirled the clumsy figure of the woman round
the room.

And he was rewarded for this tremendous exertion, for by ten o’clock she
had consented, and Caroline left the Grand Turk on the arm of her future
husband, having promised to take supper with him.

Next morning, when the scavengers came down from Montmartre to ply their
matutinal avocations, they found the body of a woman lying on her face
on the pavement. They raised her up and carried her to an hospital.
She was not dead, as had been at first supposed; and when the unhappy
creature came to her senses, she said that her name was Caroline
Schimmel, that she had been to supper at a restaurant with her
betrothed, and that from that instant she remembered nothing. At her
request, the surgeon had her conveyed to her home in the Rue Mercadet.



CHAPTER XXVII.

THE LAST LINK.

For some days M. Mascarin had not shown himself at the office, and
Beaumarchef was terribly harassed with inquiries regarding his absent
master. Mascarin, on the day after the evening on which Tantaine had
met Caroline Schimmel at the Grand Turk, was carefully shut up in
his private room; his face and eyes were red and inflamed, and he
occasionally sipped a glass of some cooling beverage which stood before
him, and his compressed lips and corrugated brow showed how deeply he
was meditating. Suddenly the door opened, and Dr. Hortebise entered the
room.

“Well!” exclaimed Mascarin, “have you seen the Mussidans, as I told you
to do.”

“Certainly,” answered Hortebise briskly; “I saw the Countess, and told
her how pressing the holders of her letters were growing, and urged on
her the necessity for immediate action. She told me that both she and
her husband had determined to yield, and that Sabine, though evidently
broken-hearted, would not oppose the marriage.”

“Good,” said Mascarin; “and now, if Croisenois only follows out the
orders that I have given him, the marriage will take place without
the knowledge of either De Breulh or Andre. Then we need fear them no
longer. The prospectus of the new Company is ready, and can be issued
almost immediately; but we meet to-day to discuss not that matter, but
the more important one of the heir to the Champdoce title.”

A timid knock at the door announced the arrival of Paul who came in
hesitatingly, as if doubtful what sort of a reception he might receive;
but Mascarin gave him the warmest possible welcome.

“Permit me,” said he, “to offer you my congratulations on having won
the affections of so estimable and wealthy a young lady as Mademoiselle
Flavia. I may tell you that a friend of mine has informed me of the very
flattering terms in which her father, M. Rigal, spoke of you, and I can
assure you that if our mutual friend Dr. Hortebise were to go to the
banker with an offer of marriage on your part, you have no cause to
dread a refusal.”

Paul blushed with pleasure, and as he was stammering out a few words,
the door opened for the third time, and Catenac made his appearance. To
cover the lateness of his arrival, he had clothed his face in smiles,
and advanced with outstretched hands toward his confederates; but
Mascarin’s look and manner were so menacing, that he recoiled a few
steps and gazed on him with an expression of the utmost wonder and
surprise.

“What is the meaning of this reception?” asked he.

“Can you not guess?” returned Mascarin, his manner growing more and more
threatening. “I have sounded the lowest depths of your infamy. I was
sure the other day that you meant to turn traitor, but you swore to the
contrary, and you--”

“On my honor--”

“It is useless. One word from Perpignan set us on the right track. Were
you or were you not ignorant that the Duke de Champdoce had a certain
way of recognizing his son, and that was by a certain ineffaceable
scar?”

“It had escaped my memory----”

The words faded from his lips, for even his great self-command failed
him under Mascarin’s disdainful glance.

“Let me tell you what I think of you,” said the latter. “I knew that you
were a coward and a traitor. Even convicts keep faith with each other,
and I had not thought you so utterly infamous.”

“Then why have you forced me to act contrary to my wishes?”

This reply exasperated Mascarin so much that he grasped Catenac by the
throat, and shook him violently.

“I made use of you, you viper,” said he, “because I had placed you in
such a position that you could not harm us. And now you will serve
me because I will show you that I can take everything from you--name,
money, liberty, and _life_. All depends upon our success. If we fail,
you fall into an abyss of the depth and horrors of which you can have
no conception. I knew with whom I had to deal, and took my measures
accordingly. The most crushing proofs of your crime are in the hands of
a person who has precise orders how to act. When I give the signal, he
moves; and when he moves, you are utterly lost.”

There was something so threatening in the silence that followed this
speech that Paul grew faint with apprehension.

“And,” went on Mascarin, “it would be an evil day for you if anything
were to happen to Hortebise, Paul, or myself; for if one of us were to
die suddenly, your fate would be sealed. You cannot say that you have
not been warned.”

Catenac stood with his head bent upon his breast, rooted to the ground
with terror. He felt that he was bound, and gagged, and fettered hand
and foot. Mascarin swallowed some of the cooling draught that stood
before him, and tranquilly commenced,--

“Suppose, Catenac, that I were to tell you that I know far more of the
Champdoce matter than you do; for, after all, your knowledge is only
derived from what the Duke has told you. You think that you have hit
upon the truth; you were never more mistaken in your life. I, perhaps
you are unaware, have been many years engaged in this matter. Perhaps
you would like to know how I first thought of the affair. Do you
remember that solicitor who had an office near the Law Courts, and did
a great deal of blackmail business? If you do, you must remember that he
got two years’ hard labor.”

“Yes, I remember the man,” returned Catenac in a humble voice.

“He used,” continued Mascarin, “to buy up waste paper, and search
through the piles he had collected for any matters that might be
concealed in the heterogeneous mass. And many things he must have found.
In what sensational case have not letters played a prominent part? What
man is there who has not at one time or other regretted that he has had
pen and ink ready to his hand? If men were wise, they would use those
patent inks, which fade from the paper in a few days. I followed his
example, and, among other strange discoveries, I made this one.”

He took from his desk a piece of paper--ragged, dirty, and creased--and,
handing it to Hortebise and Paul, said,--

“Read!”

They did so, and read the following strange word:

“TNAFNEERTONIOMZEDNEREITIPZEYAETNECONNISIUSEJECARG;”

while underneath was written in another hand the word, “Never.”

“It was evident that I had in my hands a letter written in cipher, and I
concluded that the paper contained some important secret.”

Catenac listened to this narrative with an air of contempt, for he was
one of those foolish men who never know when it is best for them to
yield.

“I daresay you are right,” answered he with a slight sneer.

“Thank you,” returned Mascarin coolly. “At any rate, I was deeply
interested in solving this riddle, the more as I belonged to an
association which owes its being and position to its skill in
penetrating the secrets of others. I shut myself up in my room, and
vowed that I would not leave it until I had worked out the cipher.”

Paul, Hortebise, and Catenac examined the letter curiously, but could
make nothing of it.

“I can’t make head or tail of it,” said the doctor impatiently.

Mascarin smiled as he took back the paper, and remarked,--

“At first I was as much puzzled as you were, and more than once was
tempted to throw the document into the waste-paper basket, but a secret
feeling that it opened a way to all our fortunes restrained me. Of
course there was the chance that I might only decipher some foolish
jest, and no secret at all, but still I went on. If the commencement of
the word was written in a woman’s hand, the last word had evidently
been added by a man. But why should a cryptogram have been used? Was it
because the demand was of so dangerous and compromising a character that
it was impossible to put it in plain language? If so, why was the
last word not in cipher? Simply because the mere rejection of what was
certainly a demand would in no manner compromise the writer. You will
ask how it happens that demand and rejection are both on the same sheet
of paper. I thought this over, and came to the conclusion that the
letter had once been meant for the post, but had been sent by hand.
Perhaps the writers may have occupied rooms in the same house. The
woman, in the anguish of her soul, may have sent the letter by a servant
to her husband, and he, transported by rage, may have hurriedly
scrawled this word across it, and returned it again: ‘Take this to your
mistress.’ Having settled this point, I attacked the cipher, and, after
fourteen hours’ hard work, hit upon its meaning.

“Accidentally I held the piece of paper between myself and the light,
with the side on which the writing was turned from me, and read it at
once. It was a cryptogram of the simplest kind, as the letters forming
the words were simply reversed. I divided the letters into words,
and made out this sentence: ‘_Grace, je suis innocente. Ayez pitie;
rendez-moi notre enfant_ (Mercy, I am innocent. Give me back our son).’”

Hortebise snatched up the paper and glanced at it.

“You are right,” said he; “it is the art of cipher writing in its
infancy.”

“I had succeeded in reading it,--but how to make use of it! The mass of
waste paper in which I found it had been purchased from a servant in
a country house near Vendome. A friend of mine, who was accustomed to
drawing plans and maps, came to my aid, and discovered some faint
signs of a crest in one corner of the paper. With the aid of a powerful
magnifying glass, I discovered it to be the cognizance of the ducal
house of Champdoce. The light that guided me was faint and uncertain,
and many another man would have given up the quest. But the thought was
with me in my waking hours, and was the companion of my pillow during
the dark hours of the night. Six months later I knew that it was the
Duchess who had addressed this missive to her husband, and why she had
done so. By degrees I learned all the secret to which this scrap of
paper gave me the clue; and if I have been a long while over it, it is
because one link was wanting which I only discovered yesterday.”

“Ah,” said the doctor, “then Caroline Schimmel has spoken.”

“Yes; drink was the magician that disclosed the secret that for twenty
years she had guarded with unswerving fidelity.”

As Mascarin uttered these words he opened a drawer, and drew from it a
large pile of manuscript, which he waved over his head with an air of
triumph.

“This is the greatest work that I have ever done,” exclaimed he. “Listen
to it, Hortebise, and you shall see how it is that I hold firmly, at
the same time, both the Duke and Duchess of Champdoce, and Diana the
Countess of Mussidan. Listen to me, Catenac,--you who distrusted me, and
were ready to play the traitor, and tell me if I do not grasp success in
my strong right hand.” Then, holding out the roll of papers to Paul, he
cried, “And do you, my dear boy, take this and read it carefully. Let
nothing escape you, for there is not one item, however trivial it may
seem to you, that has not its importance. It is the history of a great
and noble house, and one in which you are more interested than you may
think.”

Paul opened the manuscript, and, in a voice which quivered with emotion,
he read the facts announced by Mascarin, which he had entitled “The
Mystery of Champdoce.”


[The conclusion of this exciting narrative will be found in the volume
called “The Mystery of Champdoce.”]


FILE NO. 113

By Emile Gaboriau




I

In the Paris evening papers of Tuesday, February 28, 1866, under the
head of _Local Items_, the following announcement appeared:


“A daring robbery, committed against one of our most eminent bankers,
M. Andre Fauvel, caused great excitement this morning throughout the
neighborhood of Rue de Provence.

“The thieves, who were as skilful as they were bold, succeeded in
making an entrance to the bank, in forcing the lock of a safe that has
heretofore been considered impregnable, and in possessing themselves
of the enormous sum of three hundred and fifty thousand francs in
bank-notes.

“The police, immediately informed of the robbery, displayed their
accustomed zeal, and their efforts have been crowned with success.
Already, it is said, P. B., a clerk in the bank, has been arrested,
and there is every reason to hope that his accomplices will be speedily
overtaken by the hand of justice.”


For four days this robbery was the town talk of Paris.

Then public attention was absorbed by later and equally interesting
events: an acrobat broke his leg at the circus; an actress made her
debut at a small theatre: and the _item_ of the 28th was soon forgotten.

But for once the newspapers were--perhaps intentionally--wrong, or at
least inaccurate in their information.

The sum of three hundred and fifty thousand francs certainly had been
stolen from M. Andre Fauvel’s bank, but not in the manner described.

A clerk had also been arrested on suspicion, but no decisive proof had
been found against him. This robbery of unusual importance remained, if
not inexplicable, at least unexplained.

The following are the facts as they were related with scrupulous
exactness at the preliminary examination.




II

The banking-house of Andre Fauvel, No. 87 Rue de Provence, is an
important establishment, and, owing to its large force of clerks,
presents very much the appearance of a government department.

On the ground-floor are the offices, with windows opening on the street,
fortified by strong iron bars sufficiently large and close together to
discourage all burglarious attempts.

A large glass door opens into a spacious vestibule where three or four
office-boys are always in waiting.

On the right are the rooms to which the public is admitted, and from
which a narrow passage leads to the principal cash-room.

The offices of the corresponding clerk, book-keeper, and general
accounts are on the left.

At the farther end is a small court on which open seven or eight little
wicket doors. These are kept closed, except on certain days when notes
are due; and then they are indispensable.

M. Fauvel’s private office is on the first floor over the offices, and
leads into his elegant private apartments.

This private office communicates directly with the bank by means of
a narrow staircase, which opens into the room occupied by the head
cashier.

This room, which in the bank goes by the name of the “cash-office,” is
proof against all attacks, no matter how skilfully planned; indeed, it
could almost withstand a regular siege, sheeted as it is like a monitor.

The doors, and the partition where the wicket door is cut, are covered
with thick sheets of iron; and a heavy grating protects the fireplace.

Fastened in the wall by enormous iron clamps is a safe, a formidable
and fantastic piece of furniture, calculated to fill with envy the poor
devil who easily carries his fortune in a pocket-book.

This safe, which is considered the masterpiece of the firm of Becquet,
is six feet in height and four and a half in width, made entirely of
wrought iron, with triple sides, and divided into isolated compartments
in case of fire.

The safe is opened by an odd little key, which is, however, the least
important part of the mechanism. Five movable steel buttons, upon which
are engraved all the letters of the alphabet, constitute the real power
of this ingenious safe.

Before inserting the key into the lock, the letters on the buttons must
be in the exact position in which they were placed when the safe was
locked.

In M. Fauvel’s bank, as everywhere, the safe was always closed with a
word that was changed from time to time.

This word was known only to the head of the bank and the cashier, each
of whom had also a key to the safe.

In a fortress like this, a person could deposit more diamonds than the
Duke of Brunswick’s, and sleep well assured of their safety.

But one danger seemed to threaten, that of forgetting the secret word
which was the “Open sesame” of the safe.

On the morning of the 28th of February, the bank-clerks were all busy
at their various desks, about half-past nine o’clock, when a middle-aged
man of dark complexion and military air, clad in deep mourning, appeared
in the office adjoining the “safe,” and announced to the five or six
employees present his desire to see the cashier.

He was told that the cashier had not yet come, and his attention was
called to a placard in the entry, which stated that the “cash-room” was
opened at ten o’clock.

This reply seemed to disconcert and annoy the newcomer.

“I expected,” he said, in a tone of cool impertinence, “to find someone
here ready to attend to my business. I explained the matter to M. Fauvel
yesterday. I am Count Louis de Clameran, an iron-manufacturer at Oloron,
and have come to draw three hundred thousand francs deposited in this
bank by my late brother, whose heir I am. It is surprising that no
direction was given about it.”

Neither the title of the noble manufacturer, nor his explanations,
appeared to have the slightest effect upon the clerks.

“The cashier has not yet arrived,” they repeated, “and we can do nothing
for you.”

“Then conduct me to M. Fauvel.”

There was a moment’s hesitation; then a clerk named Cavaillon, who was
writing near a window, said:

“The chief is always out at this hour.”

“Then I will call again,” replied M. de Clameran.

And he walked out, as he had entered, without saying “Good-morning,” or
even touching his hat.

“Not very polite, that customer,” said little Cavaillon, “but he will
soon be settled, for here comes Prosper.”

Prosper Bertomy, head cashier of Fauvel’s banking-house, was a tall,
handsome man, of about thirty, with fair hair and large dark-blue eyes,
fastidiously neat, and dressed in the height of fashion.

He would have been very prepossessing but for a cold, reserved
English-like manner, and a certain air of self-sufficiency which spoiled
his naturally bright, open countenance.

“Ah, here you are!” cried Cavaillon, “someone has just been asking for
you.”

“Who? An iron-manufacturer, was it not?”

“Exactly.”

“Well, he will come back again. Knowing that I would get here late this
morning, I made all my arrangements yesterday.”

Prosper had unlocked his office-door, and, as he finished speaking,
entered, and closed it behind him.

“Good!” exclaimed one of the clerks, “there is a man who never lets
anything disturb him. The chief has quarrelled with him twenty times for
always coming too late, and his remonstrances have no more effect upon
him than a breath of wind.”

“And very right, too; he knows he can get anything he wants out of the
chief.”

“Besides, how could he come any sooner? a man who sits up all night, and
leads a fast life, doesn’t feel like going to work early in the morning.
Did you notice how very pale he looked when he came in?”

“He must have been playing heavily again. Couturier says he lost fifteen
thousand francs at a sitting last week.”

“His work is none the worse done for all that,” interrupted Cavaillon.
“If you were in his place--”

He stopped short. The cash-room door suddenly opened, and the cashier
appeared before them with tottering step, and a wild, haggard look on
his ashy face.

“Robbed!” he gasped out: “I have been robbed!”

Prosper’s horrified expression, his hollow voice and trembling limbs,
betrayed such fearful suffering that the clerks jumped up from their
desks, and ran toward him. He almost dropped into their arms; he was
sick and faint, and fell into a chair.

His companions surrounded him, and begged him to explain himself.

“Robbed?” they said; “where, how, by whom?”

Gradually, Prosper recovered himself.

“All the money I had in the safe,” he said, “has been stolen.”

“All?”

“Yes, all; three packages, each containing one hundred notes of a
thousand francs, and one package of fifty thousand. The four packages
were wrapped in a sheet of paper, and tied together.”

With the rapidity of lightning, the news of the robbery spread
throughout the banking-house, and the room was soon filled with curious
listeners.

“Tell us, Prosper,” said young Cavaillon, “did you find the safe broken
open?”

“No; it is just as I left it.”

“Well then, how, why----”

“Yesterday I put three hundred and fifty thousand francs in the safe;
and this morning they are gone.”

All were silent except one old clerk, who did not seem to share the
general consternation.

“Don’t distress yourself, M. Bertomy,” he said: “perhaps the chief
disposed of the money.”

The unhappy cashier started up with a look of relief; he eagerly caught
at the idea.

“Yes!” he exclaimed, “you are right: the chief must have taken it.”

But, after thinking a few minutes, he said in a tone of deep
discouragement:

“No, that is impossible. During the five years that I have had charge of
the safe, M. Fauvel has never opened it except in my presence. Several
times he has needed money, and has either waited until I came, or sent
for me, rather than touch it in my absence.”

“Well,” said Cavaillon, “before despairing, let us ascertain.”

But a messenger had already informed M. Fauvel of the disaster.

As Cavaillon was about to go in quest of him, he entered the room.

M. Andre Fauvel appeared to be a man of fifty, inclined to corpulency,
of medium height, with iron-gray hair; and, like all hard workers, he
had a slight stoop.

Never did he by a single action belie the kindly expression of his face.

He had a frank air, a lively, intelligent eye, and large, red lips.

Born in the neighborhood of Aix, he betrayed, when animated, a slight
Provencal accent that gave a peculiar flavor to his genial humor.

The news of the robbery had extremely agitated him, for his usually
florid face was now quite pale.

“What is this I hear? what has happened?” he said to the clerks, who
respectfully stood aside when he entered the room.

The sound of M. Fauvel’s voice inspired the cashier with the factitious
energy of a great crisis. The dreaded and decisive moment had come; he
arose, and advanced toward his chief.

“Monsieur,” he began, “having, as you know, a payment to make this
morning, I yesterday drew from the Bank of France three hundred and
fifty thousand francs.”

“Why yesterday, monsieur?” interrupted the banker. “I think I have a
hundred times ordered you to wait until the day of the payment.”

“I know it, monsieur, and I did wrong to disobey you. But the evil is
done. Yesterday evening I locked the money up: it has disappeared, and
yet the safe has not been broken open.”

“You must be mad!” exclaimed M. Fauvel: “you are dreaming!”

These few words destroyed all hope; but the very horror of the situation
gave Prosper, not the coolness of a matured resolution, but that sort
of stupid, stolid indifference which often results from unexpected
catastrophes.

It was with apparent calmness that he replied:

“I am not mad; neither, unfortunately, am I dreaming: I am simply
telling the truth.”

This tranquillity at such a moment appeared to exasperate M. Fauvel. He
seized Prosper by the arm, and shook him roughly.

“Speak!” he cried out. “Speak! who do you pretend to say opened the
safe? Answer me!”

“I cannot say.”

“No one but you and I knew the secret word. No one but you and myself
had keys.”

This was a formal accusation; at least, all the auditors present so
understood it.

Yet Prosper’s strange calmness never left him for an instant. He quietly
released himself from M. Fauvel’s grasp, and very slowly said:

“In other words, monsieur, I am the only person who could have taken
this money.”

“Unhappy wretch!”

Prosper drew himself to his full height, and, looking M. Fauvel full in
the face, added:

“Or you!”

The banker made a threatening gesture; and there is no knowing what
would have happened if they had not been interrupted by loud and angry
voices at the entry-door.

A man insisted upon entering in spite of the protestations of the
errand-boys, and succeeded in forcing his way in. It was M. de Clameran.

The clerks stood looking on, bewildered and motionless. The silence was
profound, solemn.

It was easy to see that some terrible question, a question of life or
death, was being weighed by all these men.

The iron-founder did not appear to observe anything unusual. He
advanced, and without lifting his hat said, in the same impertinent
tone:

“It is after ten o’clock, gentlemen.”

No one answered; and M. de Clameran was about to continue, when, turning
around, he for the first time saw the banker, and walking up to him
said:

“Well, monsieur, I congratulate myself upon finding you in at last. I
have been here once before this morning, and found the cash-room not
opened, the cashier not arrived, and you absent.”

“You are mistaken, monsieur, I was in my office.”

“At any rate, I was told you were out; that gentleman over there assured
me of the fact.”

And the iron-founder pointed out Cavaillon.

“However, that is of little importance,” he went on to say. “I return,
and this time not only the cash-room is closed, but I am refused
admittance to the banking-house, and find myself compelled to force my
way in. Be so good as to tell me whether I can have my money.”

M. Fauvel’s flushed face turned pale with anger as he listened to this
insolence; yet he controlled himself.

“I would be obliged to you monsieur, for a short delay.”

“I thought you told me--”

“Yes, yesterday. But this morning, this very instant, I find I have been
robbed of three hundred and fifty thousand francs.”

M. de Clameran bowed ironically, and said:

“Shall I have to wait long?”

“Long enough for me to send to the bank.”

Then turning his back on the iron-founder, M. Fauvel said to his
cashier:

“Write and send as quickly as possible to the bank an order for three
hundred thousand francs. Let the messenger take a carriage.”

Prosper remained motionless.

“Do you hear me?” said the banker angrily.

The cashier trembled; he seemed as if trying to shake off a terrible
nightmare.

“It is useless to send,” he said in a measured tone; “we owe this
gentleman three hundred thousand francs, and we have less than one
hundred thousand in the bank.”

M. de Clameran evidently expected this answer, for he muttered:

“Naturally.”

Although he pronounced this word, his voice, his manner, his face
clearly said:

“This comedy is well acted; but nevertheless it is a comedy, and I don’t
intend to be duped by it.”

Alas! After Prosper’s answer, and the iron-founder’s coarsely expressed
opinion, the clerks knew not what to think.

The fact was, that Paris had just been startled by several financial
crashes. The thirst for speculation caused the oldest and most reliable
houses to totter. Men of the most unimpeachable honor had to sacrifice
their pride, and go from door to door imploring aid.

Credit, that rare bird of security and peace, rested with none, but
stood with upraised wings, ready to fly off at the first rumor of
suspicion.

Therefore this idea of a comedy arranged beforehand between the banker
and his cashier might readily occur to the minds of people who, if not
suspicious, were at least aware of all the expedients resorted to
by speculators in order to gain time, which with them often meant
salvation.

M. Fauvel had had too much experience not to instantly divine the
impression produced by Prosper’s answer; he read the most mortifying
doubt on the faces around him.

“Oh! don’t be alarmed, monsieur,” said he to M. de Clameran, “this house
has other resources. Be kind enough to await my return.”

He left the room, went up the narrow steps leading to his study, and
in a few minutes returned, holding in his hand a letter and a bundle of
securities.

“Here, quick, Couturier!” he said to one of his clerks, “take my
carriage, which is waiting at the door, and go with monsieur to M. de
Rothschild’s. Hand him this letter and these securities; in exchange,
you will receive three hundred thousand francs, which you will hand to
this gentleman.”

The iron-founder was visibly disappointed; he seemed desirous of
apologizing for his impertinence.

“I assure you, monsieur, that I had no intention of giving offence. Our
relations, for some years, have been such that I hope--”

“Enough, monsieur,” interrupted the banker, “I desire no apologies. In
business, friendship counts for nothing. I owe you money: I am not ready
to pay: you are pressing: you have a perfect right to demand what is
your own. Follow my clerk: he will pay you your money.”

Then he turned to his clerks who stood curiously gazing on, and said:

“As for you, gentlemen, be kind enough to resume your desks.”

In an instant the room was cleared of everyone except the clerks who
belonged there; and they sat at their desks with their noses almost
touching the paper before them, as if too absorbed in their work to
think of anything else.

Still excited by the events so rapidly succeeding each other, M.
Andre Fauvel walked up and down the room with quick, nervous steps,
occasionally uttering some low exclamation.

Prosper remained leaning against the door, with pale face and fixed
eyes, looking as if he had lost the faculty of thinking.

Finally the banker, after a long silence, stopped short before Prosper;
he had determined upon the line of conduct he would pursue.

“We must have an explanation,” he said. “Let us go into your office.”

The cashier mechanically obeyed without a word; and his chief followed
him, taking the precaution to close the door after him.

The cash-room bore no evidences of a successful burglary. Everything was
in perfect order; not even a paper was misplaced.

The safe was open, and on the top shelf lay several rouleaus of gold,
overlooked or disdained by the thieves.

M. Fauvel, without troubling himself to examine anything, took a seat,
and ordered his cashier to do the same. He had entirely recovered his
equanimity, and his countenance wore its usual kind expression.

“Now that we are alone, Prosper,” he said, “have you nothing to tell
me?”

The cashier started, as if surprised at the question. “Nothing,
monsieur, that I have not already told you.”

“What, nothing? Do you persist in asserting a fable so absurd and
ridiculous that no one can possibly believe it? It is folly! Confide in
me: it is your only chance of salvation. I am your employer, it is true;
but I am before and above all your friend, your best and truest friend.
I cannot forget that in this very room, fifteen years ago, you were
intrusted to me by your father; and ever since that day have I had cause
to congratulate myself on possessing so faithful and efficient a
clerk. Yes, it is fifteen years since you came to me. I was then just
commencing the foundation of my fortune. You have seen it gradually
grow, step by step, from almost nothing to its present height. As my
wealth increased, I endeavored to better your condition; you, who,
although so young, are the oldest of my clerks. At each inventory of my
fortune, I increased your salary.”

Never had Prosper heard him express himself in so feeling and paternal a
manner. Prosper was silent with astonishment.

“Answer,” pursued M. Fauvel: “have I not always been like a father to
you? From the first day, my house has been open to you; you were treated
as a member of my family; Madeleine and my sons looked upon you as a
brother. But you grew weary of this peaceful life. One day, a year ago,
you suddenly began to shun us; and since then----”

The memories of the past thus evoked by the banker seemed too much for
the unhappy cashier; he buried his face in his hands, and wept bitterly.

“A man can confide everything to his father without fear of being
harshly judged,” resumed M. Fauvel. “A father not only pardons, he
forgets. Do I not know the terrible temptations that beset a young man
in a city like Paris? There are some inordinate desires before which the
firmest principles must give way, and which so pervert our moral sense
as to render us incapable of judging between right and wrong. Speak,
Prosper, Speak!”

“What do you wish me to say?”

“The truth. When an honorable man yields, in an hour of weakness, to
temptation, his first step toward atonement is confession. Say to me,
Yes, I have been tempted, dazzled: the sight of these piles of gold
turned my brain. I am young: I have passions.”

“I?” murmured Prosper. “I?”

“Poor boy,” said the banker, sadly; “do you think I am ignorant of the
life you have been leading since you left my roof a year ago? Can you
not understand that all your fellow-clerks are jealous of you? that they
do not forgive you for earning twelve thousand francs a year? Never have
you committed a piece of folly without my being immediately informed of
it by an anonymous letter. I could tell the exact number of nights
you have spent at the gaming-table, and the amount of money you have
squandered. Oh, envy has good eyes and a quick ear! I have great
contempt for these cowardly denunciations, but was forced not only to
heed them, but to make inquiries myself. It is only right that I should
know what sort of a life is led by the man to whom I intrust my fortune
and my honor.”

Prosper seemed about to protest against this last speech.

“Yes, my honor,” insisted M. Fauvel, in a voice that a sense of
humiliation rendered still more vibrating: “yes, my credit might have
been compromised to-day by this M. de Clameran. Do you know how much
I shall lose by paying him this money? And suppose I had not had the
securities which I have sacrificed? you did not know I possessed them.”

The banker paused, as if hoping for a confession, which, however, did
not come.

“Come, Prosper, have courage, be frank. I will go upstairs. You will
look again in the safe: I am sure that in your agitation you did not
search thoroughly. This evening I will return; and I am confident that,
during the day, you will have found, if not the three hundred and fifty
thousand francs, at least the greater portion of it; and to-morrow
neither you nor I will remember anything about this false alarm.”

M. Fauvel had risen, and was about to leave the room, when Prosper
arose, and seized him by the arm.

“Your generosity is useless, monsieur,” he said, bitterly; “having
taken nothing, I can restore nothing. I have searched carefully; the
bank-notes have been stolen.”

“But by whom, poor fool? By whom?”

“By all that is sacred, I swear that it was not by me.”

The banker’s face turned crimson. “Miserable wretch!” cried he, “do you
mean to say that I took the money?”

Prosper bowed his head, and did not answer.

“Ah! it is thus, then,” said M. Fauvel, unable to contain himself any
longer. “And you dare--. Then, between you and me, M. Prosper Bertomy,
justice shall decide. God is my witness that I have done all I could to
save you. You will have yourself to thank for what follows. I have sent
for the commissary of police: he must be waiting in my study. Shall I
call him down?”

Prosper, with the fearful resignation of a man who abandons himself,
replied, in a stifled voice:

“Do as you will.”

The banker was near the door, which he opened, and, after giving the
cashier a last searching look, said to an office-boy:

“Anselme, ask the commissary of police to step down.”




III

If there is one man in the world whom no event can move or surprise, who
is always on his guard against deceptive appearances, and is capable
of admitting everything and explaining everything, it certainly is a
Parisian commissary of police.

While the judge, from his lofty place, applies the code to the facts
submitted to him, the commissary of police observes and watches all
the odious circumstances that the law cannot reach. He is perforce the
confidant of disgraceful details, domestic crimes, and tolerated vices.

If, when he entered upon his office, he had any illusions, before the
end of a year they were all dissipated.

If he does not absolutely despise the human race, it is because often,
side by side with abominations indulged in with impunity, he discovers
sublime generosities which remain unrewarded.

He sees impudent scoundrels filching public respect; and he consoles
himself by thinking of the modest, obscure heroes whom he has also
encountered.

So often have his previsions been deceived, that he has reached a state
of complete scepticism. He believes in nothing, neither in evil nor in
absolute good; not more in virtue than in vice.

His experience has forced him to come to the sad conclusion that not
men, but events, are worth considering.

The commissary sent for by M. Fauvel soon made his appearance.

It was with a calm air, if not one of perfect indifference, that he
entered the office.

He was followed by a short man dressed in a full suit of black, which
was slightly relieved by a crumpled collar.

The banker, scarcely bowing to him, said:

“Doubtless, monsieur, you have been apprised of the painful circumstance
which compels me to have recourse to your assistance?”

“It is about a robbery, I believe.”

“Yes; an infamous and mysterious robbery committed in this office,
from the safe you see open there, of which my cashier” (he pointed to
Prosper) “alone possesses the key and the word.”

This declaration seemed to arouse the unfortunate cashier from his dull
stupor.

“Excuse me, monsieur,” he said to the commissary in a low tone. “My
chief also has the word and the key.”

“Of course, that is understood.”

The commissary at once drew his own conclusions.

Evidently these two men accused each other.

From their own statements, one or the other was guilty.

One was the head of an important bank: the other was a simple cashier.

One was the chief: the other was the clerk.

But the commissary of police was too well skilled in concealing his
impressions to betray his thoughts by any outward sign. Not a muscle of
his face moved.

But he became more grave, and alternately watched the cashier and M.
Fauvel, as if trying to draw some profitable conclusion from their
behavior.

Prosper was very pale and dejected. He had dropped into a seat, and his
arms hung inert on either side of the chair.

The banker, on the contrary, remained standing with flashing eyes and
crimson face, expressing himself with extraordinary violence.

“And the importance of the theft is immense,” continued M. Fauvel; “they
have taken a fortune, three hundred and fifty thousand francs. This
robbery might have had the most disastrous consequences. In times
like these, the want of this sum might compromise the credit of the
wealthiest banking-house in Paris.”

“I believe so, if notes fall due.”

“Well, monsieur, I had this very day a heavy payment to make.”

“Ah, really!”

There was no mistaking the commissary’s tone; a suspicion, the first,
had evidently entered his mind.

The banker understood it; he started, and said, quickly:

“I met the demand, but at the cost of a disagreeable sacrifice. I ought
to add further that, if my orders had been obeyed, the three hundred and
fifty thousand francs would not have been in.”

“How is that?”

“I never desire to have large sums of money in my house over-night. My
cashier had positive orders to wait always until the last moment before
drawing money from the Bank of France. I above all forbade him to leave
money in the safe over-night.”

“You hear this?” said the commissary to Prosper.

“Yes, monsieur,” replied the cashier, “M. Fauvel’s statement is quite
correct.”

After this explanation, the suspicions of the commissary, instead of
being strengthened, were dissipated.

“Well,” he said, “a robbery has been perpetrated, but by whom? Did the
robber enter from without?”

The banker hesitated a moment.

“I think not,” he said at last.

“And I am certain he did not,” said Prosper.

The commissary expected and was prepared for those answers; but it did
not suit his purpose to follow them up immediately.

“However,” said he, “we must make ourselves sure of it.” Turning toward
his companion:

“M. Fanferlot,” he said, “go and see if you cannot discover some traces
that may have escaped the attention of these gentlemen.”

M. Fanferlot, nicknamed the Squirrel, was indebted to his prodigious
agility for this title, of which he was not a little proud. Slim and
insignificant in appearance he might, in spite of his iron muscles, be
taken for a bailiff’s under clerk, as he walked along buttoned up to the
chin in his thin black overcoat. He had one of those faces that impress
us disagreeably--an odiously turned-up nose, thin lips, and little,
restless black eyes.

Fanferlot, who had been on the police force for five years, burned to
distinguish himself, to make for himself a name. He was ambitious. Alas!
he was unsuccessful, lacking opportunity--or genius.

Already, before the commissary spoke to him, he had ferreted everywhere;
studied the doors, sounded the partitions, examined the wicket, and
stirred up the ashes in the fireplace.

“I cannot imagine,” said he, “how a stranger could have effected an
entrance here.”

He walked around the office.

“Is this door closed at night?” he inquired.

“It is always locked.”

“And who keeps the key?”

“The office-boy, to whom I always give it in charge before leaving the
bank,” said Prosper.

“This boy,” said M. Fauvel, “sleeps in the outer room on a
sofa-bedstead, which he unfolds at night, and folds up in the morning.”

“Is he here now?” inquired the commissary.

“Yes, monsieur,” answered the banker.

He opened the door and called:

“Anselme!”

This boy was the favorite servant of M. Fauvel, and had lived with him
for ten years. He knew that he would not be suspected; but the idea of
being connected in any way with a robbery is terrible, and he entered
the room trembling like a leaf.

“Did you sleep in the next room last night?” asked the commissary.

“Yes, monsieur, as usual.”

“At what hour did you go to bed?”

“About half-past ten; I had spent the evening at a cafe near by, with
monsieur’s valet.”

“Did you hear no noise during the night?”

“Not a sound; and still I sleep so lightly, that, if monsieur comes down
to the cash-room when I am asleep, I am instantly awakened by the sound
of his footsteps.”

“Monsieur Fauvel often comes to the cash-room at night, does he?”

“No, monsieur; very seldom.”

“Did he come last night?”

“No, monsieur, I am very certain he did not; for I was kept awake nearly
all night by the strong coffee I had drunk with the valet.”

“That will do; you can retire,” said the commissary.

When Anselme had left the room, Fanferlot resumed his search. He opened
the door of the private staircase.

“Where do these stairs lead to?” he asked.

“To my private office,” replied M. Fauvel.

“Is not that the room whither I was conducted when I first came?”
 inquired the commissary.

“The same.”

“I would like to see it,” said Fanferlot, “and examine the entrances to
it.”

“Nothing is more easy,” said M. Fauvel, eagerly; “follow me, gentlemen,
and you come too, Prosper.”

M. Fauvel’s private office consisted of two rooms; the waiting-room,
sumptuously furnished and beautifully decorated, and the study where he
transacted business. The furniture in this room was composed of a large
office-desk, several leather-covered chairs, and, on either side of the
fireplace, a secretary and a book-shelf.

These two rooms had only three doors; one opened on the private
stairway, another into the banker’s bedroom, and the third into the main
vestibule. It was through this last door that the banker’s clients and
visitors were admitted.

M. Fanferlot examined the study at a glance. He seemed puzzled, like
a man who had flattered himself with the hope of discovering some
indication, and had found nothing.

“Let us see the adjoining room,” he said.

He passed into the waiting-room, followed by the banker and the
commissary of police.

Prosper remained alone in the study.

Despite the disordered state of his mind, he could not but perceive that
his situation was momentarily becoming more serious.

He had demanded and accepted the contest with his chief; the struggle
had commenced; and now it no longer depended upon his own will to arrest
the consequences of his action.

They were about to engage in a bitter conflict, utilizing all weapons,
until one of the two should succumb, the loss of honor being the cost of
defeat.

In the eyes of justice, who would be the innocent man?

Alas! the unfortunate cashier saw only too clearly that the chances
were terribly unequal, and was overwhelmed with the sense of his own
inferiority.

Never had he thought that his chief would carry out his threats; for,
in a contest of this nature, M. Fauvel would have as much to risk as his
cashier, and more to lose.

He was sitting near the fireplace, absorbed in the most gloomy
forebodings, when the banker’s chamber-door suddenly opened, and a
beautiful girl appeared on the threshold.

She was tall and slender; a loose morning gown, confined at the waist
by a simple black ribbon, betrayed to advantage the graceful elegance of
her figure. Her black eyes were large and soft; her complexion had
the creamy pallor of a white camellia; and her beautiful dark hair,
carelessly held together by a tortoise-shell comb, fell in a profusion
of soft curls upon her exquisite neck. She was Madeleine, M. Fauvel’s
niece, of whom he had spoken not long before.

Seeing Prosper in the study, where probably she expected to find her
uncle alone, she could not refrain from an exclamation of surprise.

“Ah!”

Prosper started up as if he had received an electric shock. His eyes,
a moment before so dull and heavy, now sparkled with joy as if he had
caught a glimpse of a messenger of hope.

“Madeleine,” he gasped, “Madeleine!”

The young girl was blushing crimson. She seemed about to hastily
retreat, and stepped back; but, Prosper having advanced toward her, she
was overcome by a sentiment stronger than her will, and extended her
hand, which he seized and pressed with much agitation.

They stood thus face to face, but with averted looks, as if they dared
not let their eyes meet for fear of betraying their feelings; having
much to say, and not knowing how to begin, they stood silent.

Finally Madeleine murmured, in a scarcely audible voice:

“You, Prosper--you!”

These words broke the spell. The cashier dropped the white hand which he
held, and answered bitterly:

“Yes, this is Prosper, the companion of your childhood, suspected,
accused of the most disgraceful theft; Prosper, whom your uncle has
just delivered up to justice, and who, before the day is over, will be
arrested, and thrown into prison.”

Madeleine, with a terrified gesture, cried in a tone of anguish:

“Good heavens! Prosper, what are you saying?”

“What, mademoiselle! do you not know what has happened? Have not your
aunt and cousins told you?”

“They have told me nothing. I have scarcely seen my cousins this
morning; and my aunt is so ill that I felt uneasy, and came to tell
uncle. But for Heaven’s sake speak: tell me the cause of your distress.”

Prosper hesitated. Perhaps it occurred to him to open his heart to
Madeleine, of revealing to her his most secret thoughts. A remembrance
of the past chilled his confidence. He sadly shook his head, and
replied:

“Thanks, mademoiselle, for this proof of interest, the last, doubtless,
that I shall ever receive from you; but allow me, by being silent, to
spare you distress, and myself the mortification of blushing before
you.”

Madeleine interrupted him imperiously:

“I insist upon knowing.”

“Alas, mademoiselle!” answered Prosper, “you will only too soon learn my
misfortune and disgrace; then, yes, then you will applaud yourself for
what you have done.”

She became more urgent; instead of commanding, she entreated; but
Prosper was inflexible.

“Your uncle is in the adjoining room, mademoiselle, with the commissary
of police and a detective. They will soon return. I entreat you to
retire that they may not find you here.”

As he spoke he gently pushed her through the door, and closed it upon
her.

It was time, for the next moment the commissary and Monsieur Fauvel
entered. They had visited the main entrance and waiting-room, and had
heard nothing of what had passed in the study.

But Fanferlot had heard for them.

This excellent bloodhound had not lost sight of the cashier. He said to
himself, “Now that my young gentleman believes himself to be alone,
his face will betray him. I shall detect a smile or a wink that will
enlighten me.”

Leaving M. Fauvel and the commissary to pursue their investigations, he
posted himself to watch. He saw the door open, and Madeleine appear upon
the threshold; he lost not a single word or gesture of the rapid scene
which had passed.

It mattered little that every word of this scene was an enigma. M.
Fanferlot was skilful enough to complete the sentences he did not
understand.

As yet he only had a suspicion; but a mere suspicion is better than
nothing; it is a point to start from. So prompt was he in building a
plan upon the slightest incident that he thought he saw in the past of
these people, who were utter strangers to him, glimpses of a domestic
drama.

If the commissary of police is a sceptic, the detective has faith; he
believes in evil.

“I understand the case now,” said he to himself. “This man loves the
young lady, who is really very pretty; and, as he is quite handsome,
I suppose his love is reciprocated. This love-affair vexes the banker,
who, not knowing how to get rid of the importunate lover by fair means,
has to resort to foul, and plans this imaginary robbery, which is very
ingenious.”

Thus to M. Fanferlot’s mind, the banker had simply robbed himself, and
the innocent cashier was the victim of an odious machination.

But this conviction was, at present, of little service to Prosper.

Fanferlot, the ambitious, who had determined to obtain renown in his
profession, decided to keep his conjectures to himself.

“I will let the others go their way, and I’ll go mine,” he said.
“When, by dint of close watching and patient investigation I shall have
collected proof sufficient to insure certain conviction, I will unmask
the scoundrel.”

He was radiant. He had at last found the crime, so long looked for,
which would make him celebrated. Nothing was wanting, neither the odious
circumstances, nor the mystery, nor even the romantic and sentimental
element represented by Prosper and Madeleine.

Success seemed difficult, almost impossible; but Fanferlot, the
Squirrel, had great confidence in his own genius for investigation.

Meanwhile, the search upstairs completed, M. Fauvel and the commissary
returned to the room where Prosper was waiting for them.

The commissary, who had seemed so calm when he first came, now looked
grave and perplexed. The moment for taking a decisive part had come, yet
it was evident that he hesitated.

“You see, gentlemen,” he began, “our search has only confirmed our first
suspicion.”

M. Fauvel and Prosper bowed assentingly.

“And what do you think, M. Fanferlot?” continued the commissary.

Fanferlot did not answer.

Occupied in studying the safe-lock, he manifested signs of a lively
surprise. Evidently he had just made an important discovery.

M. Fauvel, Prosper, and the commissary rose, and surrounded him.

“Have you discovered any trace?” said the banker, eagerly.

Fanferlot turned around with a vexed air. He reproached himself for not
having concealed his impressions.

“Oh!” said he, carelessly, “I have discovered nothing of importance.”

“But we should like to know,” said Prosper.

“I have merely convinced myself that this safe has been recently opened
or shut, I know not which, with great violence and haste.”

“Why so?” asked the commissary, becoming attentive.

“Look, monsieur, at this scratch near the lock.”

The commissary stooped down, and carefully examined the safe; he saw
a light scratch several inches long that had removed the outer coat of
varnish.

“I see the scratch,” said he, “but what does that prove?”

“Oh, nothing at all!” said Fanferlot. “I just now told you it was of no
importance.”

Fanferlot said this, but it was not his real opinion.

This scratch, undeniably fresh, had for him a signification that escaped
the others. He said to himself, “This confirms my suspicions. If the
cashier had stolen millions, there was no occasion for his being in
a hurry; whereas the banker, creeping down in the dead of night with
cat-like footsteps, for fear of awakening the boy in the ante-room,
in order to rifle his own money-safe, had every reason to tremble, to
hurry, to hastily withdraw the key, which, slipping along the lock,
scratched off the varnish.”

Resolved to unravel by himself the tangled thread of this mystery, the
detective determined to keep his conjectures to himself; for the same
reason he was silent as to the interview which he had overheard between
Madeleine and Prosper.

He hastened to withdraw attention from the scratch upon the lock.

“To conclude,” he said, addressing the commissary, “I am convinced that
no one outside of the bank could have obtained access to this room. The
safe, moreover, is intact. No suspicious pressure has been used on the
movable buttons. I can assert that the lock has not been tampered with
by burglar’s tools or false keys. Those who opened the safe knew the
word, and possessed the key.”

This formal affirmation of a man whom he knew to be skilful ended the
hesitation of the commissary.

“That being the case,” he replied, “I must request a few moments’
conversation with M. Fauvel.”

“I am at your service,” said the banker.

Prosper foresaw the result of this conversation. He quietly placed his
hat on the table, to show that he had no intention of attempting to
escape, and passed into the adjoining room.

Fanferlot also went out, but not before the commissary had made him a
sign, and received one in return.

This sign signified, “You are responsible for this man.”

The detective needed no admonition to make him keep a strict watch. His
suspicions were too vague, his desire for success was too ardent, for
him to lose sight of Prosper an instant.

Closely following the cashier, he seated himself in a dark corner of the
room, and, pretending to be sleepy, he fixed himself in a comfortable
position for taking a nap, gaped until his jaw-bone seemed about to be
dislocated, then closed his eyes, and kept perfectly quiet.

Prosper took a seat at the desk of an absent clerk. The others were
burning to know the result of the investigation; their eyes shone with
curiosity, but they dared not ask a question.

Unable to refrain himself any longer, little Cavaillon, Prosper’s
defender, ventured to say:

“Well, who stole the money?”

Prosper shrugged his shoulders.

“Nobody knows,” he replied.

Was this conscious innocence or hardened recklessness? The clerks
observed with bewildered surprise that Prosper had resumed his usual
manner, that sort of icy haughtiness that kept people at a distance, and
made him so unpopular in the bank.

Save the death-like pallor of his face, and the dark circles around
his swollen eyes, he bore no traces of the pitiable agitation he had
exhibited a short time before.

Never would a stranger entering the room have supposed that this young
man idly lounging in a chair, and toying with a pencil, was resting
under an accusation of robbery, and was about to be arrested.

He soon stopped playing with the pencil, and drew toward him a sheet of
paper upon which he hastily wrote a few lines.

“Ah, ha!” thought Fanferlot the Squirrel, whose hearing and sight were
wonderfully good in spite of his profound sleep, “eh! eh! he makes his
little confidential communication on paper, I see; now we will discover
something positive.”

His note written, Prosper folded it carefully into the smallest possible
size, and after furtively glancing toward the detective, who remained
motionless in his corner, threw it across the desk to little Cavaillon
with this one word:

“Gypsy!”

All this was so quickly and skilfully done that Fanferlot was
confounded, and began to feel a little uneasy.

“The devil take him!” said he to himself; “for a suffering innocent this
young dandy has more pluck and nerve than many of my oldest customers.
This, however, shows the result of education!”

Yes: innocent or guilty, Prosper must have been endowed with great
self-control and power of dissimulation to affect this presence of mind
at a time when his honor, his future happiness, all that he held dear in
life, were at stake. And he was only thirty years old.

Either from natural deference, or from the hope of gaining some ray of
light by a private conversation, the commissary determined to speak to
the banker before acting decisively.

“There is not a shadow of doubt, monsieur,” he said, as soon as they
were alone, “this young man has robbed you. It would be a gross neglect
of duty if I did not secure his person. The law will decide whether he
shall be released, or sent to prison.”

The declaration seemed to distress the banker.

He sank into a chair, and murmured:

“Poor Prosper!”

Seeing the astonished look of his listener, he added:

“Until to-day, monsieur, I have always had the most implicit faith in
his honesty, and would have unhesitatingly confided my fortune to his
keeping. Almost on my knees have I besought and implored him to confess
that in a moment of desperation he had taken the money, promising him
pardon and forgetfulness; but I could not move him. I have loved
him; and even now, in spite of the trouble and humiliation that he is
bringing upon me, I cannot bring myself to feel harshly toward him.”

The commissary looked as if he did not understand.

“What do you mean by humiliation, monsieur?”

“What!” said M. Fauvel, excitedly; “is not justice the same for all?
Because I am the head of a bank, and he only a clerk, does it follow
that my word is more to be relied upon than his? Why could I not have
robbed myself? Such things have been done. They will ask me for facts;
and I shall be compelled to expose the exact situation of my house,
explain my affairs, disclose the secret and method of my operations.”

“It is true, monsieur, that you will be called upon for some
explanation; but your well-known integrity--”

“Alas! He was honest, too. His integrity has never been doubted.
Who would have been suspected this morning if I had not been able to
instantly produce a hundred thousand crowns? Who would be suspected if I
could not prove that my assets exceed my liabilities by more than three
millions?”

To a strictly honorable man, the thought, the possibility of suspicion
tarnishing his fair name, is cruel suffering. The banker suffered, and
the commissary of police saw it, and felt for him.

“Be calm, monsieur,” said he; “before the end of a week justice
will have collected sufficient proof to establish the guilt of this
unfortunate man, whom we may now recall.”

Prosper entered with Fanferlot, whom they had much trouble to awaken,
and with the most stolid indifference listened to the announcement of
his arrest.

In response, he calmly said:

“I swear that I am innocent.”

M. Fauvel, much more disturbed and excited than his cashier, made a last
attempt.

“It is not too late yet, poor boy,” he said: “for Heaven’s sake
reflect----”

Prosper did not appear to hear him. He drew from his pocket a small key,
which he laid on the table, and said:

“Here is the key of your safe, monsieur. I hope for my sake that you
will some day be convinced of my innocence; and I hope for your sake
that the conviction will not come too late.”

Then, as everyone was silent, he resumed:

“Before leaving I hand over to you the books, papers, and accounts
necessary for my successor. I must at the same time inform you that,
without speaking of the stolen three hundred and fifty thousand francs,
I leave a deficit in cash.”

“A deficit!” This ominous word from the lips of a cashier fell like a
bombshell upon the ears of Prosper’s hearers.

His declaration was interpreted in divers ways.

“A deficit!” thought the commissary: “how, after this, can his guilt be
doubted? Before stealing this whole contents of the safe, he has kept
his hand in by occasional small thefts.”

“A deficit!” said the detective to himself, “now, no doubt, the very
innocence of this poor devil gives his conduct an appearance of great
depravity; were he guilty, he would have replaced the first money by a
portion of the second.”

The grave importance of Prosper’s statement was considerably diminished
by the explanation he proceeded to make.

“There is a deficit of three thousand five hundred francs on my cash
account, which has been disposed of in the following manner: two
thousand taken by myself in advance on my salary; fifteen hundred
advanced to several of my fellow-clerks. This is the last day of the
month; to-morrow the salaries will be paid, consequently--”

The commissary interrupted him:

“Were you authorized to draw money whenever you wished to advance the
clerks’ pay?”

“No; but I knew that M. Fauvel would not have refused me permission to
oblige my friends in the bank. What I did is done everywhere; I have
simply followed my predecessor’s example.”

The banker made a sign of assent.

“As regards that spent by myself,” continued the cashier, “I had a sort
of right to it, all of my savings being deposited in this bank; about
fifteen thousand francs.”

“That is true,” said M. Fauvel; “M. Bertomy has at least that amount on
deposit.”

This last question settled, the commissary’s errand was over, and his
report might now be made. He announced his intention of leaving, and
ordered to cashier to prepare to follow him.

Usually, this moment when stern reality stares us in the face, when
our individuality is lost and we feel that we are being deprived of our
liberty, this moment is terrible.

At this fatal command, “Follow me,” which brings before our eyes the
yawning prison gates, the most hardened sinner feels his courage fail,
and abjectly begs for mercy.

But Prosper lost none of that studied phlegm which the commissary of
police secretly pronounced consummate impudence.

Slowly, with as much careless ease as if going to breakfast with a
friend, he smoothed his hair, drew on his overcoat and gloves, and said,
politely:

“I am ready to accompany you, monsieur.”

The commissary folded up his pocket-book, and bowed to M. Fauvel, saying
to Prosper:

“Come!”

They left the room, and with a distressed face, and eyes filled with
tears that he could not restrain, the banker stood watching their
retreating forms.

“Good Heaven!” he exclaimed: “gladly would I give twice that sum to
regain my old confidence in poor Prosper, and be able to keep him with
me!”

The quick-eared Fanferlot overheard these words, and prompted to
suspicion, and ever disposed to impute to others the deep astuteness
peculiar to himself, was convinced they had been uttered for his
benefit.

He had remained behind the others under pretext of looking for an
imaginary umbrella, and, as he reluctantly departed, said he would call
in again to see if it had been found.

It was Fanferlot’s task to escort Prosper to prison; but, as they were
about starting, he asked the commissary to leave him at liberty to
pursue another course, a request which his superior granted.

Fanferlot had resolved to obtain possession of Prosper’s note, which he
knew to be in Cavaillon’s pocket.

To obtain this written proof, which must be an important one, appeared
the easiest thing in the world. He had simply to arrest Cavaillon,
frighten him, demand the letter, and, if necessary, take it by force.

But to what would this disturbance lead? To nothing unless it were an
incomplete and doubtful result.

Fanferlot was convinced that the note was intended, not for the young
clerk, but for a third person.

If exasperated, Cavaillon might refuse to divulge who this person was,
who after all might not bear the name “Gypsy” given by the cashier. And,
even if he did answer his questions, would he not lie?

After a mature reflection, Fanferlot decided that it would be
superfluous to ask for a secret when it could be surprised. To quietly
follow Cavaillon, and keep close watch on him until he caught him in the
very act of handing over the letter, was but play for the detective.

This method of proceeding, moreover, was much more in keeping with the
character of Fanferlot, who, being naturally soft and stealthy, deemed
it due to his profession to avoid all disturbance or anything resembling
evidence.

Fanferlot’s plan was settled when he reached the vestibule.

He began talking with an office-boy, and, after a few apparently idle
questions, had discovered that the Fauvel bank had no outlet on the Rue
de la Victoire, and that consequently all the clerks were obliged to
pass in and out through the main entrance on the Rue de Provence.

From this moment the task he had undertaken no longer presented a shadow
of difficulty. He rapidly crossed the street, and took up his position
under a gateway.

His post of observation was admirably chosen; not only could he see
everyone who entered and came out of the bank, but also commanded a view
of all the windows, and by standing on tiptoe could look through the
grating, and see Cavaillon bending over his desk.

Fanferlot waited a long time, but did not wax impatient, for he had
often had to remain on watch entire days and nights at a time, with much
less important objects in view than the present one. Besides, his mind
was busily occupied in estimating the value of his discoveries, weighing
his chances, and, like Perrette with her pot of milk, building the
foundation of his fortune upon present success.

Finally, about one o’clock, he saw Cavaillon rise from his desk, change
his coat, and take down his hat.

“Very good!” he exclaimed, “my man is coming out; I must keep my eyes
open.”

The next moment Cavaillon appeared at the door of the bank; but
before stepping on the pavement he looked up and down the street in an
undecided manner.

“Can he suspect anything?” thought Fanferlot.

No, the young clerk suspected nothing; only having a commission to
execute, and fearing his absence would be observed, he was debating with
himself which would be the shortest road for him to take.

He soon decided, entered the Faubourg Montmartre, and walked up the Rue
Notre Dame de Lorette so rapidly, utterly regardless of the grumbling
passers-by whom he elbowed out of his way, that Fanferlot found it
difficult to keep him in sight.

Reaching the Rue Chaptal, Cavaillon suddenly stopped, and entered the
house numbered 39.

He had scarcely taken three steps in the narrow corridor when he felt a
touch on his shoulder, and turning abruptly, found himself face to face
with Fanferlot.

He recognized him at once, and turning very pale he shrank back, and
looked around for means of escape.

But the detective, anticipating the attempt, barred the passage-way.
Cavaillon saw that he was fairly caught.

“What do you want with me?” he asked in a voice tremulous with fright.

Fanferlot was distinguished among his confreres for his exquisite
suavity and unequalled urbanity. Even with his prisoners he was the
perfection of courtesy, and never was known to handcuff a man without
first obsequiously apologizing for being compelled to do so.

“You will be kind enough, my dear monsieur,” he said, “to excuse the
great liberty I take; but I really am under the necessity of asking you
for a little information.”

“Information! From me, monsieur?”

“From you, my dear monsieur; from M. Eugene Cavaillon.”

“But I do not know you.”

“Ah, yes; you remember seeing me this morning. It is only about a
trifling matter, and you will overwhelm me with obligations if you will
do me the honor to accept my arm, and step outside for a moment.”

What could Cavaillon do? He took Fanferlot’s arm, and went out with him.

The Rue Chaptal is not one of those noisy thoroughfares where
foot-passengers are in perpetual danger of being run over by numberless
vehicles dashing to and fro; there were but two or three shops, and from
the corner of Rue Fontaine occupied by an apothecary, to the entrance of
the Rue Leonie, extended a high, gloomy wall, broken here and there by a
small window which lighted the carpenters’ shops behind.

It was one of those streets where you could talk at your ease, without
having to step from the sidewalk every moment. So Fanferlot and
Cavaillon were in no danger of being disturbed by passers-by.

“What I wished to say is, my dear monsieur,” began the detective, “that
M. Prosper Bertomy threw you a note this morning.”

Cavaillon vaguely foresaw that he was to be questioned about this note,
and instantly put himself on his guard.

“You are mistaken,” he said, blushing to his ears.

“Excuse me, monsieur, for presuming to contradict you, but I am quite
certain of what I say.”

“I assure you that Prosper never gave me anything.”

“Pray, monsieur, do not persist in a denial; you will compel me to prove
that four clerks saw him throw you a note written in pencil and closely
folded.”

Cavaillon saw the folly of further contradicting a man so well informed;
so he changed his tactics, and said:

“It is true Prosper gave me a note this morning; but it was intended for
me alone, and after reading it I tore it up, and threw the pieces in the
fire.”

This might be the truth. Fanferlot feared so; but how could he assure
himself of the fact? He remembered that the most palpable tricks often
succeed the best, and trusting to his star, he said at hazard:

“Permit me to observe that this statement is not correct; the note was
intrusted to you to give to Gypsy.”

A despairing gesture from Cavaillon apprised the detective that he was
not mistaken; he breathed again.

“I swear to you, monsieur,” began the young man.

“Do not swear, monsieur,” interrupted Fanferlot; “all the oaths in the
world would be useless. You not only preserved the note, but you came
to this house for the purpose of giving it to Gypsy, and it is in your
pocket now.”

“No, monsieur, no!”

Fanferlot paid no attention to this denial, but continued in his
gentlest tone:

“And I am sure you will be kind enough to give it to me; believe me,
nothing but the most absolute necessity--”

“Never!” exclaimed Cavaillon; and, believing the moment favorable, he
suddenly attempted to jerk his arm from under Fanferlot’s, and escape.

But his efforts were vain; the detective’s strength was equal to his
suavity.

“Don’t hurt yourself, young man,” he said, “but take my advice, and
quietly give up the letter.”

“I have not got it.”

“Very well; see, you reduce me to painful extremities. If you persist
in being so obstinate, I shall call two policemen, who will take you by
each arm, and escort you to the commissary of police; and, once there, I
shall be under the painful necessity of searching your pockets, whether
you will or not.”

Cavaillon was devoted to Prosper, and willing to make any sacrifice
in his behalf; but he clearly saw that it was worse than useless to
struggle any longer, as he would have no time to destroy the note. To
deliver it under force was no betrayal; but he cursed his powerlessness,
and almost wept with rage.

“I am in your power,” he said, and then suddenly drew from his
pocket-book the unlucky note, and gave it to the detective.

Fanferlot trembled with pleasure as he unfolded the paper; yet, faithful
to his habits of fastidious politeness, before reading it, he bowed to
Cavaillon, and said:

“You will permit me, will you not, monsieur?” Then he read as follows:


“DEAR NINA--If you love me, follow my instructions instantly, without
a moment’s hesitation, without asking any questions. On the receipt of
this note, take everything you have in the house, absolutely everything,
and establish yourself in furnished rooms at the other end of Paris. Do
not appear in public, but conceal yourself as much as possible. My life
may depend on your obedience.

“I am accused of an immense robbery, and am about to be arrested. Take
with you five hundred francs which you will find in the secretary.

“Leave your address with Cavaillon, who will explain what I have not
time to tell. Be hopeful, whatever happens. Good-by. PROSPER.”


Had Cavaillon been less bewildered, he would have seen blank
disappointment depicted on the detective’s face after the perusal of the
note.

Fanferlot had cherished the hope that he was about to possess a very
important document, which would clearly prove the guilt or innocence of
Prosper; whereas he had only seized a love-letter written by a man who
was evidently more anxious about the welfare of the woman he loved than
about his own.

Vainly did he puzzle over the letter, hoping to discover some hidden
meaning; twist the words as he would, they proved nothing for or against
the writer.

The two words “absolutely everything” were underscored, it is true; but
they could be interpreted in so many ways.

The detective, however, determined not to drop the matter here.

“This Mme. Nina Gypsy is doubtless a friend of M. Prosper Bertomy?”

“She is his particular friend.”

“Ah, I understand; and she lives here at No. 39?”

“You know it well enough, as you saw me go in there.”

“I suspected it to be the house, monsieur; now tell me whether the
apartments she occupies are rented in her name.”

“No. Prosper rents them.”

“Exactly; and on which floor, if you please?”

“On the first.”

During this colloquy, Fanferlot had folded up the note, and slipped it
into his pocket.

“A thousand thanks, monsieur, for the information; and, in return, I
will relieve you of the trouble of executing your commission.”

“Monsieur!”

“Yes: with your permission, I will myself take this note to Mme. Nina
Gypsy.”

Cavaillon began to remonstrate; but Fanferlot cut him short by saying:

“I will also venture to give you a piece of advice. Return quietly to
your business, and have nothing more to do with this affair.”

“But Prosper is a good friend of mine, and has saved me from ruin more
than once.”

“Only the more reason for your keeping quiet. You cannot be of the
slightest assistance to him, and I can tell you that you may be of
great injury. As you are known to be his devoted friend, of course your
absence at this time will be remarked upon. Any steps that you take in
this matter will receive the worst interpretation.”

“Prosper is innocent, I am sure.”

Fanferlot was of the same opinion, but he had no idea of betraying his
private thoughts; and yet for the success of his investigations it was
necessary to impress the importance of prudence and discretion upon the
young man. He would have told him to keep silent concerning what had
passed between them, but he dared not.

“What you say may be true,” he said. “I hope it is, for the sake of M.
Bertomy, and on your own account too; for, if he is guilty, you will
certainly be very much annoyed, and perhaps suspected of complicity, as
you are well known to be intimate with him.”

Cavaillon was overcome.

“Now you had best take my advice, monsieur, and return to your business,
and--. Good-morning, monsieur.”

The poor fellow obeyed. Slowly and with swelling heart he returned
to the Rue Notre Dame de Lorette. He asked himself how he could serve
Prosper, warn Mme. Gypsy, and, above all, have his revenge upon this
odious detective, who had just made him suffer cruel humiliation.

He had no sooner turned the corner of the street, than Fanferlot entered
No. 39, gave his name to the porter as Prosper Bertomy, went upstairs,
and knocked at the first door he came to.

It was opened by a youthful footman, dressed in the most fanciful
livery.

“Is Mme. Gypsy at home?”

The groom hesitated; seeing this, Fanferlot showed his note, and said:

“M. Prosper told me to hand this note to madame, and wait for an
answer.”

“Walk in, and I will let madame know you are here.”

The name of Prosper produced its effect. Fanferlot was ushered into
a little room furnished in blue and gold silk damask. Heavy curtains
darkened the windows, and hung in front of the doors. The floor was
covered with a blue velvet carpet.

“Our cashier was certainly well lodged,” murmured the detective.

But he had no time to purse his inventory. One of the door-curtains was
pushed aside, and Mme. Nina Gypsy stood before him.

Mme. Gypsy was quite young, small, and graceful, with a brown or rather
gold-colored quadroon complexion, with the hands and feet of a child.

Long curling silk lashes softened the piercing brilliancy of her large
black eyes; her lips were full, and her teeth were very white.

She had not yet made her toilet, but wore a velvet dressing-wrapper,
which did not conceal the lace ruffles beneath. But she had already been
under the hands of a hairdresser.

Her hair was curled and frizzed high on her forehead, and confined by
narrow bands of red velvet; her back hair was rolled in an immense coil,
and held by a beautiful gold comb.

She was ravishing. Her beauty was so startling that the dazzled
detective was speechless with admiration.

“Well,” he said to himself, as he remembered the noble, severe beauty of
Madeleine, whom he had seen a few hours previous, “our young gentleman
certainly has good taste--very good taste--two perfect beauties!”

While he thus reflected, perfectly bewildered, and wondering how
he could begin the conversation, Mme. Gypsy eyed him with the most
disdainful surprise; she was waiting for this shabby little man in a
threadbare coat and greasy hat to explain his presence in her dainty
parlor.

She had many creditors, and was recalling them, and wondering which one
had dared send this man to wipe his dusty boots on her velvet carpets.

After scrutinizing him from head to foot with undisguised contempt, she
said, haughtily:

“What do you want?”

Anyone but Fanferlot would have been offended at her insolent manner;
but he only noticed it to gain some notion of the young woman’s
disposition.

“She is bad-tempered,” he thought, “and is uneducated.”

While he was speculating upon her merits, Mme. Nina impatiently tapped
her little foot, and waited for an answer; finally she said:

“Why don’t you speak? What do you want here?”

“I am charged, my dear madame,” he answered in his softest tone, “by M.
Bertomy, to give you this note.”

“From Prosper! You know him, then?”

“I have that honor, madame; indeed, I may be so bold as to claim him as
a friend.”

“Monsieur! _You_ a friend of Prosper!” exclaimed Mme. Gypsy in a
scornful tone, as if her pride were wounded.

Fanferlot did not condescend to notice this offensive exclamation. He
was ambitious, and contempt failed to irritate him.

“I said a friend of his, madame, and there are few people who would have
the courage to claim friendship for him now.”

Mme. Gypsy was struck by the words and manner of Fanferlot.

“I never could guess riddles,” she said, tartly: “will you be kind
enough to explain what you mean?”

The detective slowly drew Prosper’s note from his pocket, and, with a
bow, presented it to Mme. Gypsy.

“Read, madame,” he said.

She certainly anticipated no misfortune; although her sight was
excellent, she stopped to fasten a tiny gold eyeglass on her nose, then
carelessly opened the note.

At a glance she read its contents.

She turned very red, then very pale; she trembled as if with a nervous
chill; her limbs seemed to give way, and she tottered so that Fanferlot,
thinking she was about to fall, extended his arms to catch her.

Useless precaution! Mme. Gypsy was one of those women whose inert
listlessness conceals indomitable energy; fragile-looking creatures
whose powers of endurance and resistance are unlimited; cat-like in
their soft grace and delicacy, especially cat-like in their nerves and
muscles of steel.

The dizziness caused by the shock she had received quickly passed off.
She tottered, but did not fall, and stood up looking stronger than
ever; seizing the wrist of the detective, she held it as if her delicate
little hand were a vice, and cried out:

“Explain yourself! what does all this mean? Do you know anything about
the contents of this note?”

Although Fanferlot betrayed courage in daily contending with the most
dangerous rascals, he was positively terrified by Mme. Gypsy.

“Alas!” he murmured.

“Prosper is to be arrested, accused of being a thief?”

“Yes, madame, he is accused of taking three hundred and fifty thousand
francs from the bank-safe.”

“It is false, infamous, absurd!” she cried. She had dropped Fanferlot’s
hand; and her fury, like that of a spoiled child, found vent in violent
actions. She tore her web-like handkerchief, and the magnificent lace on
her gown, to shreds.

“Prosper steal!” she cried; “what a stupid idea! Why should he steal? Is
he not rich?”

“M. Bertomy is not rich, madame; he has nothing but his salary.”

The answer seemed to confound Mme. Gypsy.

“But,” she insisted, “I have always seen him have plenty of money; not
rich--then----”

She dared not finish; but her eye met Fanferlot’s, and they understood
each other.

Mme. Nina’s look meant:

“He committed this robbery in order to gratify my extravagant whims.”

Fanferlot’s glance answered:

“Very likely, madame.”

A few minutes’ reflection convinced Nina that her first impression
was the correct one. Doubt fled after hovering for an instant over her
agitated mind.

“No!” she cried, “I regret to say that Prosper would never have stolen
one cent for me. One can understand a man robbing a bank to obtain means
of bestowing pleasure and luxury upon the woman he loves; but Prosper
does not love me, he never has loved me.”

“Oh, fair lady!” protested the gallant and insinuating Fanferlot, “you
surely cannot mean what you say.”

Her beautiful eyes filled with tears, as she sadly shook her head, and
said:

“I mean exactly what I say. It is only too true. He is ready to gratify
my every wish, you may say; what does that prove? Nothing. I am too
well convinced that he does not love me. I know what love is. Once I was
beloved by an affectionate, true-hearted man; and my own sufferings of
the last year make me know how miserable I must have made him by my cold
return. Alas! we must suffer ourselves before we can feel for others.
No, I am nothing to Prosper; he would not care if--”

“But then, madame, why--”

“Ah, yes,” interrupted Nina, “why? you will be very wise if you can
answer me. For a year have I vainly sought an answer to this question,
so sad to me. I, a woman, cannot answer it; and I defy you to do so. You
cannot discover the thoughts of a man so thoroughly master of himself
that never is a single thought passing in his mind to be detected upon
his countenance. I have watched him as only a woman can watch the man
upon whom her fate depends, but it has always been in vain. He is kind
and indulgent; but he does not betray himself, never will he commit
himself. Ignorant people call him weak, yielding: I tell you that
fair-haired man is a rod of iron painted like a reed!”

Carried away by the violence of her feelings, Mme. Nina betrayed her
inmost thoughts. She was without distrust, never suspecting that the
stranger listening to her was other than a friend of Prosper.

As for Fanferlot, he congratulated himself upon his success. No one but
a woman could have drawn him so excellent a portrait; in a moment of
excitement she had given him the most valuable information; he now
knew the nature of the man with whom he had to deal, which in an
investigation like that he was pursuing is the principal point.

“You know that M. Bertomy gambles,” he ventured to say, “and gambling is
apt to lead a man--”

Mme. Gypsy shrugged her shoulders, and interrupted him:

“Yes, he plays,” she said, “but he is not a gambler. I have seen him
lose and gain large sums without betraying the slightest agitation. He
plays as he drinks, as he sups, as he falls in love--without passion,
without enthusiasm, without pleasure. Sometimes he frightens me; he
seems to drag about a body without a soul. Ah, I am not happy! Never
have I been able to overcome his indifference, and indifference so
great, so reckless, that I often think it must be despair; nothing will
convince me that he has not some terrible secret, some great misfortune
weighing upon his mind, and making life a burden.”

“Then he has never spoken to you of his past?”

“Why should he tell me? Did you not hear me? I tell you he does not love
me!”

Mme. Nina was overcome by thoughts of the past, and tears silently
coursed down her cheeks.

But her despair was only momentary. She started up, and, her eyes
sparkling with generous resolution, she cried out:

“But I love him, and I will save him! I will see his chief, the
miserable wretch who dares to accuse him. I will haunt the judges, and
I will prove that he is innocent. Come, monsieur, let us start, and I
promise you that before sunset he shall be free, or I shall be in prison
with him.”

Mme. Gypsy’s project was certainly laudable, and prompted by the noblest
sentiments; but unfortunately it was impracticable.

Moreover, it would be going counter to the plans of the detective.

Although he had resolved to reserve to himself all the difficulties
as well as the benefits of this inquiry, Fanferlot saw clearly that
he could not conceal the existence of Mme. Nina from the judge of
instruction. She would necessarily be brought into the case, and sought
for. But he did not wish her to take any steps of her own accord. He
proposed to have her appear when and how he judged proper, so that he
might gain for himself the merit of having discovered her.

His first step was to endeavor to calm the young woman’s excitement. He
thought it easy to prove to her that the least interference in favor of
Prosper would be a piece of folly.

“What will you gain by acting thus, my dear madame?” he asked. “Nothing.
I can assure you that you have not the least chance of success. Remember
that you will seriously compromise yourself. Who knows if you will not
be suspected as M. Bertomy’s accomplice?”

But this alarming perspective, which had frightened Cavaillon into
foolishly giving up a letter which he might so easily have retained,
only stimulated Gypsy’s enthusiasm. Man calculates, while woman follows
the inspirations of her heart. Our most devoted friend, if a man,
hesitates and draws back: if a woman, rushes undauntedly forward,
regardless of the danger.

“What matters the risk?” she exclaimed. “I don’t believe any danger
exists; but, if it does, so much the better: it will be all the more to
my credit. I am sure Prosper is innocent; but, if he should be guilty, I
wish to share the punishment which awaits him.”

Mme. Gypsy’s persistence was becoming alarming. She hastily drew around
her a cashmere shawl, and, putting on her hat, declared that she was
ready to walk from one end of Paris to the other, in search of the
judge.

“Come, monsieur,” she said with feverish impatience. “Are you not coming
with me?”

Fanferlot was perplexed. Happily he always had several strings to his
bow.

Personal considerations having no hold upon this impulsive nature, he
resolved to appeal to her interest in Prosper.

“I am at your command, fair lady,” he said; “let us go if you desire
it; only permit me, while there is yet time, to say that we are very
probably going to do great injury to M. Bertomy.”

“In what way, if you please?”

“Because we are taking a step that he expressly forbade in his letter;
we are surprising him--giving him no warning.”

Nina scornfully tossed her head, and replied:

“There are some people who must be saved without warning, and against
their will. I know Prosper: he is just the man to let himself be
murdered without a struggle, without speaking a word--to give himself up
through sheer recklessness and despair.”

“Excuse me, madame,” interrupted the detective: “M. Bertomy has by
no means the appearance of a man who has given up in despair. On the
contrary, I think he has already laid his plan of defence. By showing
yourself, when he advised you to remain in concealment, you will be very
likely to make vain his most careful precautions.”

Mme. Gypsy was silently weighing the value of Fanferlot’s objections.
Finally she said:

“I cannot remain here inactive, without attempting to contribute in
some way to his safety. Can you not understand that this floor burns my
feet?”

Evidently, if she was not absolutely convinced, her resolution was
shaken. Fanferlot saw that he was gaining ground, and this certainty,
making him more at ease, gave weight to his eloquence.

“You have it in your power, madame,” he said, “to render a great service
to the man you love.”

“In what way, monsieur, in what way?”

“Obey him, my child,” said Fanferlot, in a paternal manner.

Mme. Gypsy evidently expected very different advice.

“Obey,” she murmured, “obey!”

“It is your duty,” said Fanferlot with grave dignity, “it is your sacred
duty.”

She still hesitated; and he took from the table Prosper’s note, which
she had laid there, then continued:

“What! M. Bertomy at the most trying moment, when he is about to be
arrested, stops to point out your line of conduct; and you would render
vain this wise precaution! What does he say to you? Let us read over
this note, which is like the testament of his liberty. He says, ‘If you
love me, I entreat you, obey.’ And you hesitate to obey. Then you do not
love him. Can you not understand, unhappy child, that M. Bertomy has his
reasons, terrible, imperious reasons, for your remaining in obscurity
for the present?”

Fanferlot understood these reasons the moment he put his foot in the
sumptuous apartment of the Rue Chaptal; and, if he did not expose them
now, it was because he kept them as a good general keeps his reserve,
for the purpose of deciding the victory.

Mme. Gypsy was intelligent enough to divine these reasons.

“Reasons for my hiding! Prosper wishes, then, to keep everyone in
ignorance of our intimacy.”

She remained thoughtful for a moment; then a ray of light seemed to
cross her mind, and she cried:

“Oh, I understand now! Fool that I was for not seeing it before! My
presence here, where I have been for a year, would be an overwhelming
charge against him. An inventory of my possessions would be taken--of my
dresses, my laces, my jewels--and my luxury would be brought against him
as a crime. He would be asked to tell where he obtained so much money to
lavish all these elegancies on me.”

The detective bowed, and said:

“That is true, madame.”

“Then I must fly, monsieur, at once. Who knows that the police are not
already warned, and may appear at any moment?”

“Oh,” said Fanferlot with easy assurance, “you have plenty of time; the
police are not so very prompt.”

“No matter!”

And, leaving the detective alone in the parlor, Mme. Nina hastily
ran into her bedroom, and calling her maid, her cook, and her little
footman, ordered them to empty her bureau and chests of their contents,
and assisted them to stuff her best clothing and jewels into her trunks.

Suddenly she rushed back to Fanferlot and said:

“Everything will be ready to start in a few minutes, but where am I to
go?”

“Did not M. Bertomy say, my dear lady, to the other end of Paris? To a
hotel, or furnished apartments.”

“But I don’t know where to find any.”

Fanferlot seemed to be reflecting; but he had great difficulty in
concealing his delight at a sudden idea that flashed upon him; his
little black eyes fairly danced with joy.

“I know of a hotel,” he said at last, “but it might not suit you. It is
not elegantly furnished like this room.”

“Would I be comfortable there?”

“Upon my recommendation you would be treated like a queen, and, above
all, concealed.”

“Where is it?”

“On the other side of the river, Quai Saint Michel, the Archangel, kept
by Mme. Alexandre.”

Mme. Nina was never long making up her mind.

“Here are pen and paper; write your recommendation.”

He rapidly wrote, and handed her the letter.

“With these three lines, madame, you can make Mme. Alexandre do anything
you wish.”

“Very good. Now, how am I to let Cavaillon know my address? It was he
who should have brought me Prosper’s letter.”

“He was unable to come, madame,” interrupted the detective, “but I will
give him your address.”

Mme. Gypsy was about to send for a carriage, but Fanferlot said he was
in a hurry, and would send her one. He seemed to be in luck that day;
for a cab was passing the door, and he hailed it.

“Wait here,” he said to the driver, after telling him that he was a
detective, “for a little brunette who is coming down with some trunks.
If she tells you to drive her to Quai Saint Michel, crack your whip; if
she gives you any other address, get down from your seat, and arrange
your harness. I will keep in sight.”

He stepped across the street, and stood in the door of a wine-store.
He had not long to wait. In a few minutes the loud cracking of a whip
apprised him that Mme. Nina had started for the Archangel.

“Aha,” said he, gayly, “I told _her_, at any rate.”




IV

At the same hour that Mme. Nina Gypsy was seeking refuge at the
Archangel, so highly recommended by Fanferlot the Squirrel, Prosper
Bertomy was being entered on the jailer’s book at the police office.

Since the moment when he had resumed his habitual composure, he had not
faltered.

Vainly did the people around him watch for a suspicious expression, or
any sign of giving way under the danger of his situation.

His face was like marble.

One would have supposed him insensible to the horrors of his condition,
had not his heavy breathing, and the beads of perspiration standing on
his brow, betrayed the intense agony he was suffering.

At the police office, where he had to wait two hours while the
commissary went to receive orders from higher authorities, he entered
into conversation with the two bailiffs who had charge of him.

At twelve o’clock he said he was hungry, and sent to a restaurant near
by for his breakfast, which he ate with a good appetite; he also drank
nearly a bottle of wine.

While he was thus occupied, several clerks from the prefecture, who
have to transact business daily with the commissary of police, curiously
watched him. They all formed the same opinion, and admiringly said to
each other:

“Well, he is made of strong material, he is!”

“Yes, my dandy looks too lamb-like to be left to his own devices. He
ought to have a strong escort.”

When he was told that a coach was waiting for him at the door, he at
once got up; but, before going out, he requested permission to light a
cigar, which was granted.

A flower-girl stood just by the door, with her stand filled with all
varieties of flowers. He stopped and bought a bunch of violets. The
girl, seeing that he was arrested, said, by way of thanks:

“Good luck to you, my poor gentleman!”

He appeared touched by this mark of interest, and replied:

“Thanks, my good woman, but ‘tis a long time since I have had any.”

It was magnificent weather, a bright spring morning. As the coach went
along Rue Montmartre, Prosper kept his head out of the window, at the
same time smilingly complaining at being imprisoned on such a lovely
day, when everything outside was so sunny and pleasant.

“It is singular,” he said, “I never felt so great a desire to take a
walk.”

One of the bailiffs, a large, jovial, red-faced man, received this
remark with a hearty burst of laughter, and said:

“I understand.”

To the court clerk, while he was going through the formalities of the
commitment, Prosper replied with haughty brevity to the indispensable
questions asked him.

But when he was ordered to empty his pockets on the table, and they
began to search him, his eyes flashed with indignation, and a single
tear dropped upon his flushed cheek. In an instant he had recovered his
stony calmness, and stood up motionless, with his arms raised in the air
so that the rough creatures about him could more conveniently ransack
him from head to foot, to assure themselves that he had no suspicious
object hid under his clothes.

The search would have, perhaps, been carried to the most ignominious
lengths, but for the intervention of a middle-aged man of rather
distinguished appearance, who wore a white cravat and gold spectacles,
and was sitting quite at home by the fire.

He started with surprise, and seemed much agitated, when he saw Prosper
brought in by the bailiffs; he stepped forward, and seemed about to
speak to him, then suddenly changed his mind, and sat down again.

In spite of his own troubles, Prosper could not help seeing that this
man kept his eyes fastened upon him. Did he know him? Vainly did he try
to recollect having met him before.

This man, treated with all the deference due to a chief, was no less a
personage than M. Lecoq, a celebrated member of the detective corps.

When the men who were searching Prosper were about to take off his
boots, saying that a knife might be concealed in them. M. Lecoq waved
them aside with an air of authority, and said:

“You have done enough.”

He was obeyed. All the formalities being ended, the unfortunate cashier
was taken to a narrow cell; the heavily barred door was swung to and
locked upon him; he breathed freely; at last he was alone.

Yes, he believed himself to be alone. He was ignorant that a prison is
made of glass, that the accused is like a miserable insect under the
microscope of an entomologist. He knew not that the walls have stretched
ears and watchful eyes.

He was so sure of being alone that he at once gave vent to his
suppressed feelings, and, dropping his mask of impassibility, burst
into a flood of tears. His long-restrained anger now flashed out like a
smouldering fire.

In a paroxysm of rage he uttered imprecations and curses. He dashed
himself against the prison-walls like a wild beast in a cage.

Prosper Bertomy was not the man he appeared to be.

This haughty, correct gentleman had ardent passions and a fiery
temperament.

One day, when he was about twenty-four years of age, he had become
suddenly fired by ambition. While all of his desires were repressed,
imprisoned in his low estate, like an athlete in a strait-jacket, seeing
around him all these rich people with whom money assumed the place of
the wand in the fairy-tale, he envied their lot.

He studied the beginnings of these financial princes, and found that at
the starting-point they possessed far less than himself.

How, then, had they succeeded? By force of energy, industry, and
assurance.

He determined to imitate and excel them.

From this day, with a force of will much less rare than we think, he
imposed silence upon his instincts. He reformed not his morals, but his
manners; and so strictly did he conform to the rules of decorum, that
he was regarded as a model of propriety by those who knew him, and had
faith in his character; and his capabilities and ambition inspired the
prophecy that he would be successful in attaining eminence and wealth.

And the end of all was this: imprisoned for robbery; that is, ruined!

For he did not attempt to deceive himself. He knew that, guilty or
innocent, a man once suspected is as ineffaceably branded as the
shoulder of a galley-slave.

Therefore what was the use of struggling? What benefit was a triumph
which could not wash out the stain?

When the jailer brought him his supper, he found him lying on his
pallet, with his face buried in the pillow, weeping bitterly.

Ah, he was not hungry now! Now that he was alone, he fed upon his own
bitter thoughts. He sank from a state of frenzy into one of stupefying
despair, and vainly did he endeavor to clear his confused mind, and
account for the dark cloud gathering about him; no loop-hole for escape
did he discover.

The night was long and terrible, and for the first time he had nothing
to count the hours by, as they slowly dragged on, but the measured tread
of the patrol who came to relieve the sentinels. He was wretched.

At dawn he dropped into a sleep, a heavy, oppressive sleep, which was
more wearisome than refreshing; from which he was startled by the rough
voice of the jailer.

“Come, monsieur,” he said, “it is time for you to appear before the
judge of instruction.”

He jumped up at once, and, without stopping to repair his disordered
toilet, said:

“Come on, quick!”

The constable remarked, as they walked along:

“You are very fortunate in having your case brought before an honest
man.”

He was right.

Endowed with remarkable penetration, firm, unbiased, equally free from
false pity and excessive severity, M. Patrigent possessed in an eminent
degree all the qualities necessary for the delicate and difficult office
of judge of instruction.

Perhaps he was wanting in the feverish activity which is sometimes
necessary for coming to a quick and just decision; but he possessed
unwearying patience, which nothing could discourage. He would cheerfully
devote years to the examination of a case; he was even now engaged on a
case of Belgian bank-notes, of which he did not collect all the threads,
and solve the mystery, until after four years’ investigation.

Thus it was always to his office that they brought the endless lawsuits,
half-finished inquests, and tangled cases.

This was the man before whom they were taking Prosper; and they were
taking him by a difficult road.

He was escorted along a corridor, through a room full of policemen, down
a narrow flight of steps, across a kind of cellar, and then up a steep
staircase which seemed to have no terminus.

Finally he reached a long narrow galley, upon which opened many doors,
bearing different numbers.

The custodian of the unhappy cashier stopped before one of these doors,
and said:

“Here we are; here your fate will be decided.”

At this remark, uttered in a tone of deep commiseration, Prosper could
not refrain from shuddering.

It was only too true, that on the other side of this door was a man upon
whose decision his freedom depended.

Summoning all his courage, he turned the door-knob, and was about to
enter when the constable stopped him.

“Don’t be in such haste,” he said; “you must sit down here, and wait
till your turn comes; then you will be called.”

The wretched man obeyed, and his keeper took a seat beside him.

Nothing is more terrible and lugubrious than this gallery of the judges
of instruction.

Stretching the whole length of the wall is a wooden bench blackened by
constant use. This bench has for the last ten years been daily occupied
by all the murderers, thieves, and suspicious characters of the
Department of the Seine.

Sooner or later, fatally, as filth rushes to a sewer, does crime
reach this gallery, this dreadful gallery with one door opening on the
galleys, the other on the scaffold. This place was vulgarly and pithily
denominated by a certain magistrate as the great public wash-house of
all the dirty linen in Paris.

When Prosper reached the gallery it was full of people. The bench was
almost entirely occupied. Beside him, so close as to touch his shoulder,
sat a man with a sinister countenance, dressed in rags.

Before each door, which belonged to a judge of instruction, stood groups
of witnesses talking in an undertone.

Policemen were constantly coming and going with prisoners. Sometimes,
above the noise of their heavy boots, tramping along the flagstones,
could be heard a woman’s stifled sobs, and looking around you would
see some poor mother or wife with her face buried in her handkerchief,
weeping bitterly.

At short intervals a door would open and shut, and a bailiff call out a
name or number.

This stifling atmosphere, and the sight of so much misery, made the
cashier ill and faint; he was feeling as if another five minutes’ stay
among these wretched creatures would make him deathly sick, when a
little old man dressed in black, wearing the insignia of his office, a
steel chain, cried out:

“Prosper Bertomy!”

The unhappy man arose, and, without knowing how, found himself in the
office of the judge of instruction.

For a moment he was blinded. He had come out of a dark room; and the one
in which he now found himself had a window directly opposite the door,
so that a flood of light fell suddenly upon him.

This office, like all those on the gallery, was of a very ordinary
appearance, small and dingy.

The wall was covered with cheap dark green paper, and on the floor was a
hideous brown carpet, very much worn.

Opposite the door was a large desk, filled with bundles of law-papers,
behind which was seated the judge, facing those who entered, so that his
face remained in the shade, while that of the prisoner or witness whom
he questioned was in a glare of light.

At the right, before a little table, sat a clerk writing, the
indispensable auxiliary of the judge.

But Prosper observed none of these details: his whole attention was
concentrated upon the arbiter of his fate, and as he closely examined
his face he was convinced that the jailer was right in calling him an
honorable man.

M. Patrigent’s homely face, with its irregular outline and short red
whiskers, lit up by a pair of bright, intelligent eyes, and a kindly
expression, was calculated to impress one favorably at first sight.

“Take a seat,” he said to Prosper.

This little attention was gratefully welcomed by the prisoner, for he
had expected to be treated with harsh contempt. He looked upon it as a
good sign, and his mind felt a slight relief.

M. Patrigent turned toward the clerk, and said:

“We will begin now, Sigault; pay attention.”

“What is your name?” he then asked, looking at Prosper.

“Auguste Prosper Bertomy.”

“How old are you?”

“I shall be thirty the 5th of next May.”

“What is your profession?”

“I am--that is, I was--cashier in M. Andre Fauvel’s bank.”

The judge stopped to consult a little memorandum lying on his desk.
Prosper, who followed attentively his every movement, began to be
hopeful, saying to himself that never would a man so unprejudiced have
the cruelty to send him to prison again.

After finding what he looked for, M. Patrigent resumed the examination.

“Where do you live?”

“At No. 39, Rue Chaptal, for the last four years. Before that time I
lived at No. 7, Boulevard des Batignolles.”

“Where were you born?”

“At Beaucaire in the Department of the Gard.”

“Are your parents living?”

“My mother died two years ago; my father is still living.”

“Does he live in Paris?”

“No, monsieur: he lives at Beaucaire with my sister, who married one of
the engineers of the Southern Canal.”

It was in broken tones that Prosper answered these last questions.
There are moments in the life of a man when home memories encourage
and console him; there are also moments when he would be thankful to be
without a single tie, and bitterly regrets that he is not alone in the
world.

M. Patrigent observed the prisoner’s emotion, when he spoke of his
parents.

“What is your father’s calling?” he continued.

“He was formerly superintendent of the bridges and canals; then he
was employed on the Southern Canal, with my brother-in-law; now he has
retired from business.”

There was a moment’s silence. The judge had turned his chair around, so
that, although his head was apparently averted, he had a good view of
the workings of Prosper’s face.

“Well,” he said, abruptly, “you are accused of having robbed M. Fauvel
of three hundred and fifty thousand francs.”

During the last twenty-four hours the wretched young man had had time to
familiarize himself with the terrible idea of this accusation; and yet,
uttered as it was in this formal, brief tone, it seemed to strike him
with a horror which rendered him incapable of opening his lips.

“What have you to answer?” asked the judge.

“That I am innocent, monsieur; I swear that I am innocent!”

“I hope you are,” said M. Patrigent, “and you may count upon me to
assist you to the extent of my ability in proving your innocence. You
must have defence, some facts to state; have you not?”

“Ah, monsieur, what can I say, when I cannot understand this dreadful
business myself? I can only refer you to my past life.”

The judge interrupted him:

“Let us be specific; the robbery was committed under circumstances that
prevent suspicion from falling upon anyone but M. Fauvel and yourself.
Do you suspect anyone else?”

“No, monsieur.”

“You declare yourself to be innocent, therefore the guilty party must be
M. Fauvel.”

Prosper remained silent.

“Have you,” persisted the judge, “any cause for believing that M. Fauvel
robbed himself?”

The prisoner preserved a rigid silence.

“I see, monsieur,” said the judge, “that you need time for reflection.
Listen to the reading of your examination, and after signing it you will
return to prison.”

The unhappy man was overcome. The last ray of hope was gone. He heard
nothing of what Sigault read, and he signed the paper without looking at
it.

He tottered as he left the judge’s office, so that the keeper was forced
to support him.

“I fear your case looks dark, monsieur,” said the man, “but don’t be
disheartened; keep up your courage.”

Courage! Prosper had not a spark of it when he returned to his cell; but
his heart was filled with anger and resentment.

He had determined that he would defend himself before the judge, that
he would prove his innocence; and he had not had time to do so. He
reproached himself bitterly for having trusted to the judge’s benevolent
face.

“What a farce,” he angrily exclaimed, “to call that an examination!”

It was not really an examination, but a mere formality.

In summoning Prosper, M. Patrigent obeyed Article 93 of the Criminal
Code, which says, “Every suspected person under arrest must be examined
within twenty-four hours.”

But it is not in twenty-four hours, especially in a case like this, with
no evidence or material proof, that a judge can collect the materials
for an examination.

To triumph over the obstinate defence of a prisoner who shuts himself up
in absolute denial as if in a fortress, valid proofs are needed. These
weapons M. Patrigent was busily preparing. If Prosper had remained a
little longer in the gallery, he would have seen the same bailiff who
had called him come out to the judge’s office, and cry out:

“Number three.”

The witness, who was awaiting his turn, and answered the call for number
three, was M. Fauvel.

The banker was no longer the same man. Yesterday he was kind and affable
in his manner: now, as he entered the judge’s room, he seemed irritated.
Reflection, which usually brings calmness and a desire to pardon,
brought him anger and a thirst for vengeance.

The inevitable questions which commence every examination had scarcely
been addressed to him before his impetuous temper gained the mastery,
and he burst forth in invectives against Prosper.

M. Patrigent was obliged to impose silence upon him, reminding him of
what was due to himself, no matter what wrongs he had suffered at the
hands of his clerk.

Although he had very slightly examined Prosper, the judge was now
scrupulously attentive and particular in having every question answered.
Prosper’s examination had been a mere formality, the stating and proving
a fact. Now it related to collecting the attendant circumstances and
the most trifling particulars, so as to group them together, and reach a
just conclusion.

“Let us proceed in order,” said the judge, “and pray confine yourself
to answering my questions. Did you ever suspect your cashier of being
dishonest?”

“Certainly not. Yet there were reasons which should have made me
hesitate to trust him with my funds.”

“What reasons?”

“M. Bertomy played cards. I have known of his spending whole nights at
the gaming table, and losing immense sums of money. He was intimate with
an unprincipled set. Once he was mixed up with one of my clients, M. de
Clameran, in a scandalous gambling affair which took place at the house
of some disreputable woman, and wound up by being tried before the
police court.”

For some minutes the banker continued to revile Prosper.

“You must confess, monsieur,” interrupted the judge, “that you were very
imprudent, if not culpable, to have intrusted your safe to such a man.”

“Ah, monsieur, Prosper was not always thus. Until the past year he was
a model of goodness. He lived in my house as one of my family; he spent
all of his evenings with us, and was the bosom friend of my eldest son
Lucien. One day, he suddenly left us, and never came to the house again.
Yet I had every reason to believe him attached to my niece Madeleine.”

M. Patrigent had a peculiar manner of contracting his brows when he
thought he had discovered some new proof. He now did this, and said:

“Might not this admiration for the young lady have been the cause of M.
Bertomy’s estrangement?”

“How so?” said the banker with surprise. “I was willing to bestow
Madeleine upon him, and, to be frank, was astonished that he did not ask
for her hand. My niece would be a good match for any man, and he should
have considered himself fortunate to obtain her. She is beautiful, and
her dowry will be half a million.”

“Then you can see no motive for your cashier’s conduct?”

“It is impossible for me to account for it. I have, however, always
supposed that Prosper was led astray by a young man whom he met at my
house about this time, M. Raoul de Lagors.”

“Ah! and who is this young man?”

“A relative of my wife; a very attractive, intelligent young man,
somewhat wild, but rich enough to pay for his follies.”

The judge wrote the name Lagors at the bottom of an already long list on
his memorandum.

“Now,” he said, “we are coming to the point. You are sure that the theft
was not committed by anyone in your house?”

“Quite sure, monsieur.”

“You always kept your key?”

“I generally carried it about on my person; and, whenever I left it at
home, I put it in the secretary drawer in my chamber.”

“Where was it the evening of the robbery?”

“In my secretary.”

“But then--”

“Excuse me for interrupting you,” said M. Fauvel, “and to permit me to
tell you that, to a safe like mine, the key is of no importance. In the
first place, one is obliged to know the word upon which the five movable
buttons turn. With the word one can open it without the key; but without
the word--”

“And you never told this word to anyone?”

“To no one, monsieur, and sometimes I would have been puzzled to know
myself with what word the safe had been closed. Prosper would change it
when he chose, and, if he had not informed me of the change, would have
to come and open it for me.”

“Had you forgotten it on the day of the theft?”

“No: the word had been changed the day before; and its peculiarity
struck me.”

“What was it?”

“Gypsy, g, y, p, s, y,” said the banker, spelling the name.

M. Patrigent wrote down this name.

“One more question, monsieur: were you at home the evening before the
robbery?”

“No; I dined and spent the evening with a friend; when I returned home,
about one o’clock, my wife had retired, and I went to bed immediately.”

“And you were ignorant of the amount of money in the safe?”

“Absolutely. In conformity with my positive orders, I could only suppose
that a small sum had been left there over-night; I stated this fact to
the commissary in M. Bertomy’s presence, and he acknowledged it to be
the case.”

“Perfectly correct, monsieur: the commissary’s report proves it.” M.
Patrigent was for a time silent. To him everything depended upon this
one fact, that the banker was unaware of the three hundred and fifty
thousand francs being in the safe, and Prosper had disobeyed orders
by placing them there over-night; hence the conclusion was very easily
drawn.

Seeing that his examination was over, the banker thought that he would
relieve his mind of what was weighing upon it.

“I believe myself above suspicion, monsieur,” he began, “and yet I can
never rest easy until Bertomy’s guilt has been clearly proved. Calumny
prefers attacking a successful man: I may be calumniated: three hundred
and fifty thousand francs is a fortune capable of tempting even a
rich man. I would be obliged if you would have the condition of my
banking-house examined. This examination will prove that I could have
no interest in robbing my own safe. The prosperous condition of my
affairs--”

“That is sufficient, monsieur.”

M. Patrigent was well informed of the high standing of the banker, and
knew almost as much of his affairs as did M. Fauvel himself.

He asked him to sign his testimony, and then escorted him to the door of
his office, a rare favor on his part.

When M. Fauvel had left the room, Sigault indulged in a remark.

“This seems to be a very cloudy case,” he said; “if the cashier is
shrewd and firm, it will be difficult to convict him.”

“Perhaps it will,” said the judge, “but let us hear the other witnesses
before deciding.”

The person who answered to the call for number four was Lucien, M.
Fauvel’s eldest son.

He was a tall, handsome young man of twenty-two. To the judge’s
questions he replied that he was very fond of Prosper, was once very
intimate with him, and had always regarded him as a strictly honorable
man, incapable of doing anything unbecoming a gentleman.

He declared that he could not imagine what fatal circumstances could
have induced Prosper to commit a theft. He knew he played cards, but not
to the extent that was reported. He had never known him to indulge in
expenses beyond his means.

In regard to his cousin Madeleine, he replied:

“I always thought that Prosper was in love with Madeleine, and, until
yesterday, I was certain he would marry her, knowing that my father
would not oppose their marriage. I have always attributed the
discontinuance of Prosper’s visits to a quarrel with my cousin, but
supposed they would end by becoming reconciled.”

This information, more than that of M. Fauvel, threw light upon
Prosper’s past life, but did not apparently reveal any evidence which
could be used in the present state of affairs.

Lucien signed his deposition, and withdrew.

Cavaillon’s turn for examination came next. The poor fellow was in a
pitiable state of mind when he appeared before the judge.

Having, as a great secret, confided to a friend his adventure with the
detective, and being jeered at for his cowardice in giving up the note,
he felt great remorse, and passed the night in reproaching himself for
having ruined Prosper.

He endeavored to repair, as well as he could, what he called his
treason.

He did not exactly accuse M. Fauvel, but he courageously declared that
he was the cashier’s friend, and that he was as sure of his innocence as
he was of his own.

Unfortunately, besides his having no proofs to strengthen his
assertions, these were deprived of any value by his violent professions
of friendship for the accused.

After Cavaillon, six or eight clerks of the Fauvel bank successively
defiled in the judge’s office; but their depositions were nearly all
insignificant.

One of them, however, stated a fact which the judge carefully noted.
He said he knew that Prosper had speculated on the Bourse through the
medium of M. Raoul de Lagors, and had gained immense sums.

Five o’clock struck before the list of witnesses summoned for the day
was exhausted. But the task of M. Patrigent was not yet finished. He
rang for his bailiff, who instantly appeared, and said to him:

“Go at once, and bring Fanferlot here.”

It was some time before the detective answered the summons. Having met
a colleague on the gallery, he thought it his duty to treat him to a
drink; and the bailiff had found it necessary to bring him from the
little inn at the corner.

“How is it that you keep people waiting?” said the judge, when he
entered bowing and scraping. Fanferlot bowed more profoundly still.

Despite his smiling face, he was very uneasy. To prosecute the Bertomy
case alone, it required a double play that might be discovered at any
moment; to manage at once the cause of justice and his own ambition, he
ran great risks, the least of which was the losing of his place.

“I have a great deal to do,” he said, to excuse himself, “and have not
wasted any time.”

And he began to give a detailed account of his movements. He was
embarrassed, for he spoke with all sorts of restrictions, picking out
what was to be said, and avoiding what was to be left unsaid. Thus he
gave the history of Cavaillon’s letter, which he handed to the judge;
but he did not breathe a word of Madeleine. On the other hand, he gave
biographical details, very minute indeed, of Prosper and Mme. Gypsy,
which he had collected from various quarters during the day.

As he progressed the conviction of M. Patrigent was strengthened.

“This young man is evidently guilty,” he said. Fanferlot did not reply;
his opinion was different, but he was delighted that the judge was
on the wrong track, thinking that his own glory would thereby be the
greater when he discovered the real culprit. True, this grand discovery
was as far off as it had ever been; but Fanferlot was hopeful.

After hearing all he had to tell, the judge dismissed Fanferlot, telling
him to return the next day.

“Above all,” he said, as Fanferlot left the room, “do not lose sight of
the girl Gypsy; she must know where the money is, and can put us on the
track.”

Fanferlot smiled cunningly.

“You may rest easy about that, monsieur; the lady is in good hands.”

Left to himself, although the evening was far advanced, M. Patrigent
continued to busy himself with the case, and to arrange that the rest of
the depositions should be made.

This case had actually taken possession of his mind; it was, at the same
time, puzzling and attractive. It seemed to be surrounded by a cloud of
mystery, and he determined to penetrate and dispel it.

The next morning he was in his office much earlier than usual. On this
day he examined Mme. Gypsy, recalled Cavaillon, and sent again for M.
Fauvel. For several days he displayed the same activity.

Of all the witnesses summoned, only two failed to appear.

One was the office-boy sent by Prosper to bring the money from the city
bank; he was ill from a fall.

The other was M. Raoul de Lagors.

But their absence did not prevent the file of papers relating to
Prosper’s case from daily increasing; and on the ensuing Monday, five
days after the robbery, M. Patrigent thought he held in his hands enough
moral proof to crush the accused.




V

While his whole past was the object of the most minute investigations,
Prosper was in prison, in a secret cell.

The two first days had not appeared very long.

He had requested, and been granted, some sheets of paper, numbered,
which he was obliged to account for; and he wrote, with a sort of rage,
plans of defence and a narrative of justification.

The third day he began to be uneasy at not seeing anyone except the
condemned prisoners who were employed to serve those confined in secret
cells, and the jailer who brought him his food.

“Am I not to be examined again?” he would ask.

“Your turn is coming,” the jailer invariably answered.

Time passed; and the wretched man, tortured by the sufferings of
solitary confinement which quickly breaks the spirit, sank into the
depths of despair.

“Am I to stay here forever?” he moaned.

No, he was not forgotten; for on Monday morning, at one o’clock, an hour
when the jailer never came, he heard the heavy bolt of his cell pushed
back.

He ran toward the door.

But the sight of a gray-headed man standing on the sill rooted him to
the spot.

“Father,” he gasped, “father!”

“Your father, yes!”

Prosper’s astonishment at seeing his father was instantly succeeded by a
feeling of great joy.

A father is one friend upon whom we can always rely. In the hour of
need, when all else fails, we remember this man upon whose knees we sat
when children, and who soothed our sorrows; and although he can in no
way assist us, his presence alone comforts and strengthens.

Without reflecting, Prosper, impelled by tender feeling, was about to
throw himself on his father’s bosom.

M. Bertomy harshly repulsed him.

“Do not approach me!” he exclaimed.

He then advanced into the cell, and closed the door. The father and son
were alone together, Prosper heart-broken, crushed; M. Bertomy angry,
almost threatening.

Cast off by this last friend, by his father, the miserable young man
seemed to be stupefied with pain and disappointment.

“You too!” he bitterly cried. “You, you believe me guilty? Oh, father!”

“Spare yourself this shameful comedy,” interrupted M. Bertomy: “I know
all.”

“But I am innocent, father; I swear it by the sacred memory of my
mother.”

“Unhappy wretch,” cried M. Bertomy, “do not blaspheme!”

He seemed overcome by tender thoughts of the past, and in a weak, broken
voice, he added:

“Your mother is dead, Prosper, and little did I think that the day would
come when I could thank God for having taken her from me. Your crime
would have killed her, would have broken her heart!”

After a painful silence, Prosper said:

“You overwhelm me, father, and at the moment when I need all my courage;
when I am the victim of an odious plot.”

“Victim!” cried M. Bertomy, “victim! Dare you utter your insinuations
against the honorable man who has taken care of you, loaded you with
benefits, and had insured you a brilliant future! It is enough for you
to have robbed him; do not calumniate him.”

“For pity’s sake, father, let me speak!”

“I suppose you would deny your benefactor’s kindness. Yet you were at
one time so sure of his affection, that you wrote me to hold myself in
readiness to come to Paris and ask M. Fauvel for the hand of his niece.
Was that a lie too?”

“No,” said Prosper in a choked voice, “no.”

“That was a year ago; you then loved Mlle. Madeleine; at least you wrote
to me that you--”

“Father, I love her now, more than ever; I have never ceased to love
her.”

M. Bertomy made a gesture of contemptuous pity.

“Indeed!” he cried, “and the thought of the pure, innocent girl whom you
loved did not prevent your entering upon a path of sin. You loved her:
how dared you, then, without blushing, approach her presence after
associating with the shameless creatures with whom you were so
intimate?”

“For Heaven’s sake, let me explain by what fatality Madeleine--”

“Enough, monsieur, enough. I told you that I know everything. I saw M.
Fauvel yesterday; this morning I saw the judge, and ‘tis to his kindness
that I am indebted for this interview. Do you know what mortification
I suffered before being allowed to see you? I was searched and made to
empty all of my pockets, on suspicion of bringing you arms!”

Prosper ceased to justify himself, but in a helpless, hopeless way,
dropped down upon a seat.

“I have seen your apartments, and at once recognized the proofs of your
crime. I saw silk curtains hanging before every window and door, and
the walls covered with pictures. In my father’s house the walls were
whitewashed; and there was but one arm-chair in the whole house, and
that was my mother’s. Our luxury was our honesty. You are the first
member of our family who has possessed Aubusson carpets; though, to be
sure, you are the first thief of our blood.”

At this last insult Prosper’s face flushed crimson, but he remained
silent and immovable.

“But luxury is necessary now,” continued M. Bertomy, becoming more
excited and angry as he went on, “luxury must be had at any price. You
must have the insolent opulence and display of an upstart, without being
an upstart. You must support worthless women who wear satin slippers
lined with swan’s-down, like those I saw in your rooms, and keep
servants in livery--and you steal! And bankers no longer trust their
safe-keys with anybody; and every day honest families are disgraced by
the discovery of some new piece of villainy.”

M. Bertomy suddenly stopped. He saw that his son was not in a condition
to hear any more reproaches.

“But I will say no more,” he said. “I came here not to reproach, but
to, if possible, save the honor of our name, to prevent it from being
published in the papers bearing the names of thieves and murderers.
Stand up and listen to me!”

At the imperious tone of his father, Prosper arose. So many successive
blows had reduced him to a state of torpor.

“First of all,” began M. Bertomy, “how much have you remaining of the
stolen three hundred and fifty thousand francs?”

“Once more, father,” replied the unfortunate man in a tone of hopeless
resignation, “once more I swear I am innocent.”

“So I supposed you would say. Then our family will have to repair the
injury you have done M. Fauvel.”

“What do you mean?”

“The day he heard of your crime, your brother-in-law brought me your
sister’s dowry, seventy thousand francs. I succeeded in collecting a
hundred and forty thousand francs more. This makes two hundred and ten
thousand francs which I have brought with me to give to M. Fauvel.”

This threat aroused Prosper from his torpor.

“You shall do nothing of the kind!” he cried with unrestrained
indignation.

“I will do so before the sun goes down this day. M. Fauvel will grant me
time to pay the rest. My pension is fifteen hundred francs. I can live
upon five hundred, and am strong enough to go to work again; and your
brother-in-law--”

M. Bertomy stopped short, frightened at the expression of his son’s
face. His features were contracted with such furious rage that he was
scarcely recognizable, and his eyes glared like a maniac’s.

“You dare not disgrace me thus!” he cried; “you have no right to do it.
You are free to disbelieve me yourself, but you have no right for taking
a step that would be a confession of guilt, and ruin me forever. Who
and what convinces you of my guilt? When cold justice hesitates, you,
my father, hesitate not, but, more pitiless than the law, condemn me
unheard!”

“I only do my duty.”

“Which means that I stand on the edge of a precipice, and you push me
over. Do you call that your duty? What! between strangers who accuse me,
and myself who swear that I am innocent, you do not hesitate? Why? Is
it because I am your son? Our honor is at stake, it is true; but that is
only the more reason why you should sustain me, and assist me to defend
myself.”

Prosper’s earnest, truthful manner was enough to unsettle the firmest
convictions, and make doubt penetrate the most stubborn mind.

“Yet,” said M. Bertomy in a hesitating tone, “everything seems to accuse
you.”

“Ah, father, you do not know that I was suddenly banished from
Madeleine’s presence; that I was compelled to avoid her. I became
desperate, and tried to forget my sorrow in dissipation. I sought
oblivion, and found shame and disgust. Oh, Madeleine, Madeleine!”

He was overcome with emotion; but in a few minutes he started up with
renewed violence in his voice and manner.

“Everything is against me!” he exclaimed, “but no matter. I will justify
myself or perish in the attempt. Human justice is liable to error;
although innocent, I may be convicted: so be it. I will undergo my
penalty; but people are not kept galley-slaves forever.”

“What do you mean?”

“I mean, father, that I am now another man. My life, henceforth, has an
object, vengeance! I am the victim of a vile plot. As long as I have a
drop of blood in my veins, I will seek its author. And I will certainly
find him; and then bitterly shall he expiate all of my cruel suffering.
The blow came from the house of Fauvel, and I will live to prove it.”

“Take care: your anger makes you say things that you will repent
hereafter.”

“Yes, I see, you are going to descant upon the probity of M. Andre
Fauvel. You will tell me that all the virtues have taken refuge in the
bosom of this patriarchal family. What do you know about it? Would this
be the first instance in which the most shameful secrets are concealed
beneath the fairest appearances? Why did Madeleine suddenly forbid me to
think of her? Why has she exiled me, when she suffers as much from our
separation as I myself, when she still loves me? For she does love me. I
am sure of it. I have proofs of it.”

The jailer came to say that the time allotted to M. Bertomy had expired,
and that he must leave the cell.

A thousand conflicting emotions seemed to rend the old man’s heart.

Suppose Prosper were telling the truth: how great would be his remorse,
if he had added to his already great weight of sorrow and trouble! And
who could prove that he was not sincere?

The voice of this son, of whom he had always been so proud, had aroused
all his paternal affection, so violently repressed. Ah, were he guilty,
and guilty of a worse crime, still he was his son, his only son!

His countenance lost its severity, and his eyes filled with tears.

He had resolved to leave, as he had entered, stern and angry: he had
not the cruel courage. His heart was breaking. He opened his arms, and
pressed Prosper to his heart.

“Oh, my son!” he murmured. “God grant you have spoken the truth!”

Prosper was triumphant: he had almost convinced his father of his
innocence. But he had not time to rejoice over this victory.

The cell-door again opened, and the jailer’s gruff voice once more
called out:

“It is time for you to appear before the court.”

He instantly obeyed the order.

But his step was no longer unsteady, as a few days previous: a complete
change had taken place within him. He walked with a firm step, head
erect, and the fire of resolution in his eye.

He knew the way now, and he walked a little ahead of the constable who
escorted him.

As he was passing through the room full of policemen, he met the man
with gold spectacles, who had watched him so intently the day he was
searched.

“Courage, M. Prosper Bertomy,” he said: “if you are innocent, there are
those who will help you.”

Prosper started with surprise, and was about to reply, when the man
disappeared.

“Who is that gentleman?” he asked of the policeman.

“Is it possible that you don’t know him?” replied the policeman with
surprise. “Why, it is M. Lecoq, of the police service.”

“You say his name is Lecoq?”

“You might as well say ‘monsieur,’” said the offended policeman; “it
would not burn your mouth. M. Lecoq is a man who knows everything that
he wants to know, without its ever being told to him. If you had had
him, instead of that smooth-tongued imbecile Fanferlot, your case would
have been settled long ago. Nobody is allowed to waste time when he has
command. But he seems to be a friend of yours.”

“I never saw him until the first day I came here.”

“You can’t swear to that, because no one can boast of knowing the
real face of M. Lecoq. It is one thing to-day, and another to-morrow;
sometimes he is a dark man, sometimes a fair one, sometimes quite young,
and then an octogenarian: why, not seldom he even deceives me. I begin
to talk to a stranger, paf! the first thing I know, it is M. Lecoq!
Anybody on the face of the earth might be he. If I were told that you
were he, I should say, ‘It is very likely.’ Ah! he can convert himself
into any shape and form he chooses. He is a wonderful man!”

The constable would have continued forever his praises of M. Lecoq, had
not the sight of the judge’s door put an end to them.

This time, Prosper was not kept waiting on the wooden bench: the judge,
on the contrary, was waiting for him.

M. Patrigent, who was a profound observer of human nature, had contrived
the interview between M. Bertomy and his son.

He was sure that between the father, a man of such stubborn honor, and
the son, accused of theft, an affecting scene would take place, and this
scene would completely unman Prosper, and make him confess.

He determined to send for him as soon as the interview was over, while
all his nerves were vibrating with terrible emotions: he would tell the
truth, to relieve his troubled, despairing mind.

His surprise was great to see the cashier’s bearing; resolute without
obstinacy, firm and assured without defiance.

“Well,” he said, “have you reflected?”

“Not being guilty, monsieur, I had nothing to reflect upon.”

“Ah, I see the prison has not been a good counsellor; you forget that
sincerity and repentance are the first things necessary to obtain the
indulgence of the law.”

“I crave no indulgence, monsieur.”

M. Patrigent looked vexed, and said:

“What would you say if I told you what had become of the three hundred
and fifty thousand francs?”

Prosper shook his head sadly.

“If it were known, monsieur, I would not be here, but at liberty.”

This device had often been used by the judge, and generally succeeded;
but, with a man so thoroughly master of himself, there was small chance
of success. It had been used at a venture, and failed.

“Then you persist in accusing M. Fauvel?”

“Him, or someone else.”

“Excuse me: no one else, since he alone knew the word. Had he any
interest in robbing himself?”

“I can think of none.”

“Well, now I will tell you what interest you had in robbing him.”

M. Patrigent spoke as a man who was convinced of the facts he was about
to state; but his assurance was all assumed.

He had relied upon crushing, at a blow, a despairing wretched man, and
was nonplussed by seeing him appear as determined upon resistance.

“Will you be good enough to tell me,” he said, in a vexed tone, “how
much you have spent during the last year?”

Prosper did not find it necessary to stop to reflect and calculate.

“Yes, monsieur,” he answered, unhesitatingly: “circumstances made it
necessary for me to preserve the greatest order in my wild career; I
spent about fifty thousand francs.”

“Where did you obtain them?”

“In the first place, twelve thousand francs were left to me by my
mother. I received from M. Fauvel fourteen thousand francs, as my
salary, and share of the profits. By speculating in stocks, I gained
eight thousand francs. The rest I borrowed, and intend repaying out of
the fifteen thousand francs which I have deposited in M. Fauvel’s bank.”

The account was clear, exact, and could be easily proved; it must be a
true one.

“Who lent you the money?”

“M. Raoul de Lagors.”

This witness had left Paris the day of the robbery, and could not be
found; so, for the time being, M. Patrigent was compelled to rely upon
Prosper’s word.

“Well,” he said, “I will not press this point; but tell me why, in spite
of the formal order of M. Fauvel, you drew the money from the Bank of
France the night before, instead of waiting till the morning of the
payment?”

“Because M. de Clameran had informed me that it would be agreeable,
necessary even, for him to have his money early in the morning. He will
testify to that fact, if you summon him; and I knew that I should reach
my office late.”

“Then M. de Clameran is a friend of yours?”

“By no means. I have always felt repelled by him; but he is the intimate
friend of M. Lagors.”

While Sigault was writing down these answers, M. Patrigent was racking
his brain to imagine what could have occurred between M. Bertomy and his
son, to cause this transformation in Prosper.

“One more thing,” said the judge: “how did you spend the evening, the
night before the crime?”

“When I left my office, at five o’clock, I took the St.-Germain train,
and went to Vesinet, M. de Lagors’s country seat, to carry him fifteen
hundred francs which he had asked for; and, finding him not at home, I
left it with his servant.”

“Did he tell you that M. de Lagors was going away?”

“No, monsieur. I did not know that he had left Paris.”

“Where did you go when you left Vesinet?”

“I returned to Paris, and dined at a restaurant with a friend.”

“And then?”

Prosper hesitated.

“You are silent,” said M. Patrigent; “then I shall tell you how you
employed your time. You returned to your rooms in the Rue Chaptal,
dressed yourself, and attended a _soiree_ given by one of those women
who style themselves dramatic artistes, and who are a disgrace to
the stage; who receive a hundred crowns a year, and yet keep their
carriages, at Mlle. Wilson’s.”

“You are right, monsieur.”

“There is heavy playing at Wilson’s?”

“Sometimes.”

“You are in the habit of visiting places of this sort. Were you not
connected in some way with a scandalous adventure which took place at
the house of a woman named Crescenzi?”

“I was summoned to testify, having witnessed a theft.”

“Gambling generally leads to stealing. And did you not play baccarat at
Wilson’s, and lose eighteen hundred francs?”

“Excuse me, monsieur, only eleven hundred.”

“Very well. In the morning you paid a note of a thousand francs.”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“Moreover, there remained in your desk five hundred francs, and you had
four hundred in your purse when you were arrested. So that altogether,
in twenty-four hours, four thousand five hundred francs--”

Prosper was not discountenanced, but stupefied.

Not being aware of the powerful means of investigation possessed by the
law, he wondered how in so short a time the judge could have obtained
such accurate information.

“Your statement is correct, monsieur,” he said finally.

“Where did all this money come from? The evening before you had so
little that you were obliged to defer the payment of a small bill.”

“The day to which you allude, I sold through an agent some bonds I had,
about three thousand francs; besides, I took from the safe two thousand
francs in advance on my salary.”

The prisoner had given clear answers to all the questions put to him,
and M. Patrigent thought he would attack him on a new point.

“You say you have no wish to conceal any of your actions; then why did
you write this note to one of your companions?” Here he held up the
mysterious note.

This time the blow struck. Prosper’s eyes dropped before the inquiring
look of the judge.

“I thought,” he stammered, “I wished--”

“You wished to screen this woman?”

“Yes, monsieur; I did. I knew that a man in my condition, accused of
a robbery, has every fault, every weakness he has ever indulged in,
charged against him as a great crime.”

“Which means that you knew that the presence of a woman at your house
would tell very much against you, and that justice would not excuse this
scandalous defiance of public morality. A man who respects himself so
little as to associate with a worthless woman, does not elevate her to
his standard, but he descends to her base level.”

“Monsieur!”

“I suppose you know who the woman is, whom you permit to bear the honest
name borne by your mother?”

“Mme. Gypsy was a governess when I first knew her. She was born at
Oporto, and came to France with a Portuguese family.”

“Her name is not Gypsy; she has never been a governess, and she is not a
Portuguese.”

Prosper began to protest against this statement; but M. Patrigent
shrugged his shoulders, and began looking over a large file of papers on
his desk.

“Ah, here it is,” he said, “listen: Palmyre Chocareille, born at Paris
in 1840, daughter of James Chocareille, undertaker’s assistant, and of
Caroline Piedlent, his wife.”

Prosper looked vexed and impatient; he did not know that the judge was
reading him this report to convince him that nothing can escape the
police.

“Palmyre Chocareille,” he continued, “at twelve years of age was
apprenticed to a shoemaker, and remained with him until she was sixteen.
Traces of her for one year are lost. At the age of seventeen she is
hired as a servant by a grocer on the Rue St. Denis, named Dombas, and
remains there three months. She lives out during this same year,
1857, at eight different places. In 1858 she entered the store of a
fan-merchant in Choiseul Alley.”

As he read, the judge watched Prosper’s face to observe the effect of
these revelations.

“Toward the close of 1858 she was employed as a servant by Madame Munes,
and accompanied her to Lisbon. How long she remained in Lisbon, and
what she did while she remained there, is not reported. But in 1861 she
returned to Paris, and was sentenced to three months’ imprisonment for
assault and battery. Ah, she returned from Portugal with the name of
Nina Gypsy.”

“But I assure you, monsieur,” Prosper began.

“Yes, I understand; this history is less romantic, doubtless, than the
one related to you; but then it has the merit of being true. We lose
sight of Palmyre Chocareille, called Gypsy, upon her release from
prison, but we meet her again six months later, having made the
acquaintance of a travelling agent named Caldas, who became infatuated
with her beauty, and furnished her a house near the Bastille. She
assumed his name for some time, then she deserted him to devote herself
to you. Did you ever hear of this Caldas?”

“Never, monsieur.”

“This foolish man so deeply loved this creature that her desertion drove
him almost insane from grief. He was a very resolute man, and publicly
swore that he would kill his rival if he ever found him. The current
report afterward was, that he committed suicide. He certainly sold
the furniture of the House occupied by Chocareille, and suddenly
disappeared. All the efforts made to discover him proved fruitless.”

The judge stopped a moment as if to give Prosper time for reflection,
and then slowly said:

“And this is the woman whom you made your companion, the woman for whom
you robbed the bank!”

Once more M. Patrigent was on the wrong track, owing to Fanferlot’s
incomplete information.

He had hoped that Prosper would betray himself by uttering some
passionate retort when thus wounded to the quick; but he remained
impassible. Of all the judge said to him his mind dwelt upon only one
word--Caldas, the name of the poor travelling agent who had killed
himself.

“At any rate,” insisted M. Patrigent, “you will confess that this girl
has caused your ruin.”

“I cannot confess that, monsieur, for it is not true.”

“Yet she is the occasion of your extravagance. Listen.” The judge here
drew a bill from the file of papers. “During December you paid her
dressmaker, Van Klopen, for two walking dresses, nine hundred francs;
one evening dress, seven hundred francs; one domino, trimmed with lace,
four hundred francs.”

“I spent this money cheerfully, but nevertheless I was not especially
attached to her.”

M. Patrigent shrugged his shoulders.

“You cannot deny the evidence,” said he. “I suppose you will also say
that it was not for this girl’s sake you ceased spending your evenings
at M. Fauvel’s?”

“I swear that she was not the cause of my ceasing to visit M. Fauvel’s
family.”

“Then why did you cease, suddenly, your attentions to a young lady whom
you confidently expected to marry, and whose hand you had written to
your father to demand for you?”

“I had reasons which I cannot reveal,” answered Prosper with emotion.

The judge breathed freely; at last he had discovered a vulnerable point
in the prisoner’s armor.

“Did Mlle. Madeleine banish you?”

Prosper was silent, and seemed agitated.

“Speak,” said M. Patrigent; “I must tell you that this circumstance is
one of the most important in your case.”

“Whatever the cost may be, on this subject I am compelled to keep
silence.”

“Beware of what you do; justice will not be satisfied with scruples of
conscience.”

M. Patrigent waited for an answer. None came.

“You persist in your obstinacy, do you? Well, we will go on to the next
question. You have, during the last year, spent fifty thousand francs.
Your resources are at an end, and your credit is exhausted; to continue
your mode of life was impossible. What did you intend to do?”

“I had no settled plan. I thought it might last as long as it would, and
then I----”

“And then you would draw from the safe!”

“Ah, monsieur, if I were guilty, I should not be here! I should never
have been such a fool as to return to the bank; I should have fled.”

M. Patrigent could not restrain a smile of satisfaction, and exclaimed:

“Exactly the argument I expected you to use. You showed your shrewdness
precisely by staying to face the storm, instead of flying the country.
Several recent suits have taught dishonest cashiers that flight abroad
is dangerous. Railways travel fast, but telegrams travel faster. A
French thief can be arrested in London within forty-eight hours after
his description has been telegraphed. Even America is no longer a
refuge. You remained prudently and wisely, saying to yourself, ‘I will
manage to avoid suspicion; and, even if I am found out, I shall be free
again after three or five years’ seclusion, with a large fortune to
enjoy.’ Many people would sacrifice five years of their lives for three
hundred and fifty thousand francs.”

“But monsieur, had I calculated in the manner you describe, I should not
have been content with three hundred and fifty thousand francs; I should
have waited for an opportunity to steal half a million. I often have
that sum in charge.”

“Oh! it is not always convenient to wait.”

Prosper was buried in deep thought for some minutes.

“Monsieur,” he finally said, “there is one detail I forgot to mention
before, and it may be of importance.”

“Explain, if you please.”

“The office messenger whom I sent to the Bank of France for the money
must have seen me tie up the bundle, and put it away in the safe. At any
rate, he knows that I left the bank before he did.”

“Very well; the man shall be examined. Now you can return to your
cell; and once more I advise you to consider the consequences of your
persistent denial.”

M. Patrigent thus abruptly dismissed Prosper because he wished to
immediately act upon this last piece of information.

“Sigault,” said he as soon as Prosper had left the room, “is not this
Antonin the man who was excused from testifying because he sent a
doctor’s certificate declaring him too ill to appear?”

“It is, monsieur.”

“Where doe he live?”

“Fanferlot says he was so ill that he was taken to the hospital--the
Dubois Hospital.”

“Very well. I am going to examine him to-day, this very hour. Take your
pen and paper, and send for a carriage.”

It was some distance from the Palais de Justice to the Dubois Hospital;
but the cabman, urged by the promise of a large fee, made his sorry
jades fly as if they were blooded horses.

Would Antonin be able to answer any questions?

The physician in charge of the hospital said that, although the man
suffered horribly from a broken knee, his mind was perfectly clear.

“That being the case, monsieur,” said the judge, “I wish to examine him,
and desire that no one be admitted while he makes his deposition.”

“Oh! you will not be intruded upon, monsieur; his room contains four
beds, but they are just now unoccupied.”

When Antonin saw the judge enter, followed by a little weazened man in
black, with a portfolio under his arm, he at once knew what he had come
for.

“Ah,” he said, “monsieur comes to see me about M. Bertomy’s case?”

“Precisely.”

M. Patrigent remained standing by the sick-bed while Sigault arranged
his papers on a little table.

In answer to the usual questions, the messenger swore that he was named
Antonin Poche, was forty years old, born at Cadaujac (Gironde), and was
unmarried.

“Now,” said the judge, “are you well enough to clearly answer any
questions I may put?”

“Certainly, monsieur.”

“Did you, on the 27th of February, go to the Bank of France for the
three hundred and fifty thousand francs that were stolen?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“At what hour did you return with the money?”

“It must have been five o’clock when I got back.”

“Do you remember what M. Bertomy did when you handed him the notes? Now,
do not be in a hurry; think before you answer.”

“Let me see: first he counted the notes, and made them into four
packages; then he put them in the safe; and then--it seems to me--and
then he locked the safe; and, yes, I am not mistaken, he went out!”

He uttered these last words so quickly, that, forgetting his knee, he
half started up, but, with a cry of pain, sank back in bed.

“Are you sure of what you say?” asked the judge.

M. Patrigent’s solemn tone seemed to frighten Antonin.

“Sure?” he replied with marked hesitation, “I would bet my head on it,
yet I am not sure!”

It was impossible for him to be more decided in his answers. He had been
frightened. He already imagined himself in difficulty, and for a trifle
would have retracted everything.

But the effect was already produced; and when they retired M. Patrigent
said to Sigault:

“This is a very important piece of evidence.”




VI

The Archangel Hotel, Mme. Gypsy’s asylum, was the most elegant building
on the Quai St. Michel.

A person who pays her fortnight’s board in advance is treated with
consideration at this hotel.

Mme. Alexandre, who had been a handsome woman, was now stout, laced till
she could scarcely breathe, always over-dressed, and fond of wearing a
number of flashy gold chains around her fat neck.

She had bright eyes and white teeth; but, alas, a red nose. Of all her
weaknesses, and Heaven knows she had indulged in every variety, only one
remained; she loved a good dinner, washed down with plenty of good wine.

She also loved her husband; and, about the time M. Patrigent was leaving
the hospital, she began to be worried that her “little man” had not
returned to dinner. She was about to sit down without him, when the
hotel-boy cried out:

“Here is monsieur.”

And Fanferlot appeared in person.

Three years before, Fanferlot had kept a little office of secret
intelligence; Mme. Alexandre was a trader without a license in perfumery
and toilet articles, and, finding it necessary to watch some of her
suspicious customers, engaged Fanferlot’s services; this was the origin
of their acquaintance.

If they went through the marriage ceremony for the good of the mayoralty
and the church, it was because they imagined it would, like a baptism,
wash out the sins of the past.

Upon this momentous day, Fanferlot gave up his secret intelligence
office, and entered the police, where he had already been occasionally
employed, and Mme. Alexandre retired from trade.

Uniting their savings, they hired and furnished the “Archangel,”
 which they were now carrying on prosperously well, esteemed by their
neighbors, who were ignorant of Fanferlot’s connection with the police
force.

“Why, how late you are, my little man!” she exclaimed, as she dropped
her knife and fork, and rushed forward to embrace him.

He received her caresses with an air of abstraction.

“My back is broken,” he said. “I have been the whole day playing
billiards with Evariste, M. Fauvel’s valet, and allowed him to win as
often as he wished, a man who does not know what ‘the pool’ is! I became
acquainted with him yesterday, and now I am his best friend. If I wish
to enter M. Fauvel’s service in Antonin’s place, I can rely upon M.
Evariste’s good word.”

“What, you be an office messenger? you?”

“Of course I would. How else am I to get an opportunity of studying my
characters, if I am not on the spot to watch them all the time?”

“Then the valet gave you no news?”

“He gave me none that I could make use of, and yet I turned him inside
out, like a glove. This banker is a remarkable man; you don’t often meet
with one of his sort nowadays. Evariste says he has not a single vice,
not even a little defect by which his valet could gain ten sous. He
neither smokes, drinks, nor plays; in fact, he is a saint. He is worth
millions, and lives as respectably and quietly as a grocer. He is
devoted to his wife, adores his children, is lavishly hospitable, and
seldom goes into society.”

“Then his wife is young?”

“She must be about fifty.”

Mme. Alexandre reflected a minute, then asked:

“Did you inquire about the other members of the family?”

“Certainly. The younger son is in the army. The elder son, Lucien, lives
with his parents, and is as proper as a young lady; so good, indeed,
that he is stupid.”

“And what about the niece?”

“Evariste could tell me nothing about her.”

Mme. Alexandre shrugged her fat shoulders.

“If you have discovered nothing, it is because there is nothing to be
discovered. Still, do you know what I would do, if I were you?”

“Tell me.”

“I would consult with M. Lecoq.”

Fanferlot jumped up as if he had been shot.

“Now, that’s pretty advice! Do you want me to lose my place? M. Lecoq
does not suspect that I have anything to do with the case, except to
obey his orders.”

“Nobody told you to let him know you were investigating it on your own
account. You can consult him with an air of indifference, as if you were
not at all interested; and, after you have got his opinion, you can take
advantage of it.”

The detective weighed his wife’s words, and then said:

“Perhaps you are right; yet M. Lecoq is so devilishly shrewd, that he
might see through me.”

“Shrewd!” echoed Mme. Alexandre, “shrewd! All of you at the police
office say that so often, that he has gained his reputation by it: you
are just as sharp as he is.”

“Well, we will see. I will think the matter over; but, in the meantime,
what does the girl say?”

The “girl” was Mme. Nina Gypsy.

In taking up her abode at the Archangel, the poor girl thought she
was following good advice; and, as Fanferlot had never appeared in her
presence since, she was still under the impression that she had obeyed
a friend of Prosper’s. When she received her summons from M. Patrigent,
she admired the wonderful skill of the police in discovering her
hiding-place; for she had established herself at the hotel under a
false, or rather her true name, Palmyre Chocareille.

Artfully questioned by her inquisitive landlady, she had, without any
mistrust, confided her history to her.

Thus Fanferlot was able to impress the judge with the idea of his being
a skilful detective, when he pretended to have discovered all this
information from a variety of sources.

“She is still upstairs,” answered Mme. Alexandre. “She suspects nothing;
but to keep her in her present ignorance becomes daily more difficult.
I don’t know what the judge told her, but she came home quite beside
herself with anger. She wanted to go and make a fuss at M. Fauvel’s;
then she wrote a letter which she told Jean to post for her; but I kept
it to show you.”

“What!” interrupted Fanferlot, “you have a letter, and did not tell
me before? Perhaps it contains the clew to the mystery. Give it to me,
quick.”

Obeying her husband, Mme. Alexandre opened a little cupboard, and took
out a letter which she handed to him.

“Here, take it,” she said, “and be satisfied.”

Considering that she used to be a chambermaid, Palmyre Chocareille,
since become Mme. Gypsy, wrote a good letter.

It bore the following address, written in a free, flowing hand:


FOR M. L. DE CLAMERAN,

Forge-Master, Hotel du Louvre.

To be handed to M. Raoul de Lagors.

(In great haste.)


“Oh, ho!” said Fanferlot, accompanying his exclamation with a little
whistle, as was his habit when he thought he had made a grand discovery.
“Oh, ho!”

“Do you intend to open it?” questioned Mme. Alexandre.

“A little bit,” said Fanferlot, as he dexterously opened the envelope.

Mme. Alexandre leaned over her husband’s shoulder, and they both read
the following letter:


“MONSIEUR RAOUL--Prosper is in prison, accused of a robbery which he
never committed. I wrote to you three days ago.”


“What!” interrupted Fanferlot, “this silly girl wrote, and I never saw
the letter?”

“But, little man, she must have posted it herself, the day she went to
the Palais de Justice.”

“Very likely,” said Fanferlot propitiated. He continued reading:


“I wrote to you three days ago, and have no reply. Who will help Prosper
if his best friends desert him? If you don’t answer this letter, I shall
consider myself released from a certain promise, and without scruple
will tell Prosper of the conversation I overheard between you and M. de
Clameran. But I can count on you, can I not? I shall expect you at the
Archangel day after to-morrow, between twelve and four.

“NINA GYPSY”


The letter read, Fanferlot at once proceeded to copy it.

“Well!” said Mme. Alexandre, “what do you think?”

Fanferlot was delicately resealing the letter when the door of the hotel
office was abruptly opened, and the boy twice whispered, “Pst! Pst!”

Fanferlot rapidly disappeared into a dark closet. He had barely time to
close the door before Mme. Gypsy entered the room.

The poor girl was sadly changed. She was pale and hollow-cheeked, and
her eyes were red with weeping.

On seeing her, Mme. Alexandre could not conceal her surprise.

“Why, my child, you are not going out?”

“I am obliged to do so, madame; and I come to ask you to tell anyone
that may call during my absence to wait until I return.”

“But where in the world are you going at this hour, sick as you are?”

For a moment Mme. Gypsy hesitated.

“Oh,” she said, “you are so kind that I am tempted to confide in you;
read this note which a messenger just now brought to me.”

“What!” cried Mme. Alexandre perfectly aghast: “a messenger enter my
house, and go up to your room!”

“Is there anything surprising in that?”

“Oh, oh, no! nothing surprising.”

And in a tone loud enough to be heard in the closet she read the note:


“A friend of Prosper who can neither receive you, nor present himself
at your house, is very anxious to speak to you. Be in the stage-office
opposite the Saint Jacques tower, to-night at nine precisely, and the
writer will approach, and tell you what he has to say.

“I have appointed this public place for the rendezvous so as to relieve
your mind of all fear.”


“And you are going to this rendezvous?”

“Certainly, madame.”

“But it is imprudent, foolish; it is a snare to entrap you.”

“It makes no difference,” interrupted Gypsy. “I am so unfortunate
already that I have nothing more to dread. Any change would be a
relief.”

And, without waiting to hear any more, she went out. The door had
scarcely closed upon Mme. Gypsy, before Fanferlot bounced out of the
closet.

The mild detective was white with rage, and swore violently.

“What is the meaning of this?” he cried. “Am I to stand by and have
people walking over the Archangel, as if it were a public street?”

Mme. Alexandre stood trembling, and dared not speak.

“Was ever such impudence heard of before!” he continued. “A messenger
comes into my house, and goes upstairs without being seen by anybody!
I will look into this. And the idea of you, Mme. Alexandre, you, a
sensible woman, being idiotic enough to persuade that little viper not
to keep the appointment!”

“But, my dear--”

“Had you not sense enough to know that I would follow her, and discover
what she is attempting to conceal? Come, make haste, and help me, so
that she won’t recognize me.”

In a few minutes Fanferlot was completely disguised by a thick beard, a
wig, and one of those long linen blouses worn by dishonest workmen, who
go about seeking labor, and, at the same time, hoping they may not find
any.

“Have you your handcuffs?” asked the solicitous Mme. Alexandre.

“Yes, yes: make haste and put that letter to M. de Clameran in the
post-office, and--and keep good watch.”

And without waiting for his wife’s reply, who cried out, “Good luck!”
 Fanferlot darted into the street.

Mme. Gypsy had ten minutes’ start of him; but he ran up the street he
knew she must have taken, and overtook her near the Change Bridge.

She was walking with the uncertain gait of a person who, impatient to
be at a rendezvous, has started too soon, and is obliged to occupy
the intervening time; she would walk very rapidly, then retrace her
footsteps, and proceed slowly.

On Chatelet Place she strolled up and down several times, read the
theatre-bills, and finally took a seat on a bench. One minute before a
quarter of nine, she entered the stage-office, and sat down.

A moment after, Fanferlot entered; but, as he feared that Mme. Gypsy
might recognize him in spite of his heavy beard, he took a seat at the
opposite end of the room, in a dark corner.

“Singular place for a conversation,” he thought, as he watched the
young woman. “Who in the world could have made this appointment in a
stage-office? Judging from her evident curiosity and uneasiness, I could
swear she has not the faintest idea for whom she is waiting.”

Meanwhile, the office was gradually filling with people. Every minute
a man would shriek out the destination of an omnibus which had just
arrived, and the bewildered passengers would rush in to get tickets, and
inquire when the omnibus would leave.

As each new-comer entered, Gypsy would tremble, and Fanferlot would say,
“This is he!”

Finally, as the Hotel-de-Ville clock was striking nine, a man entered,
and, without going to the ticket-window, walked directly up to Gypsy,
bowed, and took a seat beside her.

He was a medium-sized man, rather stout, with a crimson face, and
fiery-red whiskers. His dress was that of a well-to-do merchant, and
there was nothing in his manner or appearance to excite attention.

Fanferlot watched him eagerly.

“Well, my friend,” he said to himself, “in future I shall recognize you,
no matter where we meet; and this very evening I will find out who you
are.”

Despite his intent listening, he could not hear a word spoken by the
stranger or Gypsy. All he could do was to judge by their pantomime and
countenances, what the subject of their conversation might be.

When the stout man bowed and spoke to her, the girl looked so surprised
that it was evident she had never seen him before. When he sat down by
her, and said a few words, she jumped up with a frightened look, as
if seeking to escape. A single word and look made her resume her seat.
Then, as the stout man went on talking, Gypsy’s attitude betrayed great
apprehension. She positively refused to do something; then suddenly she
seemed to consent, when he stated a good reason for her so doing. At
one moment she appeared ready to weep, and the next her pretty face was
illumined by a bright smile. Finally, she shook hands with him, as if
she was confirming a promise.

“What can all that mean?” said Fanferlot to himself, as he sat in his
dark corner, biting his nails. “What an idiot I am to have stationed
myself so far off!”

He was thinking how he could manage to approach nearer without arousing
their suspicions, when the fat man arose, offered his arm to Mme. Gypsy,
who accepted it without hesitation, and together they walked toward the
door.

They were so engrossed with each other, that Fanferlot thought he could,
without risk, follow them; and it was well he did; for the crowd was
dense outside, and he would soon have lost them.

Reaching the door, he saw the stout man and Gypsy cross the pavement,
approach a hackney-coach, and enter it.

“Very good,” muttered Fanferlot, “I’ve got them now. There is no use of
hurrying any more.”

While the coachman was gathering up his reins, Fanferlot prepared
his legs; and, when the coach started, he followed in a brisk trot,
determined upon following it to the end of the earth.

The cab went up the Boulevard Sebastopol. It went pretty fast; but it
was not for nothing that Fanferlot had won the name of “Squirrel.” With
his elbows glued to his sides, and holding his breath, he ran on.

By the time he had reached the Boulevard St. Denis, he began to get
breathless, and stiff from a pain in his side. The cabman abruptly
turned into the Rue Faubourg St. Martin.

But Fanferlot, who, at eight years of age, had been familiar with every
street in Paris, was not to be baffled: he was a man of resources. He
seized the springs of the coach, raised himself up by the strength of
his wrists, and hung on behind, with his legs resting on the axle-tree
of the back wheels. He was not quite comfortable, but then, he no longer
ran the risk of being distanced.

“Now,” he chuckled, behind his false beard, “you may drive as fast as
you please, M. Cabby.”

The man whipped up his horses, and drove furiously along the hilly
street of the Faubourg St. Martin.

Finally the cab stopped in front of a wine-store, and the driver jumped
down from his seat, and went in.

The detective also left his uncomfortable post, and crouching in
a doorway, waited for Gypsy and her companion to get out, with the
intention of following closely upon their heels.

Five minutes passed, and still there were no signs of them.

“What can they be doing all this time?” grumbled the detective.

With great precautions, he approached the cab, and peeped in.

Oh, cruel deception! it was empty!

Fanferlot felt as if someone had thrown a bucket of ice-water over him;
he remained rooted to the spot with his mouth stretched, the picture of
blank bewilderment.

He soon recovered his wits sufficiently to burst forth in a volley of
oaths, loud enough to rattle all the window-panes in the neighborhood.

“Tricked!” he said, “fooled! Ah! but won’t I make them pay for this!”

In a moment his quick mind had run over the gamut of possibilities,
probable and improbable.

“Evidently,” he muttered, “this fellow and Gypsy entered one door, and
got out of the other; the trick is simple enough. If they resorted
to it, ‘tis because they feared being watched. If they feared being
watched, they have uneasy consciences: therefore--”

He suddenly interrupted his monologue as the idea struck him that he had
better attempt to find out something from the driver.

Unfortunately, the driver was in a very surly mood, and not only refused
to answer, but shook his whip in so threatening a manner that Fanferlot
deemed it prudent to beat a retreat.

“Oh, Lord,” he muttered, “perhaps he and the driver are one and the
same!”

But what could he do now, at this time of night? He could not imagine.
He walked dejectedly back to the quay, and it was half-past eleven when
he reached his own door.

“Has the little fool returned?” he inquired of Mme. Alexandre, the
instant she opened the door for him.

“No; but here are two large bundles which have come for her.”

Fanferlot hastily opened the bundles.

They contained three calico dresses, some coarse shoes, and some linen
caps.

“Well,” said the detective in a vexed tone, “now she is going to
disguise herself. Upon my word, I am getting puzzled! What can she be up
to?”

When Fanferlot was sulkily walking down the Faubourg St. Martin, he
had fully made up his mind that he would not tell his wife of his
discomfiture.

But once at home, confronted with a new fact of a nature to negative all
his conjectures, his vanity disappeared. He confessed everything--his
hopes so nearly realized, his strange mischance, and his suspicions.

They talked the matter over, and finally decided that they would not
go to bed until Mme. Gypsy, from whom Mme. Alexandre was determined to
obtain an explanation of what had happened, returned. At one o’clock the
worthy couple were about giving over all hope of her re-appearance, when
they heard the bell ring.

Fanferlot instantly slipped into the closet, and Mme. Alexandre remained
in the office to received Gypsy.

“Here you are at last, my dear child!” she cried. “Oh, I have been so
uneasy, so afraid lest some misfortune had happened!”

“Thanks for your kind interest, madame. Has a bundle been sent here for
me?”

Poor Gypsy’s appearance had strikingly changed; she was very sad, but
not as before dejected. To her melancholy of the last few days, had
succeeded a firm and generous resolution, which was betrayed in her
sparkling eyes and resolute step.

“Yes, two bundles came for you; here they are. I suppose you saw M.
Bertomy’s friend?”

“Yes, madame; and his advice has so changed my plans, that, I regret to
say, I must leave you to-morrow.”

“Going away to-morrow! then something must have happened.”

“Oh! nothing that would interest you, madame.”

After lighting her candle at the gas-burner, Mme. Gypsy said
“Good-night” in a very significant way, and left the room.

“And what do you think of that, Mme. Alexandre?” questioned Fanferlot,
emerging from his hiding-place.

“It is incredible! This girl writes to M. de Clameran to meet her here,
and then does not wait for him.”

“She evidently mistrusts us; she knows who I am.”

“Then this friend of the cashier must have told her.”

“Nobody knows who told her. I shall end by believing that I am among
a gang of thieves. They think I am on their track, and are trying to
escape me. I should not be at all surprised if this little rogue has the
money herself, and intends to run off with it to-morrow.”

“That is not my opinion; but listen to me: you had better take my
advice, and consult M. Lecoq.”

Fanferlot meditated awhile, then exclaimed.

“Very well; I will see him, just for your satisfaction; because I
know that, if I have discovered nothing, neither has he. But, if
he undertakes to be domineering, it won’t do; for, if he shows his
insolence to me, _I_ will make him know his place!”

Notwithstanding this brave speech, the detective passed an uneasy night,
and at six o’clock the next morning he was up--it was necessary to rise
very early if he wished to catch M. Lecoq at home--and, refreshed by a
cup of strong coffee, he directed his steps toward the dwelling of the
celebrated detective.

Fanferlot the Squirrel certainly was not afraid of his patron, as he
called him; for he started out with his nose in the air, and his hat
cocked on one side.

But by the time he reached the Rue Montmartre, where M. Lecoq lived,
his courage had vanished; he pulled his hat over his eyes, and hung
his head, as if looking for relief among the paving-stones. He slowly
ascended the steps, pausing several times, and looking around as if he
would like to fly.

Finally he reached the third floor, and stood before a door decorated
with the arms of the famous detective--a cock, the symbol of
vigilance--and his heart failed him so that he had scarcely the courage
to ring the bell.

The door was opened by Janouille, M. Lecoq’s old servant, who had very
much the manner and appearance of a grenadier. She was as faithful to
her master as a watch-dog, and always stood ready to attack anyone who
did not treat him with the august respect which she considered his due.

“Well, M. Fanferlot,” she said, “you come in time for once in your life.
Your patron wants to see you.”

Upon this announcement, Fanferlot was seized with a violent desire to
retreat. By what chance could Lecoq want anything of him?

While he thus hesitated, Janouille seized him by the arm, and pulled him
in, saying:

“Do you want to take root there? Come along, your patron is waiting for
you.”

In the middle of a large room curiously furnished, half library and half
green-room, was seated at a desk the same person with gold spectacles,
who had said to Prosper at the police-office, “Have courage.”

This was M. Lecoq in his official character.

Upon Fanferlot’s entrance, as he advanced respectfully, bowing till
his backbone was a perfect curve, M. Lecoq laid down his pen, and said,
looking sharply at him:

“Ah, here you are, young man. Well, it seems that you haven’t made much
progress in the Bertomy case.”

“Why,” murmured Fanferlot, “you know--”

“I know that you have muddled everything until you can’t see your way
out; so that you are ready to give up.”

“But, M. Lecoq, it was not I----”

M. Lecoq arose, and walked up and down the room: suddenly he confronted
Fanferlot, and said, in a tone of scornful irony:

“What would you think, Master Squirrel, of a man who abuses the
confidence of those who employ him, who reveals just enough to lead the
prosecution on the wrong scent, who sacrifices to his own foolish vanity
the cause of justice and the liberty of an unfortunate man?”

Fanferlot started back with a frightened look.

“I should say,” he stammered, “I should say--”

“You would say this man ought to be punished, and dismissed from his
employment; and you are right. The less a profession is honored, the
more honorable should those be who belong to it. And yet you have been
false to yours. Ah! Master Fanferlot, we are ambitious, and we try to
make the police force serve our own views! We let Justice stray her way,
and we go ours. One must be a more cunning bloodhound than you are, my
friend, to be able to hunt without a huntsman. You are too self-reliant
by half.”

“But, patron, I swear--”

“Silence! Do you pretend to say that you did your duty, and told all
to the judge of instruction? Whilst others were informing against the
cashier, you undertook to inform against the banker. You watched his
movements: you became intimate with his valet.”

Was M. Lecoq really angry, or pretending to be? Fanferlot, who knew him
well, was puzzled to know whether all this indignation was real.

“If you were only skilful,” he continued, “but no: you wish to be
master, and you are not fit to be a journeyman.”

“You are right, patron,” said Fanferlot, piteously, for he saw that
it was useless for him to deny anything. “But how could I go about an
affair like this, where there was not even a trace or sign to start
from?”

M. Lecoq shrugged his shoulders.

“You are an ass! Why, don’t you know that on the very day you were sent
for with the commissary to verify the robbery, you held--I do not say
certainly, but very probably held--in your great stupid hands the means
of knowing which key had been used when the money was stolen?”

“How! What!”

“You want to know, do you? I will tell you. Do you remember the scratch
you discovered on the safe-door? You were so struck by it, that you
exclaimed directly you saw it. You carefully examined it, and were
convinced that it was a fresh scratch, only a few hours old. You
thought, and rightly too, that this scratch was made at the time of the
theft. Now, with what was it made? Evidently with a key. That being
the case, you should have asked for the keys both of the banker and the
cashier. One of them would have had some particles of the hard green
paint sticking to it.”

Fanferlot listened with open mouth to this explanation. At the last
words, he violently slapped his forehead with his hand, and cried out:

“Imbecile! Imbecile!”

“You have rightly named yourself,” said M. Lecoq. “Imbecile! This proof
stares you right in the face, and you don’t see it! This scratch is the
sole and only clew to work the case upon, and you must go and lose the
traces of it. If I find the guilty party, it will be by means of this
scratch; and I am determined that I will find him.”

At a distance the Squirrel very bravely abused and defied M. Lecoq; but,
in his presence, he yielded to the influence which this extraordinary
man exercised upon all who approached him.

This exact information, these minute details of all his secret
movements, and even thoughts, so upset his mind that he could not think
where and how M. Lecoq had obtained them. Finally he said, humbly:

“You must have been looking up this case, patron?”

“Probably I have; but I am not infallible, and may have overlooked some
important evidence. Take a seat, and tell me all you know.”

M. Lecoq was not the man to be hoodwinked, so Fanferlot told the exact
truth, a rare thing for him to do. However as he reached the end of his
statement, a feeling of mortified vanity prevented his telling how he
had been fooled by Gypsy and the stout man.

Unfortunately for poor Fanferlot, M. Lecoq was always fully informed on
every subject in which he interested himself.

“It seems to me, Master Squirrel, that you have forgotten something. How
far did you follow the empty coach?”

Fanferlot blushed, and hung his head like a guilty school-boy.

“Oh, patron!” he cried, “and you know about that too! How could you
have----”

But a sudden idea flashed across his brain: he stopped short, bounded
off his chair, and cried:

“Oh! I know now: you were the large gentleman with red whiskers.”

His surprise gave so singular an expression to his face that M. Lecoq
could not restrain a smile.

“Then it was you,” continued the bewildered detective; “you were the
large gentleman at whom I stared, so as to impress his appearance upon
my mind, and I never recognized you! Patron, you would make a superb
actor, if you would go on the stage; but I was disguised, too--very well
disguised.”

“Very poorly disguised; it is only just to you that I should let you
know what a failure it was, Fanferlot. Do you think that a heavy beard
and a blouse are a sufficient transformation? The eye is the thing to be
changed--the eye! The art lies in being able to change the eye. That is
the secret.”

This theory of disguise explained why the lynx-eyed Lecoq never appeared
at the police-office without his gold spectacles.

“Then, patron,” said Fanferlot, clinging to his idea, “you have been
more successful than Mme. Alexandre; you have made the little girl
confess? You know why she leaves the Archangel, why she does not wait
for M. de Clameran, and why she bought calico dresses?”

“She is following my advice.”

“That being the case,” said the detective dejectedly, “there is nothing
left for me to do, but to acknowledge myself an ass.”

“No, Squirrel,” said M. Lecoq, kindly, “you are not an ass. You
merely did wrong in undertaking a task beyond your capacity. Have you
progressed one step since you started this affair? No. That shows that,
although you are incomparable as a lieutenant, you do not possess the
qualities of a general. I am going to present you with an aphorism;
remember it, and let it be your guide in the future: _A man can shine in
the second rank, who would be totally eclipsed in the first_.”

Never had Fanferlot seen his patron so talkative and good-natured.
Finding his deceit discovered, he had expected to be overwhelmed with
a storm of anger; whereas he had escaped with a little shower that had
cooled his brain. Lecoq’s anger disappeared like one of those heavy
clouds which threaten in the horizon for a moment, and then are suddenly
swept away by a gust of wind.

But this unexpected affability made Fanferlot feel uneasy. He was afraid
that something might be concealed beneath it.

“Do you know who the thief is, patron?”

“I know no more than you do, Fanferlot; and you seem to have made up
your mind, whereas I am still undecided. You declare the cashier to be
innocent, and the banker guilty. I don’t know whether you are right or
wrong. I started after you, and have only reached the preliminaries of
my search. I am certain of but one thing, and that is, that a scratch
was on the safe-door. That scratch is my starting-point.”

As he spoke, M. Lecoq took from his desk and unrolled an immense sheet
of drawing-paper.

On this paper was photographed the door of M. Fauvel’s safe. The
impression of every detail was perfect. There were the five movable
buttons with the engraved letters, and the narrow, projecting brass
lock: The scratch was indicated with great exactness.

“Now,” said M. Lecoq, “here is our scratch. It runs from top to bottom,
starting from the hole of the lock, diagonally, and, observe, from left
to right; that is to say, it terminates on the side next to the private
staircase leading to the banker’s apartments. Although very deep at the
key-hole, it ends off in a scarcely perceptible mark.”

“Yes, patron, I see all that.”

“Naturally you thought that this scratch was made by the person who took
the money. Let us see if you were right. I have here a little iron box,
painted with green varnish like M. Fauvel’s safe; here it is. Take a
key, and try to scratch it.”

“The deuce take it!” he said after several attempts, “this paint is
awfully hard to move!”

“Very hard, my friend, and yet that on the safe is still harder and
thicker. So you see the scratch you discovered could not have been made
by the trembling hand of a thief letting the key slip.”

“Sapristi!” exclaimed Fanferlot, stupefied: “I never should have thought
of that. It certainly required great force to make the deep scratch on
the safe.”

“Yes, but how was that force employed? I have been racking my brain
for three days, and only yesterday did I come to a conclusion. Let us
examine together, and see if our conjectures present enough chances of
probability to establish a starting-point.”

M. Lecoq abandoned the photograph, and, walking to the door
communicating with his bedroom, took the key from the lock, and, holding
it in his hand, said:

“Come here, Fanferlot, and stand by my side: there; very well. Now
suppose that I want to open this door, and you don’t want me to open
it; when you see me about to insert the key, what would be your first
impulse?”

“To put my hands on your arm, and draw it toward me so as to prevent
your introducing the key.”

“Precisely so. Now let us try it; go on.” Fanferlot obeyed; and the key
held by M. Lecoq, pulled aside from the lock, slipped along the door,
and traced upon it a diagonal scratch, from top to bottom, the exact
reproduction of the one in the photograph.

“Oh, oh, oh!” exclaimed Fanferlot in three different tones of
admiration, as he stood gazing in a revery at the door.

“Do you begin to understand now?” asked M. Lecoq.

“Understand, patron? Why, a child could understand it now. Ah, what a
man you are! I see the scene as if I had been present. Two persons were
present at the robbery; one wished to take the money, the other wished
to prevent its being taken. That is clear, that is certain.”

Accustomed to triumphs of this sort, M. Lecoq was much amused at
Fanferlot’s enthusiasm.

“There you go off, half-primed again,” he said, good-humoredly: “you
regard as sure proof a circumstance which may be accidental, and at the
most only probable.”

“No, patron, no! a man like you could not be mistaken: doubt no longer
exists.”

“That being the case, what deductions would you draw from our
discovery?”

“In the first place, it proves that I am correct in thinking the cashier
innocent.”

“How so?”

“Because, at perfect liberty to open the safe whenever he wished to
do so, it is not likely that he would have brought a witness when he
intended to commit the theft.”

“Well reasoned, Fanferlot. But on this supposition the banker would be
equally innocent: reflect a little.”

Fanferlot reflected, and all of his animation vanished.

“You are right,” he said in a despairing tone. “What can be done now?”

“Look for the third rogue, or rather the real rogue, the one who opened
the safe, and stole the notes, and who is still at large, while others
are suspected.”

“Impossible, patron--impossible! Don’t you know that M. Fauvel and his
cashier had keys, and they only? And they always kept these keys in
their pockets.”

“On the evening of the robbery the banker left his key in the
secretary.”

“Yes; but the key alone was not sufficient to open the safe; the word
also must be known.”

M. Lecoq shrugged his shoulders impatiently.

“What was the word?” he asked.

“Gypsy.”

“Which is the name of the cashier’s grisette. Now keep your eyes open.
The day you find a man sufficiently intimate with Prosper to be aware of
all the circumstances connected with this name, and at the same time on
a footing with the Fauvel family which would give him the privilege
of entering M. Fauvel’s chamber, then, and not until then, will you
discover the guilty party. On that day the problem will be solved.”

Self-sufficient and vain, like all famous men, M. Lecoq had never had a
pupil, and never wished to have one. He worked alone, because he hated
assistants, wishing to share neither the pleasures of success nor the
pain of defeat.

Thus Fanferlot, who knew his patron’s character, was surprised to hear
him giving advice, who heretofore had only given orders.

He was so puzzled, that in spite of his pre-occupation he could not help
betraying his surprise.

“Patron,” he ventured to say, “you seem to take a great interest in this
affair, you have so deeply studied it.”

M. Lecoq started nervously, and replied, frowning:

“You are too curious, Master Squirrel; be careful that you do not go too
far. Do you understand?”

Fanferlot began to apologize.

“That will do,” interrupted M. Lecoq. “If I choose to lend you a helping
hand, it is because it suits my fancy to do so. It pleases me to be the
head, and let you be the hand. Unassisted, with your preconceived ideas,
you never would have found the culprit; if we two together don’t find
him, my name is not Lecoq.”

“We shall certainly succeed if you interest yourself in the case.”

“Yes, I am interested in it, and during the last four days I have
discovered many important facts. But listen to me. I have reasons for
not appearing in this affair. No matter what happens, I forbid your
mentioning my name. If we succeed, all the success must be attributed
to you. And, above all, don’t try to find out what I choose to keep from
you. Be satisfied with what explanations I give you. Now, be careful.”

These conditions seemed quite to suit Fanferlot.

“I will obey your instructions, and be discreet.”

“I shall rely upon you. Now, to begin, you must carry this photograph
to the judge of instruction. I know M. Patrigent is much perplexed about
this case. Explain to him, as if it were your own discovery, what I have
just shown you; repeat for his benefit the scene we have acted, and I am
convinced that this evidence will determine him to release the cashier.
Prosper must be at liberty before I can commence my operations.”

“Of course, patron, but must I let him know that I suspect anyone
besides the banker or cashier?”

“Certainly. Justice must not be kept in ignorance of your intention of
following up this affair. M. Patrigent will tell you to watch Prosper;
you will reply that you will not lose sight of him. I myself will answer
for his being in safe-keeping.”

“Suppose he asks me about Gypsy?”

M. Lecoq hesitated for a moment.

“Tell him,” he finally said, “that you persuaded her, in the interest
of Prosper, to live in a house where she can watch someone whom you
suspect.”

Fanferlot was joyously picking up his hat to go, when M. Lecoq checked
him by waving his hand, and said:

“I have not finished. Do you know how to drive a carriage and manage
horses?”

“Why, patron, can you ask this of a man who used to be a rider in the
Bouthor Circus?”

“Very well. As soon as the judge dismisses you, return home immediately,
make yourself a wig and the complete dress of a valet; and, having
dressed yourself, take this letter to the Agency on Delorme Street.”

“But, patron--”

“There must be no but, my friend; the agent will send you to M.
de Clameran, who is looking for a valet, his man having left him
yesterday.”

“Excuse me if I venture to suggest that you are making a mistake. This
Clameran is not the cashier’s friend.”

“Why do you always interrupt me?” said M. Lecoq imperiously. “Do what I
tell you, and don’t disturb your mind about the rest. Clameran is not a
friend of Prosper’s, I know; but he is the friend and protector of
Raoul de Lagors. Why so? Whence the intimacy of these two men of such
different ages? That is what I must find out. I must also find out who
this forge-master is who lives in Paris, and never goes to attend to
his furnaces. A jolly fellow, who takes it into his head to live at the
Hotel du Louvre, in the midst of a tumultuous, ever-changing crowd, is
a fellow difficult to watch. Through you I will have an eye upon him. He
has a carriage, you are to drive it; and you will soon be able to give
me an account of his manner of life, and of the sort of people with whom
he associates.”

“You shall be obeyed, patron.”

“Another thing. M. de Clameran is irritable and suspicious. You will be
presented to him under the name of Joseph Dubois. He will demand your
certificate of good character. Here are three, which state that you have
lived with the Marquis de Sairmeuse and the Count de Commarin, and that
you have just left the Baron de Wortschen, who went to Germany the other
day. Now keep your eyes open; be careful of your dress and manners.
Be polite, but not excessively so. And, above all things, don’t be
obsequious; it might arouse suspicion.”

“I understand, patron. Where shall I report to you?”

“I will call on you every day. Until I tell you differently, don’t step
foot in this house; you might be followed. If anything important should
happen, send a note to your wife, and she will inform me. Go, and be
prudent.”

The door closed on Fanferlot as M. Lecoq passed into his bedroom.

In the twinkling of an eye he had divested himself of the appearance of
a police officer. He took off his stiff cravat and gold spectacles, and
removed the close wig from his thick black hair. The official Lecoq had
disappeared, leaving in his place the genuine Lecoq whom nobody knew--a
handsome young man, with a bold, determined manner, and brilliant,
piercing eyes.

But he only remained himself for an instant. Seated before a
dressing-table covered with more cosmetics, paints, perfumes, false
hair, and other unmentionable shams, than are to be found on the
toilet-tables of our modern belles, he began to undo the work of nature,
and make himself a new face.

He worked slowly, handling his brushes with great care. But in an hour
he had accomplished one of his daily masterpieces. When he had finished,
he was no longer Lecoq: he was the large gentleman with red whiskers,
whom Fanferlot had failed to recognize.

“Well,” he said, casting a last look in the mirror, “I have forgotten
nothing: I have left nothing to chance. All my plans are fixed; and I
shall make some progress to-day, provided the Squirrel does not waste
time.”

But Fanferlot was too happy to waste a minute. He did not run, he flew,
toward the Palais de Justice.

At last he was now able to convince someone that he, Fanferlot, was a
man of wonderful perspicacity.

As to acknowledging that he was about to obtain a triumph with the ideas
of another man, he never thought of it. It is generally in perfect good
faith that the jackdaw struts in the peacock’s feathers.

His hopes were not deceived. If the judge was not absolutely and
fully convinced, he admired the ingenuity and shrewdness of the whole
proceeding, and complimented the proud jackdaw upon his brilliancy.

“This decides me,” he said, as he dismissed Fanferlot. “I will make out
a favorable report to-day; and it is highly probable that the accused
will be released to-morrow.”

He began at once to write out one of these terrible decisions of “Not
proven,” which restores liberty, but not honor, to the accused man;
which says that he is not guilty, but does not say he is innocent.

“Whereas there do not exist sufficient charges against the accused,
Prosper Bertomy, in pursuance of Article 128 of the Criminal Code,
we hereby declare that we find no grounds for prosecution against the
aforesaid prisoner at this present time; and we order that he shall be
released from the prison where he is confined, and set at liberty by the
jailer,” etc.

“Well,” he said to the clerk, “here is another one of those crimes
which justice cannot clear up. The mystery remains to be solved. This is
another file to be stowed away among the archives of the record-office.”

And with his own hand he wrote on the cover of the bundle of papers
relating to Prosper’s case, the number of the package, File No. 113.




VII

Prosper had been languishing in his private cell for nine days, when on
Thursday morning the jailer came to inform him of the judge’s decision.
He was conducted before the officer who had searched him when he was
arrested; and the contents of his pocket, his watch, penknife, and
several little pieces of jewelry, were restored to him; then he was told
to sign a large sheet of paper, which he did.

He was next led across a dark passage, and almost pushed through a door,
which was abruptly shut upon him.

He found himself on the quay: he was alone; he was free.

Free! Justice had confessed her inability to convict him of the crime of
which he was accused.

Free! He could walk about, he could breathe the pure air; but every door
would be closed against him.

Only acquittal after due trial would restore him to his former position
among men.

A decision of “Not proven” had left him covered with suspicion.

The torments inflicted by public opinion are more fearful than those
suffered in a prison cell.

At the moment of his restoration to liberty, Prosper so cruelly suffered
from the horror of his situation, that he could not repress a cry of
rage and despair.

“I am innocent! God knows I am innocent!” he cried out. But of what use
was his anger?

Two strangers, who were passing, stopped to look at him, and said,
pityingly, “He is crazy.”

The Seine was at his feet. A thought of suicide crossed his mind.

“No,” he said, “no! I have not even the right to kill myself. No: I will
not die until I have vindicated my innocence!”

Often, day and night, had Prosper repeated these words, as he walked
his cell. With a heart filled with a bitter, determined thirst for
vengeance, which gives a man the force and patience to destroy or
wear out all obstacles in his way, he would say, “Oh! why am I not at
liberty? I am helpless, caged up; but let me once be free!”

Now he was free; and, for the first time, he saw the difficulties of the
task before him. For each crime, justice requires a criminal: he could
not establish his own innocence without producing the guilty man; how
find the thief so as to hand him over to the law?

Discouraged, but not despondent, he turned in the direction of his
apartments. He was beset by a thousand anxieties. What had taken place
during the nine days that he had been cut off from all intercourse with
his friends? No news of them had reached him. He had heard no more of
what was going on in the outside world, than if his secret cell had been
a grave.

He slowly walked along the streets, with his eyes cast down dreading to
meet some familiar face. He, who had always been so haughty, would now
be pointed at with the finger of scorn. He would be greeted with cold
looks and averted faces. Men would refuse to shake hands with him. He
would be shunned by honest people, who have no patience with a thief.

Still, if he could count on only one true friend! Yes: he was sure of
one. But what friend would believe him when his father, who should have
been the last to suspect him, had refused to believe him?

In the midst of his sufferings, when he felt almost overwhelmed by the
sense of his wretched, lonely condition, he thought of Gypsy.

He had never loved the poor girl: indeed, at times he almost hated her;
but now he felt a longing to see her. He wished to be with her, because
he knew that she loved him, and that nothing would make her believe him
guilty; because he knew that a woman remains true and firm in her faith,
and is always faithful in the hour of adversity, although she sometimes
fails in prosperity.

On entering the Rue Chaptal, Prosper saw his own door, but hesitated to
enter it.

He suffered from the timidity which an honest man always feels when he
knows he is viewed with suspicion.

He dreaded meeting anyone whom he knew; yet he could not remain in the
street. He entered.

When the porter saw him, he uttered an exclamation of glad surprise, and
said:

“Ah, here you are at last, monsieur. I told everyone you would come out
as white as snow; and, when I read in the papers that you were arrested
for robbery, I said, ‘My third-floor lodger a thief! Never would I
believe such a thing, never!’”

The congratulations of this ignorant man were sincere, and offered from
pure kindness of heart; but they impressed Prosper painfully, and he cut
them short by abruptly asking:

“Madame of course has left: can you tell me where she has gone?”

“Dear me, no, monsieur. The day of your arrest, she sent for a hack, got
into it with her trunks, and disappeared; and no one has seen or heard
of her since.”

This was another blow to the unhappy cashier.

“And where are my servants?”

“Gone, monsieur; your father paid and discharged them.”

“I suppose you have my keys?”

“No, monsieur; when your father left here this morning at eight o’clock,
he told me that a friend of his would take charge of your rooms until
you should return. Of course you know who he is--a stout gentleman with
red whiskers.”

Prosper was stupefied. What could be the meaning of one of his father’s
friends being in his rooms? He did not, however, betray any surprise,
but quietly said:

“Yes: I know who it is.”

He quickly ran up the stairs, and knocked at his door.

It was opened by his father’s friend.

He had been accurately described by the porter. A fat man, with a red
face, sensual lips, brilliant eyes, and of rather coarse manners, stood
bowing to Prosper, who had never seen him before.

“Delighted to make your acquaintance, monsieur,” said he to Prosper.

He seemed to be perfectly at home. On the table lay a book, which he had
taken from the bookcase; and he appeared ready to do the honors of the
house.

“I must say, monsieur,” began Prosper.

“That you are surprised to find me here? So I suppose. Your father
intended introducing me to you; but he was compelled to return to
Beaucaire this morning; and let me add that he departed thoroughly
convinced, as I myself am, that you never took a cent from M. Fauvel.”

At this unexpected good news, Prosper’s face lit up with pleasure.

“Here is a letter from your father, which I hope will serve as an
introduction between us.”

Prosper opened the letter; and as he read his eyes grew brighter, and a
slight color returned to his pale face.

When he had finished, he held out his hand to the large gentleman, and
said:

“My father, monsieur, tells me you are his best friend; he advises me to
have absolute confidence in you, and follow your counsel.”

“Exactly. This morning your father said to me, ‘Verduret’--that is my
name--‘Verduret, my son is in great trouble, he must be helped out.’ I
replied, ‘I am ready,’ and here I am to help you. Now the ice is broken,
is it not? Then let us go to work at once. What do you intend to do?”

This question revived Prosper’s slumbering rage. His eyes flashed.

“What do I intend to do?” he said, angrily: “what should I do but seek
the villain who has ruined me?”

“So I supposed; but have you any hopes of success?”

“None; yet I shall succeed, because, when a man devotes his whole life
to the accomplishment of an object, he is certain to achieve it.”

“Well said, M. Prosper; and, to be frank, I fully expected that this
would be your purpose. I have therefore already begun to think and
act for you. I have a plan. In the first place, you will sell this
furniture, and disappear from the neighborhood.”

“Disappear!” cried Prosper, indignantly, “disappear! Why, monsieur?
Do you not see that such a step would be a confession of guilt, would
authorize the world to say that I am hiding so as to enjoy undisturbed
the stolen fortune?”

“Well, what then?” said the man with the red whiskers; “did you not say
just now the sacrifice of your life is made? The skilful swimmer thrown
into the river by malefactors is careful not to rise to the surface
immediately: on the contrary, he plunges beneath, and remains there as
long as his breath holds out. He comes up again at a great distance, and
lands out of sight; then, when he is supposed to be dead, lost forever
to the sight of man, he rises up and has his vengeance. You have an
enemy? Some petty imprudence will betray him. But, while he sees you
standing by on the watch, he will be on his guard.”

It was with a sort of amazed submission that Prosper listened to this
man, who, though a friend of his father, was an utter stranger to
himself.

He submitted unconsciously to the ascendency of a nature so much more
energetic and forcible than his own. In his helpless condition he was
grateful for friendly assistance, and said:

“I will follow your advice, monsieur.”

“I was sure you would, my dear friend. Let us reflect upon the course
you should pursue. And remember that you will need every cent of the
proceeds of the sale. Have you any ready money? no, but you must have
some. Knowing that you would need it at once, I brought an upholsterer
here; and he will give twelve thousand francs for everything excepting
the pictures.”

The cashier could not refrain from shrugging his shoulders, which M.
Verduret observed.

“Well,” said he, “it is rather hard, I admit, but it is a necessity. Now
listen: you are the invalid, and I am the doctor charged to cure you;
if I cut to the quick, you will have to endure it. It is the only way to
save you.”

“Cut away then, monsieur,” answered Prosper.

“Well, we will hurry, for time passes. You have a friend, M. de Lagors?”

“Raoul? Yes, monsieur, he is an intimate friend.”

“Now tell me, who is this fellow?”

The term “fellow” seemed to offend Prosper.

“M. de Lagors, monsieur,” he said, haughtily, “is M. Fauvel’s nephew; he
is a wealthy young man, handsome, intelligent, cultivated, and the best
friend I have.”

“Hum!” said M. Verduret, “I shall be delighted to make the acquaintance
of one adorned by so many charming qualities. I must let you know that I
wrote him a note in your name asking him to come here, and he sent word
that he would be here directly.”

“What! do you suppose--”

“Oh, I suppose nothing! Only I must see this young man. Also, I have
arranged and will submit to you a little plan of conversation--”

A ring at the front door interrupted M. Verduret.

“Sacrebleu! adieu to my plan; here he is! Where can I hide so as to hear
and see?”

“There, in my bedroom; leave the door open and the curtain down.”

A second ring was heard.

“Now remember, Prosper,” said M. Verduret in a warning tone, “not
one word to this man about your plans, or about me. Pretend to be
discouraged, helpless, and undecided what to do.”

And he disappeared behind the curtain, as Prosper ran to open the door.

Prosper’s portrait of M. de Lagors had not been an exaggerated one.
So handsome a face and manly a figure could belong only to a noble
character.

Although Raoul said that he was twenty-four, he appeared to be not more
than twenty. He had a superb figure, well knit and supple; a beautiful
white brow, shaded by soft chestnut curly hair, soft blue eyes which
beamed with frankness.

His first impulse was to throw himself into Prosper’s arms.

“My poor, dear friend!” he said, “my poor Prosper!”

But beneath these affectionate demonstrations there was a certain
constraint, which, if it escaped the cashier, was noticed by M.
Verduret.

“Your letter, my dear Prosper,” said Raoul, “made me almost ill, I was
so frightened by it. I asked myself if you could have lost your mind.
Then I left everything, to fly to your assistance; and here I am.”

Prosper did not seem to hear him; he was pre-occupied about the letter
which he had not written. What were its contents? Who was this stranger
whose assistance he had accepted?

“You must not feel discouraged,” continued M. de Lagors: “you are young
enough to commence life anew. Your friends are still left to you. I have
come to say to you, Rely upon me; I am rich, half of my fortune is at
your disposal.”

This generous offer, made at a moment like this with such frank
simplicity, deeply touched Prosper.

“Thanks, Raoul,” he said with emotion, “thank you! But unfortunately all
the money in the world would be of no use now.”

“Why so? What are you going to do? Do you propose to remain in Paris?”

“I know not, Raoul. I have made no plans yet. My mind is too confused
for me to think.”

“I will tell you what to do,” replied Raoul quickly, “you must start
afresh; until this mysterious robbery is explained you must keep away
from Paris. It will never do for you to remain here.”

“And suppose it never should be explained?”

“Only the more reason for your remaining in oblivion. I have been
talking about you to Clameran. ‘If I were in Prosper’s place,’ he said,
‘I would turn everything into money, and embark for America; there I
would make a fortune, and return to crush with my millions those who
have suspected me.’”

This advice offended Prosper’s pride, but he said nothing. He was
thinking of what the stranger had said to him.

“I will think it over,” he finally forced himself to say. “I will see. I
would like to know what M. Fauvel says.”

“My uncle? I suppose you know that I have declined the offer he made me
to enter his banking-house, and we have almost quarrelled. I have not
set foot in his house for over a month; but I hear of him occasionally.”

“Through whom?”

“Through your friend Cavaillon. My uncle, they say, is more distressed
by this affair than you are. He does not attend to his business, and
wanders about as if he had lost every friend on earth.”

“And Mme. Fauvel, and”--Prosper hesitated--“and Mlle. Madeleine, how are
they?”

“Oh,” said Raoul lightly, “my aunt is as pious as ever; she has mass
said for the benefit of the sinner. As to my handsome, icy cousin, she
cannot bring herself down to common matters, because she is entirely
absorbed in preparing for the fancy ball to be given day after to-morrow
by MM. Jandidier. She has discovered, so one of her friends told me, a
wonderful dressmaker, a stranger who has suddenly appeared from no one
knows where, who is making a costume of Catherine de Medici’s maid of
honor; and it is to be a marvel of beauty.”

Excessive suffering brings with it a sort of dull insensibility and
stupor; and Prosper thought that there was nothing left to be inflicted
upon him, and had reached that state of impassibility from which he
never expected to be aroused, when this last remark of M. de Lagors made
him cry out with pain:

“Madeleine! Oh, Madeleine!”

M. de Lagors, pretending not to have heard him, rose from his chair, and
said:

“I must leave you now, my dear Prosper; on Saturday I will see these
ladies at the ball, and will bring you news of them. Now, do have
courage, and remember that, whatever happens, you have a friend in me.”

Raoul shook Prosper’s hand, closed the door after him, and hurried
up the street, leaving Prosper standing immovable and overcome by
disappointment.

He was aroused from his gloomy revery by hearing the red-whiskered man
say, in a bantering tone:

“So these are your friends.”

“Yes,” said Prosper with bitterness. “You heard him offer me half his
fortune?”

M. Verduret shrugged his shoulders with an air of compassion.

“That was very stingy on his part,” he said, “why did he not offer the
whole? Offers cost nothing; although I have no doubt that this sweet
youth would cheerfully give ten thousand francs to put the ocean between
you and him.”

“Monsieur! what reason?”

“Who knows? Perhaps for the same reason that he had not set foot in his
uncle’s house for a month.”

“But that is the truth, monsieur, I am sure of it.”

“Naturally,” said M. Verduret with a provoking smile. “But,” he
continued with a serious air, “we have devoted enough time to this
Adonis. Now, be good enough to change your dress, and we will go and
call on M. Fauvel.”

This proposal seemed to stir up all of Prosper’s anger.

“Never!” he exclaimed with excitement, “no, never will I voluntarily set
eyes on that wretch!”

This resistance did not surprise M. Verduret.

“I can understand your feelings toward him,” said he, “but at the same
time I hope you will change your mind. For the same reason that I wished
to see M. de Lagors, do I wish to see M. Fauvel; it is necessary, you
understand. Are you so very weak that you cannot put a constraint upon
yourself for five minutes? I shall introduce myself as one of your
relatives, and you need not open your lips.”

“If it is positively necessary,” said Prosper, “if--”

“It is necessary; so come on. You must have confidence, put on a brave
face. Hurry and fix yourself up a little; it is getting late, and I am
hungry. We will breakfast on our way there.”

Prosper had hardly passed into his bedroom when the bell rang again.
M. Verduret opened the door. It was the porter, who handed him a thick
letter, and said:

“This letter was left this morning for M. Bertomy; I was so flustered
when he came that I forgot to hand it to him. It is a very odd-looking
letter; is it not, monsieur?”

It was indeed a most peculiar missive. The address was not written, but
formed of printed letters, carefully cut from a book, and pasted on the
envelope.

“Oh, ho! what is this?” cried M. Verduret; then turning toward the
porter he cried, “Wait.”

He went into the next room, and closed the door behind him; there he
found Prosper, anxious to know what was going on.

“Here is a letter for you,” said M. Verduret.

He at once tore open the envelope.

Some bank-notes dropped out; he counted them; there were ten.

Prosper’s face turned purple.

“What does this mean?” he asked.

“We will read the letter and find out,” replied M. Verduret.

The letter, like the address, was composed of printed words cut out and
pasted on a sheet of paper.

It was short but explicit:


“MY DEAR PROSPER--A friend, who knows the horror of your situation,
sends you this succor. There is one heart, be assured, that shares your
sufferings. Go away; leave France; you are young; the future is before
you. Go, and may this money bring you happiness!”


As M. Verduret read the note, Prosper’s rage increased. He was angry and
perplexed, for he could not explain the rapidly succeeding events which
were so calculated to mystify his already confused brain.

“Everybody wishes me to go away,” he cried; “then there must be a
conspiracy against me.”

M. Verduret smiled with satisfaction.

“At last you begin to open your eyes, you begin to understand. Yes,
there are people who hate you because of the wrong they have done you;
there are people to whom your presence in Paris is a constant danger,
and who will not feel safe till they are rid of you.”

“But who are these people, monsieur? Tell me, who dares send this
money?”

“If I knew, my dear Prosper, my task would be at an end, for then I
would know who committed the robbery. But we will continue our searches.
I have finally procured evidence which will sooner or later become
convincing proof. I have heretofore only made deductions more or less
probable; I now possess knowledge which proves that I was not mistaken.
I walked in darkness: now I have a light to guide me.”

As Prosper listened to M. Verduret’s reassuring words, he felt hope
arising in his breast.

“Now,” said M. Verduret, “we must take advantage of this evidence,
gained by the imprudence of our enemies, without delay. We will begin
with the porter.”

He opened the door and called out:

“I say, my good man, step here a moment.”

The porter entered, looking very much surprised at the authority
exercised over his lodger by this stranger.

“Who gave you this letter?” said M. Verduret.

“A messenger, who said he was paid for bringing it.”

“Do you know him?”

“I know him well; he is the errand-runner who keeps his cart at the
corner of the Rue Pigalle.”

“Go and bring him here.”

After the porter had gone, M. Verduret drew from his pocket his diary,
and compared a page of it with the notes which he had spread over the
table.

“These notes were not sent by the thief,” he said, after an attentive
examination of them.

“Do you think so, monsieur?”

“I am certain of it; that is, unless the thief is endowed with
extraordinary penetration and forethought. One thing is certain: these
ten thousand francs are not part of the three hundred and fifty thousand
which were stolen from the safe.”

“Yet,” said Prosper, who could not account for this certainty on the
part of his protector, “yet----”

“There is no doubt about it: I have the numbers of all the stolen
notes.”

“What! When even I did not have them?”

“But the bank did, fortunately. When we undertake an affair we must
anticipate everything, and forget nothing. It is a poor excuse for a
man to say, ‘I did not think of it’ when he commits some oversight. I
thought of the bank.”

If, in the beginning, Prosper had felt some repugnance about confiding
in his father’s friend, the feeling had now disappeared.

He understood that alone, scarcely master of himself, governed only
by the inspirations of inexperience, never would he have the patient
perspicacity of this singular man.

Verduret continued talking to himself, as if he had absolutely forgotten
Prosper’s presence:

“Then, as this package did not come from the thief, it can only come
from the other person, who was near the safe at the time of the robbery,
but could not prevent it, and now feels remorse. The probability of
two persons assisting at the robbery, a probability suggested by the
scratch, is now converted into undeniable certainty. _Ergo_, I was
right.”

Prosper listening attentively tried hard to comprehend this monologue,
which he dared not interrupt.

“Let us seek,” went on the fat man, “this second person, whose
conscience pricks him, and yet who dares not reveal anything.”

He read the letter over several times, scanning the sentences, and
weighing every word.

“Evidently this letter was composed by a woman,” he finally said. “Never
would one man doing another man a service, and sending him money, use
the word ‘succor.’ A man would have said, loan, money, or some other
equivalent, but succor, never. No one but a woman, ignorant of masculine
susceptibilities, would have naturally made use of this word to express
the idea it represents. As to the sentence, ‘There is one heart,’ and so
on, it could only have been written by a woman.”

“You are mistaken, monsieur,” said Prosper: “no woman is mixed up in
this affair.”

M. Verduret paid no attention to this interruption, perhaps he did not
hear it; perhaps he did not care to argue the matter.

“Now, let us see if we can discover whence the printed words were taken
to compose this letter.”

He approached the window, and began to study the pasted words with all
the scrupulous attention which an antiquarian would devote to an old,
half-effaced manuscript.

“Small type,” he said, “very slender and clear; the paper is thin and
glossy. Consequently, these words have not been cut from a newspaper,
magazine, or even a novel. I have seen type like this, I recognize it at
once; Didot often uses it, so does Mme. de Tours.”

He stopped with his mouth open, and eyes fixed, appealing laboriously to
his memory.

Suddenly he struck his forehead exultantly.

“Now I have it!” he cried; “now I have it! Why did I not see it at
once? These words have all been cut from a prayer-book. We will look, at
least, and then we shall be certain.”

He moistened one of the words pasted on the paper with his tongue, and,
when it was sufficiently softened, he detached it with a pin. On the
other side of this word was printed a Latin word, _Deus_.

“Ah, ha,” he said with a little laugh of satisfaction. “I knew it.
Father Taberet would be pleased to see this. But what has become of
the mutilated prayer-book? Can it have been burned? No, because a
heavy-bound book is not easily burned. It is thrown in some corner.”

M. Verduret was interrupted by the porter, who returned with the
messenger from the Rue Pigalle.

“Ah, here you are,” he said encouragingly. Then he showed the envelope
of the letter, and said:

“Do you remember bringing this letter here this morning?”

“Perfectly, monsieur. I took particular notice of the direction; we
don’t often see anything like it.”

“Who told you to bring it? a gentleman, or a lady?”

“Neither, monsieur; it was a porter.”

This reply made the porter laugh very much, but not a muscle of M.
Verduret’s face moved.

“A porter? Well, do you know this colleague of yours.”

“I never even saw him before.”

“How does he look?”

“He was neither tall nor short; he wore a green vest, and his medal.”

“Your description is so vague that it would suit every porter in the
city; but did your colleague tell you who sent the letter?”

“No, monsieur. He only put ten sous in my hand, and said, ‘Here, carry
this to No. 39, Rue Chaptal: a coachman on the boulevard handed it to
me.’ Ten sous! I warrant you he made more than that by it.”

This answer seemed to disconcert M. Verduret. So many precautions taken
in sending the letter disturbed him, and disarranged his plans.

“Do you think you would recognize the porter again?”

“Yes, monsieur, if I saw him.”

“How much do you gain a day as a porter?”

“I can’t tell exactly; but my corner is a good stand, and I am busy
doing errands nearly all day. I suppose I make from eight to ten
francs.”

“Very well; I will give you ten francs a day if you will walk about the
streets, and look for the porter who brought this letter. Every evening,
at eight o’clock, come to the Archangel, on the Quai Saint Michel, give
me a report of your search, and receive your pay. Ask for M. Verduret.
If you find the man I will give you fifty francs. Do you accept?”

“I rather think I will, monsieur.”

“Then don’t lose a minute. Start off!”

Although ignorant of M. Verduret’s plans, Prosper began to comprehend
the sense of his investigations. His fate depended upon their success,
and yet he almost forgot this fact in his admiration of this singular
man; for his energy, his bantering coolness when he wished to discover
anything, the surety of his deductions, the fertility of his expedients,
and the rapidity of his movements, were astonishing.

“Monsieur,” said Prosper when the porter had left the room, “do you
still think you see a woman’s hand in this affair?”

“More than ever; and a pious woman too, and a woman who has two
prayer-books, since she could cut up one to write to you.”

“And you hope to find the mutilated book?”

“I do, thanks to the opportunity I have of making an immediate search;
which I will set about at once.”

Saying this, he sat down, and rapidly scratched off a few lines on a
slip of paper, which he folded up, and put in his vest-pocket.

“Are you ready to go to M. Fauvel’s? Yes? Come on, then; we have
certainly earned our breakfast to-day.”




VIII

When Raoul de Lagors spoke of M. Fauvel’s extraordinary dejection, he
had not exaggerated.

Since the fatal day when, upon his denunciation, his cashier had been
arrested, the banker, this active, energetic man of business, had been
a prey to the most gloomy melancholy, and absolutely refused to take any
interest in his affairs, seldom entering the banking-house.

He, who had always been so domestic, never came near his family except
at meals, when he would swallow a few mouthfuls, and hastily leave the
room.

Shut up in his study, he would deny himself to visitors. His anxious
countenance, his indifference to everybody and everything, his constant
reveries and fits of abstraction, betrayed the preoccupation of some
fixed idea, or the tyrannical empire of some hidden sorrow.

The day of Prosper’s release, about three o’clock, M. Fauvel was, as
usual, seated in his study, with his elbows resting on the table, and
his face buried in his hands, when his office-boy rushed in, and with a
frightened look said:

“Monsieur, the former cashier, M. Bertomy, is here with one of his
relatives; he says he must see you on business.”

The banker at these words started up as if he had been shot.

“Prosper!” he cried in a voice choked by anger, “what! does he dare--”

Then remembering that he ought to control himself before his servant, he
waited a few moments, and then said, in a tone of forced calmness:

“Ask them to walk in.”

If M. Verduret had counted upon witnessing a strange and affecting
sight, he was not disappointed.

Nothing could be more terrible than the attitude of these two men as
they stood confronting each other. The banker’s face was almost purple
with suppressed anger, and he looked as if about to be struck by
apoplexy. Prosper was as pale and motionless as a corpse.

Silent and immovable, they stood glaring at each other with mortal
hatred.

M. Verduret curiously watched these two enemies, with the indifference
and coolness of a philosopher, who, in the most violent outbursts of
human passion, merely sees subjects for meditation and study.

Finally, the silence becoming more and more threatening, he decided to
break it by speaking to the banker:

“I suppose you know, monsieur, that my young relative has just been
released from prison.”

“Yes,” replied M. Fauvel, making an effort to control himself, “yes, for
want of sufficient proof.”

“Exactly so, monsieur, and this want of proof, as stated in the decision
of ‘Not proven,’ ruins the prospects of my relative, and compels him to
leave here at once for America.”

M. Fauvel’s features relaxed as if he had been relieved of some fearful
agony.

“Ah, he is going away,” he said, “he is going abroad.”

There was no mistaking the resentful, almost insulting intonation of the
words, “going away!”

M. Verduret took no notice of M. Fauvel’s manner.

“It appears to me,” he continued, in an easy tone, “that Prosper’s
determination is a wise one. I merely wished him, before leaving Paris,
to come and pay his respects to his former chief.”

The banker smiled bitterly.

“M. Bertomy might have spared us both this painful meeting. I have
nothing to say to him, and of course he can have nothing to tell me.”

This was a formal dismissal; and M. Verduret, understanding it thus,
bowed to M. Fauvel, and left the room, accompanied by Prosper, who had
not opened his lips.

They had reached the street before Prosper recovered the use of his
tongue.

“I hope you are satisfied, monsieur,” he said, in a gloomy tone; “you
exacted this painful step, and I could only acquiesce. Have I gained
anything by adding this humiliation to the others which I have
suffered?”

“You have not, but I have,” replied M. Verduret. “I could find no way of
gaining access to M. Fauvel, save through you; and now I have found out
what I wanted to know. I am convinced that M. Fauvel had nothing to do
with the robbery.”

“Oh, monsieur!” objected Prosper, “innocence can be feigned.”

“Certainly, but not to this extent. And this is not all. I wished to
find out if M. Fauvel would be accessible to certain suspicions. I am
now confident that he is.”

Prosper and his companion had stopped to talk more at their ease, near
the corner of the Rue Lafitte, in the middle of a large space which had
lately been cleared by pulling down an old house.

M. Verduret seemed to be anxious, and was constantly looking around as
if he expected someone.

He soon uttered an exclamation of satisfaction.

At the other end of the vacant space, he saw Cavaillon, who was
bareheaded and running.

He was so excited that he did not even stop to shake hands with Prosper,
but darted up to M. Verduret, and said:

“They have gone, monsieur!”

“How long since?”

“They went about a quarter of an hour ago.”

“The deuce they did! Then we have not an instant to lose.”

He handed Cavaillon the note he had written some hours before at
Prosper’s house.

“Here, send him this, and then return at once to your desk; you might be
missed. It was very imprudent in you to come out without your hat.”

Cavaillon ran off as quickly as he had come. Prosper was stupefied.

“What!” he exclaimed. “You know Cavaillon?”

“So it seems,” answered M. Verduret with a smile, “but we have no time
to talk; come on, hurry!”

“Where are we gong now?”

“You will soon know; walk fast!”

And he set the example by striding rapidly toward the Rue Lafayette. As
they went along he continued talking more to himself than to Prosper.

“Ah,” said he, “it is not by putting both feet in one shoe, that one
wins a race. The track once found, we should never rest an instant.
When the savage discovers the footprints of an enemy, he follows it
persistently, knowing that falling rain or a gust of wind may efface
the footprints at any moment. It is the same with us: the most trifling
incident may destroy the traces we are following up.”

M. Verduret suddenly stopped before a door bearing the number 81.

“We are going in here,” he said to Prosper; “come.”

They went up the steps, and stopped on the second floor, before a door
over which was a large sign, “Fashionable Dressmaker.”

A handsome bell-rope hung on the wall, but M. Verduret did not touch it.
He tapped with the ends of his fingers in a peculiar way, and the door
instantly opened as if someone had been watching for his signal on the
other side.

The door was opened by a neatly dressed woman of about forty. She
quietly ushered M. Verduret and Prosper into a neat dining-room with
several doors opening into it.

This woman bowed humbly to M. Verduret, as if he were some superior
being.

He scarcely noticed her salutation, but questioned her with a look. His
look said:

“Well?”

She bowed affirmatively:

“Yes.”

“In there?” asked M. Verduret in a low tone, pointing to one of the
doors.

“No,” said the woman in the same tone, “over there, in the little
parlor.”

M. Verduret opened the door pointed out, and pushed Prosper into the
little parlor, whispering, as he did so:

“Go in, and keep your presence of mind.”

But his injunction was useless. The instant he cast his eyes around
the room into which he had so unceremoniously been pushed without any
warning, Prosper exclaimed, in a startled voice:

“Madeleine!”

It was indeed M. Fauvel’s niece, looking more beautiful than ever. Hers
was that calm, dignified beauty which imposes admiration and respect.

Standing in the middle of the room, near a table covered with silks and
satins, she was arranging a skirt of red velvet embroidered in gold;
probably the dress she was to wear as maid of honor to Catherine de
Medicis.

At sight of Prosper, all the blood rushed to her face, and her beautiful
eyes half closed, as if she were about to faint; she clung to the table
to prevent herself from falling.

Prosper well knew that Madeleine was not one of those cold-hearted women
whom nothing could disturb, and who feel sensations, but never a true
sentiment.

Of a tender, dreamy nature, she betrayed in the minute details of her
life the most exquisite delicacy. But she was also proud, and incapable
of in any way violating her conscience. When duty spoke, she obeyed.

She recovered from her momentary weakness, and the soft expression of
her eyes changed to one of haughty resentment. In an offended tone she
said:

“What has emboldened you, monsieur, to be watching my movements? Who
gave you permission to follow me, to enter this house?”

Prosper was certainly innocent. He would have given worlds to explain
what had just happened, but he was powerless, and could only remain
silent.

“You promised me upon your honor, monsieur,” continued Madeleine, “that
you would never again seek my presence. Is this the way you keep your
word?”

“I did promise, mademoiselle, but----”

He stopped.

“Oh, speak!”

“So many things have happened since that terrible day, that I think I am
excusable in forgetting, for one hour, an oath torn from me in a moment
of blind weakness. It is to chance, at least to another will than my
own, that I am indebted for the happiness of once more finding myself
near you. Alas! the instant I saw you my heart bounded with joy. I did
not think, no I could not think, that you would prove more pitiless than
strangers have been, that you would cast me off when I am so miserable
and heart-broken.”

Had not Prosper been so agitated he could have read in the eyes of
Madeleine--those beautiful eyes which had so long been the arbiters of
his destiny--the signs of a great inward struggle.

It was, however, in a firm voice that she replied:

“You know me well enough, Prosper, to be sure than no blow can strike
you without reaching me at the same time. You suffer, I suffer with you:
I pity you as a sister would pity a beloved brother.”

“A sister!” said Prosper, bitterly. “Yes, that was the word you used the
day you banished me from your presence. A sister! Then why during three
years did you delude me with vain hopes? Was I a brother to you the day
we went to Notre Dame de Fourvieres, that day when, at the foot of the
altar, we swore to love each other for ever and ever, and you fastened
around my neck a holy relic and said, ‘Wear this always for my sake,
never part from it, and it will bring you good fortune’?”

Madeleine attempted to interrupt him by a supplicating gesture: he would
not heed it, but continued with increased bitterness:

“One month after that happy day--a year ago--you gave me back my
promise, told me to consider myself free from any engagement, and never
to come near you again. If I could have discovered in what way I had
offended you--But no, you refused to explain. You drove me away, and to
obey you I told everyone that I had left you of my own accord. You told
me that an invincible obstacle had arisen between us, and I believed
you, fool that I was! The obstacle was your own heart, Madeleine. I
have always worn the medal; but it has not brought me happiness or good
fortune.”

As white and motionless as a statue, Madeleine stood with bowed head
before this storm of passionate reproach.

“I told you to forget me,” she murmured.

“Forget!” exclaimed Prosper, excitedly, “forget! Can I forget! Is it in
my power to stop, by an effort of will, the circulation of my blood? Ah,
you have never loved! To forget, as to stop the beatings of the heart,
there is but one means--death!”

This word, uttered with the fixed determination of a desperate, reckless
man, caused Madeleine to shudder.

“Miserable man!” she exclaimed.

“Yes, miserable man, and a thousand times more miserable than you can
imagine! You can never understand the tortures I have suffered, when for
a year I would awake every morning, and say to myself, ‘It is all over,
she has ceased to love me!’ This great sorrow stared me in the face
day and night in spite of all my efforts to dispel it. And you speak of
forgetfulness! I sought it at the bottom of poisoned cups, but found it
not. I tried to extinguish this memory of the past, that tears my heart
to shreds like a devouring flame; in vain. When the body succumbed, the
pitiless heart kept watch. With this corroding torture making life a
burden, do you wonder that I should seek rest which can only be obtained
by suicide?”

“I forbid you to utter that word.”

“You forget, Madeleine, that you have no right to forbid me, unless you
love me. Love would make you all powerful, and me obedient.”

With an imperious gesture Madeleine interrupted him as if she wished to
speak, and perhaps to explain all, to exculpate herself.

But a sudden thought stopped her; she clasped her hands despairingly,
and cried:

“My God! this suffering is beyond endurance!”

Prosper seemed to misconstrue her words.

“Your pity comes too late,” he said. “There is no happiness in store for
one like myself, who has had a glimpse of divine felicity, had the
cup of bliss held to his lips, and then dashed to the ground. There
is nothing left to attach me to life. You have destroyed my holiest
beliefs; I came forth from prison disgraced by my enemies; what is to
become of me? Vainly do I question the future; for me there is no hope
of happiness. I look around me to see nothing but abandonment, ignominy,
and despair!”

“Prosper, my brother, my friend, if you only knew----”

“I know but one thing, Madeleine, and that is, that you no longer love
me, and that I love you more madly than ever. Oh, Madeleine, God only
knows how I love you!”

He was silent. He hoped for an answer. None came.

But suddenly the silence was broken by a stifled sob.

It was Madeleine’s maid, who, seated in a corner, was weeping bitterly.

Madeleine had forgotten her presence.

Prosper had been so surprised at finding Madeleine when he entered
the room, that he kept his eyes fastened upon her face, and never once
looked about him to see if anyone else were present.

He turned in surprise and looked at the weeping woman.

He was not mistaken: this neatly dressed waiting-maid was Nina Gypsy.

Prosper was so startled that he became perfectly dumb. He stood there
with ashy lips, and a chilly sensation creeping through his veins.

The horror of the situation terrified him. He was there, between the two
women who had ruled his fate; between Madeleine, the proud heiress
who spurned his love, and Nina Gypsy, the poor girl whose devotion to
himself he had so disdainfully rejected.

And she had heard all; poor Gypsy had witnessed the passionate avowal
of her lover, had heard him swear that he could never love any woman but
Madeleine, that if his love were not reciprocated he would kill himself,
as he had nothing else to live for.

Prosper could judge of her sufferings by his own. For she was wounded
not only in the present, but in the past. What must be her humiliation
and danger on hearing the miserable part which Prosper, in his
disappointed love, had imposed upon her?

He was astonished that Gypsy--violence itself--remained silently
weeping, instead of rising and bitterly denouncing him.

Meanwhile Madeleine had succeeded in recovering her usual calmness.

Slowly and almost unconsciously she had put on her bonnet and shawl,
which were lying on the sofa.

Then she approached Prosper, and said:

“Why did you come here? We both have need of all the courage we can
command. You are unhappy, Prosper; I am more than unhappy, I am most
wretched. You have a right to complain: I have not the right to shed a
tear. While my heart is slowly breaking, I must wear a smiling face. You
can seek consolation in the bosom of a friend: I can have no confidant
but God.”

Prosper tried to murmur a reply, but his pale lips refused to
articulate; he was stifling.

“I wish to tell you,” continued Madeleine, “that I have forgotten
nothing. But oh! let not this knowledge give you any hope; the future
is blank for us, but if you love me you will live. You will not, I know,
add to my already heavy burden of sorrow, the agony of mourning your
death. For my sake, live; live the life of a good man, and perhaps the
day will come when I can justify myself in your eyes. And now, oh, my
brother, oh, my only friend, adieu! adieu!”

She pressed a kiss upon his brow, and rushed from the room, followed by
Nina Gypsy.

Prosper was alone. He seemed to be awaking from a troubled dream. He
tried to think over what had just happened, and asked himself if he were
losing his mind, or whether he had really spoken to Madeleine and seen
Gypsy?

He was obliged to attribute all this to the mysterious power of the
strange man whom he had seen for the first time that very morning.

How did he gain this wonderful power of controlling events to suit his
own purposes?

He seemed to have anticipated everything, to know everything. He was
acquainted with Cavaillon, he knew all Madeleine’s movements; he had
made even Gypsy become humble and submissive.

Thinking all this, Prosper had reached such a degree of exasperation,
that when M. Verduret entered the little parlor, he strode toward him
white with rage, and in a harsh, threatening voice, said to him:

“Who are you?”

The stout man did not show any surprise at this burst of anger, but
quietly answered:

“A friend of your father’s; did you not know it?”

“That is no answer, monsieur; I have been surprised into being
influenced by a stranger, and now--”

“Do you want my biography, what I have been, what I am, and what I may
be? What difference does it make to you? I told you that I would save
you; the main point is that I am saving you.”

“Still I have the right to ask by what means you are saving me.”

“What good will it do you to know what my plans are?”

“In order to decide whether I will accept or reject them?”

“But suppose I guarantee success?”

“That is not sufficient, monsieur. I do not choose to be any longer
deprived of my own free will, to be exposed without warning to trials
like those I have undergone to-day. A man of my age must know what he is
doing.”

“A man of your age, Prosper, when he is blind, takes a guide, and does
not undertake to point out the way to his leader.”

The half-bantering, half-commiserating tone of M. Verduret was not
calculated to calm Prosper’s irritation.

“That being the case, monsieur,” he cried, “I will thank you for your
past services, and decline them for the future, as I have no need of
them. If I attempted to defend my honor and my life, it was because
I hoped that Madeleine would be restored to me. I have been convinced
to-day that all is at an end between us; I retire from the struggle, and
care not what becomes of me now.”

Prosper was so decided, that M. Verduret seemed alarmed.

“You must be mad,” he finally said.

“No, unfortunately I am not. Madeleine has ceased to love me, and of
what importance is anything else?”

His heart-broken tone aroused M. Verduret’s sympathy, and he said, in a
kind, soothing tone:

“Then you suspect nothing? You did not fathom the meaning of what she
said?”

“You were listening,” cried Prosper fiercely.

“I certainly was.”

“Monsieur!”

“Yes. It was a presumptuous thing to do, perhaps; but the end justified
the means in this instance. I am glad I did listen, because it has
enabled me to say to you, Take courage, Prosper: Mlle. Madeleine loves
you; she has never ceased to love you.”

Like a dying man who eagerly listens to deceitful promises of recovery,
although he feels himself sinking into the grave, did Prosper feel his
sad heart cheered by M. Verduret’s assertion.

“Oh,” he murmured, suddenly calmed, “if only I could hope!”

“Rely upon me, I am not mistaken. Ah, I could see the torture endured by
this generous girl, while she struggled between her love, and what she
believed to be her duty. Were you not convinced of her love when she
bade you farewell?”

“She loves me, she is free, and yet she shuns me.”

“No, she is not free! In breaking off her engagement with you, she
was governed by some powerful, irrepressible event. She is sacrificing
herself--for whom? We shall soon know; and the secret of her
self-sacrifice will discover to us the secret of her plot against you.”

As M. Verduret spoke, Prosper felt all his resolutions of revolt slowly
melting away, and their place taken by confidence and hope.

“If what you say were true!” he mournfully said.

“Foolish young man! Why do you persist in obstinately shutting your eyes
to the proof I place before you? Can you not see that Mlle. Madeleine
knows who the thief is? Yes, you need not look so shocked; she knows the
thief, but no human power can tear it from her. She sacrifices you, but
then she almost has the right, since she first sacrificed herself.”

Prosper was almost convinced; and it nearly broke his heart to leave
this little parlor where he had seen Madeleine.

“Alas!” he said, pressing M. Verduret’s hand, “you must think me a
ridiculous fool! but you don’t know how I suffer.”

The man with the red whiskers sadly shook his head, and his voice
sounded very unsteady as he replied, in a low tone:

“What you suffer, I have suffered. Like you, I loved, not a pure, noble
girl, yet a girl fair to look upon. For three years I was at her feet,
a slave to her every whim; when, one day she suddenly deserted me who
adored her, to throw herself in the arms of a man who despised her.
Then, like you, I wished to die. Neither threats nor entreaties could
induce her to return to me. Passion never reasons, and she loved my
rival.”

“And did you know this rival?”

“I knew him.”

“And you did not seek revenge?”

“No,” replied M. Verduret with a singular expression, “no: fate took
charge of my vengeance.”

For a minute Prosper was silent; then he said:

“I have finally decided, monsieur. My honor is a sacred trust for which
I must account to my family. I am ready to follow you to the end of the
world; dispose of me as you judge proper.”

That same day Prosper, faithful to his promise, sold his furniture, and
wrote a letter to his friends announcing his intended departure to San
Francisco.

In the evening he and M. Verduret installed themselves in the
“Archangel.”

Mme. Alexandre gave Prosper her prettiest room, but it was very ugly
compared with the coquettish little parlor on the Rue Chaptal. His state
of mind did not permit him, however, to notice the difference between
his former and present quarters. He lay on an old sofa, meditating upon
the events of the day, and feeling a bitter satisfaction in his isolated
condition.

About eleven o’clock he thought he would raise the window, and let the
cool air fan his burning brow; as he did so a piece of paper was blown
from among the folds of the window-curtain, and lay at his feet on the
floor.

Prosper mechanically picked it up, and looked at it.

It was covered with writing, the handwriting of Nina Gypsy; he could not
be mistaken about that.

It was the fragment of a torn letter; and, if the half sentences did not
convey any clear meaning, they were sufficient to lead the mind into all
sorts of conjectures.

The fragment read as follows:

“of M. Raoul, I have been very im . . . plotted against him, of whom
never . . . warn Prosper, and then . . . best friend. he . . . hand of
Mlle. Ma . . .”

Prosper never closed his eyes during that night.




IX

Not far from the Palais Royal, in the Rue St. Honore, is the sign of “La
Bonne Foi,” a small establishment, half cafe and half shop, extensively
patronized by the people of the neighborhood.

It was in the smoking-room of this modest cafe that Prosper, the day
after his release, awaited M. Verduret, who had promised to meet him at
four o’clock.

The clock struck four; M. Verduret, who was punctuality itself,
appeared. He was more red-faced and self-satisfied, if possible, than
the day before.

As soon as the servant had left the room to obey his orders, he said to
Prosper:

“Well, are our commissions executed?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“Have you seen the costumer?”

“I gave him your letter, and everything you ordered will be sent to the
Archangel to-morrow.”

“Very good; you have not lost time, neither have I. I have good news for
you.”

The “Bonne Foi” is almost deserted at four o’clock. The hour for coffee
is passed, and the hour for absinthe has not yet come. M. Verduret and
Prosper could talk at their ease without fear of being overheard by
gossiping neighbors.

M. Verduret drew forth his memorandum-book, the precious diary which,
like the enchanted book in the fairy-tale, had an answer for every
question.

“While awaiting our emissaries whom I appointed to meet here, let us
devote a little time to M. de Lagors.”

At this name Prosper did not protest, as he had done the night previous.
Like those imperceptible insects which, having once penetrated the root
of a tree, devour it in a single night, suspicion, when it invades our
mind, soon develops itself, and destroys our firmest beliefs.

The visit of Lagors, and Gypsy’s torn letter, had filled Prosper with
suspicions which had grown stronger and more settled as time passed.

“Do you know, my dear friend,” said M. Verduret, “what part of France
this devoted friend of yours comes from?”

“He was born at St. Remy, which is also Mme. Fauvel’s native town.”

“Are you certain of that?”

“Oh, perfectly so, monsieur! He has not only often told me so, but I
have heard him tell M. Fauvel; and he would talk to Mme. Fauvel by the
hour about his mother, who was cousin to Mme. Fauvel, and dearly beloved
by her.”

“Then you think there is no possible mistake or falsehood about this
part of his story?”

“None in the least, monsieur.”

“Well, things are assuming a queer look.”

And he began to whistle between his teeth; which, with M. Verduret, was
a sign of intense inward satisfaction.

“What seems so, monsieur?” inquired Prosper.

“What has just happened; what I have been tracing. Parbleu!” he
exclaimed, imitating the manner of a showman at a fair, “here is
a lovely town, called St. Remy, six thousand inhabitants; charming
boulevards on the site of the old fortifications; handsome hotel;
numerous fountains; large charcoal market, silk factories, famous
hospital, and so on.”

Prosper was on thorns.

“Please be so good, monsieur, as to explain what you----”

“It also contains,” continued M. Verduret, “a Roman triumphal arch,
which is of unparalleled beauty, and a Greek mausoleum; but no Lagors.
St. Remy is the native town of Nostradamus, but not of your friend.”

“Yet I have proofs.”

“Naturally. But proofs can be fabricated; relatives can be improvised.
Your evidence is open to suspicion. My proofs are undeniable, perfectly
authenticated. While you were pining in prison, I was preparing my
batteries and collecting munition to open fire. I wrote to St. Remy, and
received answers to my questions.”

“Will you let me know what they were?”

“Have patience,” said M. Verduret as he turned over the leaves of
his memoranda. “Ah, here is number one. Bow respectfully to it, ‘tis
official.”

He then read:


“‘LAGORS.--Very old family, originally from Maillane, settled at St.
Remy about a century ago.’”


“I told you so,” cried Prosper.

“Pray allow me to finish,” said M. Verduret.

“‘The last of the Lagors (Jules-Rene-Henri) bearing without warrant
the title of count, married in 1829 Mlle. Rosalie-Clarisse Fontanet,
of Tarascon; died December 1848, leaving no male heir, but left two
daughters. The registers make no mention of any person in the district
bearing the name of Lagors.’

“Now what do you think of this information?” queried the fat man with a
triumphant smile.

Prosper looked amazed.

“But why did M. Fauvel treat Raoul as his nephew?”

“Ah, you mean as his wife’s nephew! Let us examine note number two: it
is not official, but it throws a valuable light upon the twenty thousand
livres income of your friend.”

“‘_Jules-Rene-Henri_ de Lagors, last of his name, died at St. Remy on
the 29th of December, 1848, in a state of great poverty. He at one time
was possessed of a moderate fortune, but invested it in a silk-worm
nursery, and lost it all.

“‘He had no son, but left two daughters, one of whom is a teacher at
Aix, and the other married a retail merchant at Orgon. His widow, who
lives at Montagnette, is supported entirely by one of her relatives, the
wife of a rich banker in Paris. No person of the name of Lagors lives in
the district of Arles.’

“That is all,” said M. Verduret; “don’t you think it enough?”

“Really, monsieur, I don’t know whether I am awake or dreaming.”

“You will be awake after a while. Now I wish to remark one thing. Some
people may assert that the widow Lagors had a child born after her
husband’s death. This objection has been destroyed by the age of your
friend. Raoul is twenty-four, and M. de Lagors has not been dead twenty
years.”

“But,” said Prosper thoughtfully, “who can Raoul be?”

“I don’t know. The fact is, I am more perplexed to find out who he is,
than to know whom he is not. There is one man who could give us all the
information we seek, but he will take good care to keep his mouth shut.”

“You mean M. de Clameran?”

“Him, and no one else.”

“I have always felt the most inexplicable aversion toward him. Ah, if we
could only get his account in addition to what you already have!”

“I have been furnished with a few notes concerning the Clameran family
by your father, who knew them well; they are brief, but I expect more.”

“What did my father tell you?”

“Nothing favorable, you may be sure. I will read you the synopsis of
this information:

“‘Louis de Clameran was born at the Chateau de Clameran, near Tarascon.
He had an elder brother named Gaston, who, in consequence of an affray
in which he had the misfortune to kill one man and badly wound another,
was compelled to fly the country in 1842. Gaston was an honest, noble
youth, universally beloved. Louis, on the contrary, was a wicked,
despicable fellow, detested by all who knew him.

“‘Upon the death of his father, Louis came to Paris, and in less than
two years had squandered not only his own patrimony, but also the share
of his exiled brother.

“‘Ruined and harassed by debt, Louis entered the army, but behaved so
disgracefully that he was dismissed.

“‘After leaving the army we lose sight of him; all we can discover is,
that he went to England, and thence to a German gambling resort, where
he became notorious for his scandalous conduct.

“‘In 1865 we find him again at Paris. He was in great poverty, and his
associates were among the most depraved classes.

“‘But he suddenly heard of the return of his brother Gaston to Paris.
Gaston had made a fortune in Mexico; but being still a young man,
and accustomed to a very active life, he purchased, near Orloron, an
iron-mill, intending to spend the remainder of his life in working at
it. Six months ago he died in the arms of his brother Louis. His death
provided our De Clameran an immense fortune, and the title of marquis.’”


“Then,” said Prosper, “from all this I judge that M. de Clameran was
very poor when I met him for the first time at M. Fauvel’s?”

“Evidently.”

“And about that time Lagors arrived from the country?”

“Precisely.”

“And about a month after his appearance Madeleine suddenly banished me?”

“Well,” exclaimed M. Verduret, “I am glad you are beginning to
understand the state of affairs.”

He was interrupted by the entrance of a stranger.

The new-comer was a dandified-looking coachman, with elegant black
whiskers, shining boots with fancy tops; buff breeches, and a yellow
waistcoat with red and black stripes.

After cautiously looking around the room, he walked straight up to the
table where M. Verduret sat.

“What is the news, Master Joseph Dubois?” said the stout man eagerly.

“Ah, patron, don’t speak of it!” answered the servant: “things are
getting warm.”

Prosper concentrated all his attention upon this superb domestic. He
thought he recognized his face. He had certainly somewhere seen that
retreating forehead and those little restless black eyes, but where and
when he could not remember.

Meanwhile, Master Joseph had taken a seat at a table adjoining the
one occupied by M. Verduret and Prosper; and, having called for some
absinthe, was preparing it by holding the water aloft and slowly
dropping it in the glass.

“Speak!” said M. Verduret.

“In the first place, patron, I must say that the position of valet and
coachman to M. de Clameran is not a bed of roses.”

“Go on: come to the point. You can complain to-morrow.”

“Very good. Yesterday my master walked out at two o’clock. I, of course,
followed him. Do you know where he went? The thing was as good as a
farce. He went to the Archangel to keep the appointment made by ‘Nina
Gypsy.’”

“Well, make haste. They told him she was gone. Then?”

“Then? Ah! he was not at all pleased, I can tell you. He hurried back to
the hotel where the other, M. de Lagors, awaited him. And, upon my soul,
I have never heard so much swearing in my life! M. Raoul asked him
what had happened to put him in such a bad humor. ‘Nothing,’ replied my
master, ‘except that little devil has run off, and no one knows where
she is; she has slipped through our fingers.’ Then they both appeared
to be vexed and uneasy. Lagors asked if she knew anything serious. ‘She
knows nothing but what I told you,’ replied Clameran; ‘but this nothing,
falling in the ear of a man with any suspicions, will be more than
enough to work on.’”

M. Verduret smiled like a man who had his reasons for appreciating at
their just value De Clameran’s fears.

“Well, your master is not without sense, after all; don’t you think he
showed it by saying that?”

“Yes, patron. Then Lagors exclaimed, ‘If it is as serious as that,
we must get rid of this little serpent!’ But my master shrugged his
shoulders, and laughing loudly said, ‘You talk like an idiot; when one
is annoyed by a woman of this sort, one must take measures to get rid of
her administratively.’ This idea seemed to amuse them both very much.”

“I can understand their being entertained by it,” said M. Verduret; “it
is an excellent idea; but the misfortune is, it is too late to carry it
out. The nothing which made Clameran uneasy has already fallen into a
knowing ear.”

With breathless curiosity, Prosper listened to this report, every word
of which seemed to throw light upon past events. Now, he thought, he
understood the fragment of Gypsy’s letter. He saw that this Raoul, in
whom he had confided so deeply, was nothing more than a scoundrel. A
thousand little circumstances, unnoticed at the time, now recurred to
his mind, and made him wonder how he could have been so blind so long.

Master Joseph Dubois continued his report:

“Yesterday, after dinner, my master decked himself out like a
bridegroom. I shaved him, curled his hair, and perfumed him with special
care, after which I drove him to the Rue de Provence to call on Mme.
Fauvel.”

“What!” exclaimed Prosper, “after the insulting language he used the day
of the robbery, did he dare to visit the house?”

“Yes, monsieur, he not only dared this, but he also stayed there until
midnight, to my great discomfort; for I got as wet as a rat, waiting for
him.”

“How did he look when he came out?” asked M. Verduret.

“Well, he certainly looked less pleased then when he went in. After
putting away my carriage, and rubbing down my horses, I went to see if
he wanted anything; I found the door locked, and he swore at me like a
trooper, through the key-hole.”

And, to assist the digestion of this insult, Master Joseph here gulped
down a glass of absinthe.

“Is that all?” questioned M. Verduret.

“All that occurred yesterday, patron; but this morning my master rose
late, still in a horrible bad humor. At noon Raoul arrived, also in
a rage. They at once began to dispute, and such a row! why, the most
abandoned housebreakers and pickpockets would have blushed to hear such
Billingsgate. At one time my master seized the other by the throat and
shook him like a reed. But Raoul was too quick for him; he saved himself
from strangulation by drawing out a sharp-pointed knife, the sight of
which made my master drop him in a hurry, I can tell you.”

“But what did they say?”

“Ah, there is the rub, patron,” said Joseph in a piteous tone; “the
scamps spoke English, so I could not understand them. But I am sure they
were disputing about money.”

“How do you know that?”

“Because I learned at the Exposition that the word ‘argent’ means money
in every language in Europe; and this word they constantly used in their
conversation.”

M. Verduret sat with knit brows, talking in an undertone to himself; and
Prosper, who was watching him, wondered if he was trying to understand
and construct the dispute by mere force of reflection.

“When they had done fighting,” continued Joseph, “the rascals began to
talk in French again; but they only spoke of a fancy ball which is to
be given by some banker. When Raoul was leaving, my master said, ‘Since
this thing is inevitable, and it must take place to-day, you had better
remain at home, at Vesinet, this evening.’ Raoul replied, ‘Of course.’”

Night was approaching, and the smoking-room was gradually filling
with men who called for absinthe or bitters, and youths who perched
themselves up on high stools, and smoked their pipes.

“It is time to go,” said M. Verduret; “your master will want you,
Joseph; besides, here is someone come for me. I will see you to-morrow.”

The new-comer was no other than Cavaillon, more troubled and frightened
than ever. He looked uneasily around the room, as if he expected the
whole police force to appear, and carry him off to prison.

He did not sit down at M. Verduret’s table, but stealthily gave his hand
to Prosper, and, after assuring himself that no one was observing them,
handed M. Verduret a package, saying:

“She found this in a cupboard.”

It was a handsomely bound prayer-book. M. Verduret rapidly turned over
the leaves, and soon found the pages from which the words pasted on
Prosper’s letter had been cut.

“I had moral proofs,” he said, handing the book to Prosper, “but here is
material proof sufficient in itself to save you.”

When Prosper looked at the book he turned pale as a ghost. He recognized
this prayer-book instantly. He had given it to Madeleine in exchange for
the medal.

He opened it, and on the fly-leaf Madeleine had written, “Souvenir of
Notre Dame de Fourvieres, 17 January, 1866.”

“This book belongs to Madeleine,” he cried.

M. Verduret did not reply, but walked toward a young man dressed like a
brewer, who had just entered the room.

He glanced at the note which this person handed to him, and hastened
back to the table, and said, in an agitated tone:

“I think we have got them now!”

Throwing a five-franc piece on the table, and without saying a word to
Cavaillon, he seized Prosper’s arm, and hurried from the room.

“What a fatality!” he said, as he hastened along the street: “we may
miss them. We shall certainly reach the St. Lazare station too late for
the St. Germain train.”

“For Heaven’s sake, where are you going?” asked Prosper.

“Never mind, we can talk after we start. Hurry!”

Reaching Palais Royal Place, M. Verduret stopped before one of the hacks
belonging to the railway station, and examined the horses at a glance.

“How much for driving us to Vesinet?” he asked of the driver.

“I don’t know the road very well that way.”

The name of Vesinet was enough for Prosper.

“Well,” said the driver, “at this time of night, in such dreadful
weather, it ought to be--twenty-five francs.”

“And how much more for driving very rapidly?”

“Bless my soul! Why, monsieur, I leave that to your generosity; but if
you put it at thirty-five francs--”

“You shall have a hundred,” interrupted M. Verduret, “if you overtake a
carriage which has half an hour’s start of us.”

“Tonnerre de Brest!” cried the delighted driver; “jump in quick: we are
losing time!”

And, whipping up his lean horses, he galloped them down the Rue de
Valois at lightning speed.




X

Leaving the little station of Vesinet, we come upon two roads. One, to
the left, macadamized and kept in perfect repair, leads to the village,
of which there are glimpses here and there through the trees. The other,
newly laid out, and just covered with gravel, leads through the woods.

Along the latter, which before the lapse of five years will be a busy
street, are built a few houses, hideous in design, and at some distance
apart; rural summer retreats of city merchants, but unoccupied during
the winter.

It was at the junction of these two roads that Prosper stopped the hack.

The driver had gained his hundred francs. The horses were completely
worn out, but they had accomplished all that was expected of them; M.
Verduret could distinguish the lamps of a hack similar to the one he
occupied, about fifty yards ahead of him.

M. Verduret jumped out, and, handing the driver a bank-note, said:

“Here is what I promised you. Go to the first tavern you find on the
right-hand side of the road as you enter the village. If we do not meet
you there in an hour, you are at liberty to return to Paris.”

The driver was overwhelming in his thanks; but neither Prosper nor his
friend heard them. They had already started up the new road.

The weather, which had been inclement when they set out, was now
fearful. The rain fell in torrents, and a furious wind howled dismally
through the dense woods.

The intense darkness was rendered more dreary by the occasional
glimmer of the lamps at the distant station, which seemed about to be
extinguished by every new gust of wind.

M. Verduret and Prosper had been running along the muddy road for about
five minutes, when suddenly the latter stopped and said:

“This is Raoul’s house.”

Before the gate of an isolated house stood the hack which M. Verduret
had followed. Reclining on his seat, wrapped in a thick cloak, was the
driver, who, in spite of the pouring rain, was already asleep, evidently
waiting for the person whom he had brought to this house a few minutes
ago.

M. Verduret pulled his cloak, and said, in a low voice:

“Wake up, my good man.”

The driver started, and, mechanically gathering his reins, yawned out:

“I am ready: come on!”

But when, by the light of the carriage-lamps, he saw two men in this
lonely spot, he imagined that they wanted his purse, and perhaps his
life.

“I am engaged!” he cried out, as he cracked his whip in the air; “I am
waiting here for someone.”

“I know that, you fool,” replied M. Verduret, “and only wish to ask you
a question, which you can gain five francs by answering. Did you not
bring a middle-aged lady here?”

This question, this promise of five francs, instead of reassuring the
coachman, increased his alarm.

“I have already told you I am waiting for someone,” he said, “and, if
you don’t go away and leave me alone, I will call for help.”

M. Verduret drew back quickly.

“Come away,” he whispered to Prosper, “the cur will do as he says; and,
alarm once given, farewell to our projects. We must find some other
entrance than by this gate.”

They then went along the wall surrounding the garden, in search of a
place where it was possible to climb up.

This was difficult to discover, the wall being twelve feet high, and the
night very dark. Fortunately, M. Verduret was very agile; and, having
decided upon the spot to be scaled, he drew back a few feet, and making
a sudden spring, seized one of the projecting stones above him, and,
drawing himself up by aid of his hands and feet, soon found himself on
top of the wall.

It was now Prosper’s turn to climb up; but, though much younger than
his companion, he had not his agility and strength, and would never have
succeeded if M. Verduret had not pulled him up, and then helped him down
on the other side.

Once in the garden, M. Verduret looked about him to study the situation.

The house occupied by M. de Lagors was built in the middle of an immense
garden. It was narrow, two stories high, and with garrets.

Only one window, in the second story, was lighted.

“As you have often been here,” said M. Verduret, “you must know all
about the arrangement of the house: what room is that where we see the
light?”

“That is Raoul’s bed-chamber.”

“Very good. What rooms are on the first floor?”

“The kitchen, pantry, billiard-room, and dining-room.”

“And on the floor above?”

“Two drawing-rooms separated by folding doors, and a library.”

“Where do the servants sleep?”

“Raoul has none at present. He is waited on by a man and his wife, who
live at Vesinet; they come in the morning, and leave after dinner.”

M. Verduret rubbed his hands gleefully.

“That suits our plans exactly,” he said; “there is nothing to prevent
our hearing what Raoul has to say to this person who has come from Paris
at ten o’clock at night, to see him. Let us go in.”

Prosper seemed averse to this, and said:

“It is a serious thing for us to do, monsieur.”

“Bless my soul! what else did we come here for? Did you think it was
a pleasure-trip, merely to enjoy this lovely weather?” he said in a
bantering tone.

“But we might be discovered.”

“Suppose we are? If the least noise betrays our presence, you have only
to advance boldly as a friend come to visit a friend, and, finding the
door open walked in.”

But unfortunately the heavy oak door was locked. M. Verduret shook it in
vain.

“How foolish!” he said with vexation, “I ought to have brought my
instruments with me. A common lock which could be opened with a nail,
and I have not even a piece of wire!”

Thinking it useless to attempt the door, he tried successively every
window on the ground-floor. Alas! each blind was securely fastened on
the inside.

M. Verduret was provoked. He prowled around the house like a fox around
a hen-coop, seeking an entrance, but finding none. Despairingly he came
back to the spot in front of the house, whence he had the best view of
the lighted window.

“If I could only look in,” he cried. “Just to think that in there,” and
he pointed to the window, “is the solution of the mystery; and we are
cut off from it by thirty or forty feet of cursed blank wall!”

Prosper was more surprised than ever at his companion’s strange
behavior. He seemed perfectly at home in this garden; he ran about
without any precaution; so that one would have supposed him accustomed
to such expeditions, especially when he spoke of picking the lock of
an occupied house, as if he were talking of opening a snuff-box. He
was utterly indifferent to the rain and sleet driven in his face by the
gusts of wind as he splashed about in the mud trying to find some way of
entrance.

“I must get a peep into that window,” he said, “and I will, cost what it
may!”

Prosper seemed to suddenly remember something.

“There is a ladder here,” he cried.

“Why did you not tell me that before? Where is it?”

“At the end of the garden, under the trees.”

They ran to the spot, and in a few minutes had the ladder standing
against the wall.

But to their chagrin they found the ladder six feet too short. Six long
feet of wall between the top of the ladder and the lighted window was a
very discouraging sight to Prosper; he exclaimed:

“We cannot reach it.”

“We _can_ reach it,” cried M. Verduret triumphantly.

And he quickly placed himself a yard off from the house, and, seizing
the ladder, cautiously raised it and rested the bottom round on his
shoulders, at the same time holding the two uprights firmly and steadily
with his hands. The obstacle was overcome.

“Now mount,” he said to his companion.

Prosper did not hesitate. The enthusiasm of difficulties so skilfully
conquered, and the hope of triumph, gave him a strength and agility
which he had never imagined he possessed. He made a sudden spring, and,
seizing the lower rounds, quickly climbed up the ladder, which swayed
and trembled beneath his weight.

But he had scarcely looked in the lighted window when he uttered a cry
which was drowned in the roaring tempest, and dropped like a log down on
the wet grass, exclaiming:

“The villain! the villain!”

With wonderful promptness and vigor M. Verduret laid the ladder on the
ground, and ran toward Prosper, fearing that he was dead or dangerously
injured.

“What did you see? Are you hurt?” he whispered.

But Prosper had already risen. Although he had had a violent fall, he
was unhurt; he was in a state when mind governs matter so absolutely
that the body is insensible to pain.

“I saw,” he answered in a hoarse voice, “I saw Madeleine--do you
understand, Madeleine--in that room, alone with Raoul!”

M. Verduret was confounded. Was it possible that he, the infallible
expert, had been mistaken in his deductions?

He well knew that M. de Lagors’s visitor was a woman; but his own
conjectures, and the note which Mme. Gypsy had sent to him at the
tavern, had fully assured him that this woman was Mme. Fauvel.

“You must be mistaken,” he said to Prosper.

“No, monsieur, no. Never could I mistake another for Madeleine. Ah! you
who heard what she said to me yesterday, answer me: was I to expect such
infamous treason as this? You said to me then, ‘She loves you, she loves
you!’ Now do you think she loves me? speak!”

M. Verduret did not answer. He had first been stupefied by his mistake,
and was now racking his brain to discover the cause of it, which was
soon discerned by his penetrating mind.

“This is the secret discovered by Nina,” continued Prosper. “Madeleine,
this pure and noble Madeleine, whom I believed to be as immaculate as
an angel, is in love with this thief, who has even stolen the name he
bears; and I, trusting fool that I was, made this scoundrel my best
friend. I confided to him all my hopes and fears; and he was her lover!
Of course they amused themselves by ridiculing my silly devotion and
blind confidence!”

He stopped, overcome by his violent emotions. Wounded vanity is the
worst of miseries. The certainty of having been so shamefully deceived
and betrayed made Prosper almost insane with rage.

“This is the last humiliation I shall submit to,” he fiercely cried. “It
shall not be said that I was coward enough to stand by and let an insult
like this go unpunished.”

He started toward the house; but M. Verduret seized his arm and said:

“What are you going to do?”

“Have my revenge! I will break down the door; what do I care for the
noise and scandal, now that I have nothing to lose? I shall not attempt
to creep into the house like a thief, but as a master, as one who has a
right to enter; as a man who, having received an insult which can only
be washed out with blood, comes to demand satisfaction.”

“You will do nothing of the sort, Prosper.”

“Who will prevent me?”

“I will.”

“You? do not hope that you will be able to deter me. I will appear
before them, put them to the blush, kill them both, then put an end
to my own wretched existence. That is what I intend to do, and nothing
shall stop me!”

If M. Verduret had not held Prosper with a vice-like grip, he would have
escaped, and carried out his threat.

“If you make any noise, Prosper, or raise an alarm, all your hopes are
ruined.”

“I have no hopes now.”

“Raoul, put on his guard, will escape us, and you will remain dishonored
forever.”

“What difference is it to me?”

“It makes a great difference to me. I have sworn to prove your
innocence. A man of your age can easily find a wife, but can never
restore lustre to a tarnished name. Let nothing interfere with the
establishing of your innocence.”

Genuine passion is uninfluenced by surrounding circumstances. M.
Verduret and Prosper stood foot-deep in mud, wet to the skin, the rain
pouring down on their heads, and yet seemed in no hurry to end their
dispute.

“I will be avenged,” repeated Prosper with the persistency of a fixed
idea, “I will avenge myself.”

“Well, avenge yourself like a man, and not like a child!” said M.
Verduret angrily.

“Monsieur!”

“Yes, I repeat it, like a child. What will you do after you get into
the house? Have you any arms? No. You rush upon Raoul, and a struggle
ensues; while you two are fighting, Madeleine jumps in her carriage, and
drives off. What then? Which is the stronger, you or Raoul?”

Overcome by the sense of his powerlessness, Prosper was silent.

“And arms would be of no use,” continued M. Verduret: “it is fortunate
you have none with you, for it would be very foolish to shoot a man whom
you can send to the galleys.”

“What must I do?”

“Wait. Vengeance is a delicious fruit, that must ripen in order that we
may fully enjoy it.”

Prosper was unsettled in his resolution; M. Verduret seeing this brought
forth his last and strongest argument.

“How do we know,” he said, “that Mlle. Madeleine is here on her own
account? Did we not come to the conclusion that she was sacrificing
herself for the benefit of someone else? That superior will which
compelled her to banish you may have constrained this step to-night.”

That which coincides with our secret wishes is always eagerly welcomed.
This supposition, apparently improbable, struck Prosper as possibly
true.

“That might be the case,” he murmured, “who knows?”

“I would soon know,” said M. Verduret, “if I could see them together in
that room.”

“Will you promise me, monsieur, to tell me the exact truth, all that you
see and hear, no matter how painful it may be for me?”

“I swear it, upon my word of honor.”

Then, with a strength of which a few minutes before he would not have
believed himself possessed, Prosper raised the ladder, placed the last
round on his shoulders, and said to M. Verduret:

“Mount!”

M. Verduret rapidly ascended the ladder without even shaking it, and had
his head on a level with the window.

Prosper had seen but too well. There was Madeleine at this hour of the
night, alone with Raoul de Lagors in his room!

M. Verduret observed that she still wore her shawl and bonnet.

She was standing in the middle of the room, talking with great
animation. Her look and gestures betrayed indignant scorn. There was an
expression of ill-disguised loathing upon her beautiful face.

Raoul was seated by the fire, stirring up the coals with a pair of
tongs. Every now and then, he would shrug his shoulders, like a man
resigned to everything he heard, and had no answer, except, “I cannot
help it. I can do nothing for you.”

M. Verdure would willingly have given the diamond ring on his finger to
be able to hear what was said; but the roaring wind completely drowned
their voices.

“They are evidently quarrelling,” he thought; “but it is not a lovers’
quarrel.”

Madeleine continued talking; and it was by closely watching the face
of Lagors, clearly revealed by the lamp on the mantel, that M. Verduret
hoped to discover the meaning of the scene before him.

At one moment Lagors would start and tremble in spite of his apparent
indifference; the next, he would strike at the fire with the tongs, as
if giving vent to his rage at some reproach uttered by Madeleine.

Finally Madeleine changed her threats into entreaties, and, clasping her
hands, almost fell at his knees.

He turned away his head, and refused to answer save in monosyllables.

Several times she turned to leave the room, but each time returned, as
if asking a favor, and unable to make up her mind to leave the house
till she had obtained it.

At last she seemed to have uttered something decisive; for Raoul quickly
rose and opened a desk near the fireplace, from which he took a bundle
of papers, and handed them to her.

“Well,” thought M. Verduret, “this looks bad. Can it be a compromising
correspondence which the fair one wants to secure?”

Madeleine took the papers, but was apparently still dissatisfied. She
again entreated him to give her something else. Raoul refused; and then
she threw the papers on the table.

The papers seemed to puzzle M. Verduret very much, as he gazed at them
through the window.

“I am not blind,” he said, “and I certainly am not mistaken; those
papers, red, green, and yellow, are pawnbroker’s tickets!”

Madeleine turned over the papers as if looking for some particular ones.
She selected three, which she put in her pocket, disdainfully pushing
the others aside.

She was evidently preparing to take her departure, for she said a few
words to Raoul, who took up the lamp as if to escort her downstairs.

There was nothing more for M. Verduret to see. He carefully descended
the ladder, muttering to himself. “Pawnbroker’s tickets! What infamous
mystery lies at the bottom of all this?”

The first thing he did was to remove the ladder.

Raoul might take it into his head to look around the garden, when he
came to the door with Madeleine, and if he did so the ladder could
scarcely fail to attract his attention.

M. Verduret and Prosper hastily laid it on the ground, regardless of
the shrubs and vines they destroyed in doing so, and then concealed
themselves among the trees, whence they could watch at once the front
door and the outer gate.

Madeleine and Raoul appeared in the doorway. Raoul set the lamp on the
bottom step, and offered his hand to the girl; but she refused it with
haughty contempt, which somewhat soothed Prosper’s lacerated heart.

This scornful behavior did not, however, seem to surprise or hurt
Raoul. He simply answered by an ironical gesture which implied, “As you
please!”

He followed her to the gate, which he opened and closed after her; then
he hurried back to the house, while Madeleine’s carriage drove rapidly
away.

“Now, monsieur,” said Prosper, “you must tell me what you saw. You
promised me the truth no matter how bitter it might be. Speak; I can
bear it, be it what it may!”

“You will only have joy to bear, my friend. Within a month you will
bitterly regret your suspicions of to-night. You will blush to think
that you ever imagined Mlle. Madeleine to be intimate with a man like
Lagors.”

“But, monsieur, appearances----”

“It is precisely against appearances that we must be on our guard.
Always distrust them. A suspicion, false or just, is always based on
something. But we must not stay here forever; and, as Raoul has fastened
the gate, we shall have to climb back again.”

“But there is the ladder.”

“Let it stay where it is; as we cannot efface our footprints, he will
think thieves have been trying to get into the house.”

They scaled the wall, and had not walked fifty steps when they heard the
noise of a gate being unlocked. The stood aside and waited; a man soon
passed on his way to the station.

“That is Raoul,” said M. Verduret, “and Joseph will report to us that
he has gone to tell Clameran what has just taken place. If they are only
kind enough to speak French!”

He walked along quietly for some time, trying to connect the broken
chain of his deductions.

“How in the deuce,” he abruptly asked, “did this Lagors, who is devoted
to gay society, come to choose a lonely country house to live in?”

“I suppose it was because M. Fauvel’s villa is only fifteen minutes’
ride from here, on the Seine.”

“That accounts for his staying here in the summer; but in winter?”

“Oh, in winter he has a room at the Hotel du Louvre, and all the year
round keeps an apartment in Paris.”

This did not enlighten M. Verduret much; he hurried his pace.

“I hope our driver has not gone. We cannot take the train which is about
to start, because Raoul would see us at the station.”

Although it was more than an hour since M. Verduret and Prosper left the
hack at the branch road, they found it waiting for them in front of the
tavern.

The driver could not resist the desire to change his five-franc piece;
he had ordered dinner, and, finding his wine very good, was calling for
more, when he looked up and saw his employers.

“Well, you are in a strange state!” he exclaimed.

Prosper replied that they had gone to see a friend, and, losing their
way, had fallen into a pit; as if there were pits in Vesinet forest.

“Ah, that is the way you got covered with mud, is it?” exclaimed the
driver, who, though apparently contented with this explanation, strongly
suspected that his two customers had been engaged in some nefarious
transaction.

This opinion seemed to be entertained by everyone present, for they
looked at Prosper’s muddy clothes and then at each other in a knowing
way.

But M. Verduret stopped all comment by saying:

“Come on.”

“All right, monsieur: get in while I settle my bill; I will be there in
a minute.”

The drive back was silent and seemed interminably long. Prosper at
first tried to draw his strange companion into conversation, but, as he
received nothing but monosyllables in reply, held his peace for the rest
of the journey. He was again beginning to feel irritated at the absolute
empire exercised over him by this man.

Physical discomfort was added to his other troubles. He was stiff and
numb; every bone in him ached with the cold.

Although mental endurance may be unlimited, bodily strength must in the
end give way. A violent effort is always followed by reaction.

Lying back in a corner of the carriage, with his feet upon the front
seat, M. Verduret seemed to be enjoying a nap; yet he was never more
wide awake.

He was in a perplexed state of mind. This expedition, which, he had
been confident, would resolve all his doubts, had only added mystery to
mystery. His chain of evidence, which he thought so strongly linked, was
completely broken.

For him the facts remained the same, but circumstances had changed. He
could not imagine what common motive, what moral or material complicity,
what influences, could have existed to make the four actors in his
drama, Mme. Fauvel, Madeleine, Raoul, and Clameran, seem to have the
same object in view.

He was seeking in his fertile mind, that encyclopaedia of craft and
subtlety, for some combination which would throw light on the problem
before him.

The midnight bells were ringing when they reached the Archangel, and for
the first time M. Verduret remembered that he had not dined.

Fortunately Mme. Alexandre was still up, and in the twinkling of an eye
had improvised a tempting supper. It was more than attention, more than
respect, that she showed her guest. Prosper observed that she gazed
admiringly at M. Verduret all the while he was eating his supper.

“You will not see me to-morrow,” said M. Verduret to Prosper, when
he had risen to leave the room; “but I will be here about this time
to-morrow night. Perhaps I shall discover what I am seeking at MM.
Jandidier’s ball.”

Prosper was dumb with astonishment. What! would M. Verduret think of
appearing at a ball given by the wealthiest and most fashionable bankers
in Paris? This accounted for his sending to the costumer.

“Then you are invited to this ball?”

The expressive eyes of M. Verduret danced with amusement.

“Not yet,” he said, “but I shall be.”

Oh, the inconsistency of the human mind! Prosper was tormented by the
most serious preoccupations. He looked sadly around his chamber, and, as
he thought of M. Verduret’s projected pleasure at the ball, exclaimed:

“Ah, how fortunate he is! To-morrow he will have the privilege of seeing
Madeleine.”




XI

The Rue St. Lazare was adorned by the palatial residences of the
Jandidier brothers, two celebrated financiers, who, if deprived of the
prestige of immense wealth, would still be looked up to as remarkable
men. Why cannot the same be said of all men?

These two mansions, which were thought marvels at the time they were
built, were entirely distinct from each other, but so planned that they
could be turned into one immense house when so desired.

When MM. Jandidier gave parties, they always had the movable partitions
taken away, and thus obtained the most superb salon in Paris.

Princely magnificence, lavish hospitality, and an elegant, graceful
manner of receiving their guests, made these entertainments eagerly
sought after by the fashionable circles of the capital.

On Saturday, the Rue St. Lazare was blocked up by a file of carriages,
whose fair occupants were impatiently awaiting their turn to drive up
to the door, through which they could catch the tantalizing strains of a
waltz.

It was a fancy ball; and nearly all of the costumes were superb, though
some were more original than elegant.

Among the latter was a clown. Everything was in perfect keeping: the
insolent eye, coarse lips, high cheek-bones, and a beard so red that it
seemed to emit flames in the reflection of the dazzling lights.

He wore top-boots, a dilapidated hat on the back of his head, and a
shirt-ruffle trimmed with torn lace.

He carried in his left hand a canvas banner, upon which were painted
six or eight pictures, coarsely designed like those found in strolling
fairs. In his right he waved a little switch, with which he would every
now and then strike his banner, like a quack retailing his wares.

Quite a crowd surrounded this clown, hoping to hear some witty speeches
and puns; but he kept near the door, and remained silent.

About half-past ten he quitted his post.

M. and Mme. Fauvel, followed by their niece Madeleine, had just entered.

A compact group immediately formed near the door.

During the last ten days, the affair of the Rue de Provence had been the
universal topic of conversation; and friends and enemies were alike
glad to seize this opportunity of approaching the banker, some to tender
their sympathy, and others to offer equivocal condolence, which of all
things is the most exasperating and insulting.

Belonging to the battalion of grave, elderly men, M. Fauvel had not
assumed a fancy costume, but merely threw over his shoulders a short
silk domino.

On his arm leaned Mme. Fauvel, _nee_ Valentine de la Verberie, bowing
and gracefully greeting her numerous friends.

She had once been remarkably beautiful; and to-night the effect of the
soft wax-lights, and her very becoming dress, half restored her
youthful freshness and comeliness. No one would have supposed her to be
forty-eight years old.

She wore a dress of the later years of Louis the Fourteenth’s reign,
magnificent and severe, of embroidered satin and black velvet, without
the adornment of a single jewel.

She looked so graceful and elegant in this court dress and powdered
hair, that some ill-natured gossips said it was a pity to see a real
La Verberie, so well fitted to adorn a queen’s drawing-room, as all her
ancestors had done before her, thrown away upon a man whom she had only
married for his money.

But Madeleine was the object of universal admiration, so dazzlingly
beautiful and queenlike did she appear in her costume of maid of honor,
which seemed to have been especially invented to set forth her beautiful
figure.

Her loveliness expanded in the perfumed atmosphere and soft light of
the ball-room. Never had her hair looked so black, her complexion so
exquisite, or her large eyes so brilliant.

Having greeted the hosts, Madeleine took her aunt’s arm, while M. Fauvel
wandered through the rooms in search of the card-table, the usual refuge
of bored men, when they are enticed to the ball-room by their womankind.

The ball was now at its height.

Two orchestras, led by Strauss and one of his lieutenants, filled the
two mansions with intoxicating music. The motley crowd whirled in the
waltz until they presented a curious confusion of velvets, satins,
laces, and diamonds. Almost every head and bosom sparkled with jewels;
the palest cheeks were rosy; heavy eyes now shone like stars; and the
glistening shoulders of fair women were like drifted snow in an April
sun.

Forgotten by the crowd, the clown had taken refuge in the embrasure of
a window, and seemed to be meditating upon the gay scene before him; at
the same time, he kept his eye upon a couple not far off.

It was Madeleine, dancing with a splendidly dressed doge. The doge was
the Marquis de Clameran.

He appeared to be radiant, rejuvenated, and well satisfied with the
impression he was making upon his partner; at the end of a quadrille
he leaned over her, and whispered compliments with the most unbounded
admiration; and she seemed to listen, if not with pleasure, at least
without repugnance. She now and then smiled, and coquettishly shrugged
her shoulders.

“Evidently,” muttered the clown, “this noble scoundrel is paying court
to the banker’s niece; so I was right yesterday. But how can Mlle.
Madeleine resign herself to so graciously receive his insipid flattery?
Fortunately, Prosper is not here now.”

He was interrupted by an elderly man wrapped in a Venetian mantle, who
said to him:

“You remember, M. Verduret,”--this name was uttered half seriously, half
banteringly--“what you promised me?”

The clown bowed with great respect, but not the slightest shade of
humility.

“I remember,” he replied.

“But do not be imprudent, I beg you.”

“M. the Count need not be uneasy; he has my promise.”

“Very good. I know the value of it.”

The count walked off; but during this short colloquy the quadrille had
ended, and M. de Clameran and Madeleine were lost to sight.

“I shall find them near Mme. Fauvel,” said the clown.

And he at once started in search of the banker’s wife.

Incommoded by the stifling heat of the room, Mme. Fauvel had sought
a little fresh air in the grand picture-gallery, which, thanks to the
talisman called gold, was now transformed into a fairy-like garden,
filled with orange-trees, japonicas, laurel, and many rare exotics.

The clown saw her seated near a grove, not far from the door of the
card-room. Upon her right was Madeleine, and near her stood Raoul de
Lagors, dressed in a costume of Henri III.

“I must confess,” muttered the clown from his post of observation, “that
the young scamp is a very handsome man.”

Madeleine appeared very sad. She had plucked a japonica from a tree near
by, and was mechanically pulling it to pieces as she sat with her eyes
downcast.

Raoul and Mme. Fauvel were engaged in earnest conversation. Their faces
were composed, but the gestures of one and the trembling of the other
betrayed a serious discussion.

In the card-room sat the doge, M. de Clameran, so placed as to have
full view of Mme. Fauvel and Madeleine, although himself concealed by an
angle of the room.

“It is the continuation of yesterday’s scene,” thought the clown. “If
I could only get behind the oleander-tree, I might hear what they are
saying.”

He pushed his way through the crowd, and, just as he had reached the
desired spot, Madeleine arose, and, taking the arm of a bejewelled
Persian, walked away.

At the same moment Raoul went into the card-room, and whispered a few
words to De Clameran.

“There they go,” muttered the clown. “The two scoundrels certainly hold
these poor women in their power; and they are determined to make them
suffer before releasing them. What can be the secret of their power?”

His attention was attracted by a commotion in the picture-gallery; it
was caused by the announcement of a wonderful minuet to be danced in the
ball-room; the arrival of the Countess de Commarin as Aurora; and the
presence of the Princess Korasoff, with her superb emeralds, which were
reported to be the finest in the world.

In an instant the gallery became almost deserted. Only a few
forlorn-looking people remained; mostly sulky husbands, and some
melancholy youths looking awkward and unhappy in their gay fancy
dresses.

The clown thought it a favorable opportunity for carrying out his
project.

He abruptly left his corner, flourishing his switch, and beating his
banner, and, crossing the gallery, seated himself in a chair between
Mme. Fauvel and the door. As soon as the people had collected in a
circle around him, he commenced to cough in an affected manner, like a
stump orator about to make a speech.

Then he struck a comical attitude, standing up with his body twisted
sideways, and his hat on one ear, and with great buffoonery and
volubility made the following remarks:

“Ladies and gentlemen, this very morning I obtained a license from the
authorities of this town. And what for? Why gentlemen, for the purpose
of exhibiting to you a spectacle which has already won the admiration of
the four quarters of the globe, and several universities besides. Inside
of this booth, ladies, is about to commence the representation of a most
remarkable drama, acted for the first time at Pekin, and translated into
several languages by our most celebrated authors. Gentlemen, you can
take your seats; the lamps are lighted, and the actors are changing
their dress.”

Here he stopped speaking, and imitated to perfection the feats which
mountebanks play upon horns and kettle-drums.

“Now, ladies and gentlemen,” he resumed, “you wish to know what I am
doing outside, if the piece is to be performed under the tent. The fact
is, gentlemen, that I wish to give you a foretaste of the agitations,
sensations, emotions, palpitations, and other entertainments which
you may enjoy by paying the small sum of ten sous. You see this superb
picture? It represents eight of the most thrilling scenes in the drama.
Ah, I see you begin to shudder already; and yet this is nothing compared
to the play itself. This splendid picture gives you no more idea of the
acting than a drop of water gives an idea of the sea, or a spark of fire
of the sun. My picture, gentlemen, is merely to give you a foretaste of
what is in the tent; as the steam oozing from a restaurant gives you a
taste, or rather a smell, of what is within.”

“Do you know this clown?” asked an enormous Turk of a melancholy Punch.

“No, but he can imitate a trumpet splendidly.”

“Oh, very well indeed! But what is he driving at?”

The clown was endeavoring to attract the attention of Mme. Fauvel, who,
since Raoul and Madeleine had left her, sat by herself in a mournful
revery.

He succeeded in his object.

The showman’s shrill voice brought the banker’s wife back to a sense
of reality; she started, and looked quickly about her, as if suddenly
awakened from a troubled dream.

“Now, ladies, we are in China. The first picture on my canvas, here,
in the left corner”--here he touched the top daub--“represents the
celebrated Mandarin Li-Fo, in the bosom of his family. This pretty woman
leaning over him is his wife; and these children playing on the carpet
are the bonds of love between this happy pair. Do you not inhale the
odor of sanctity and happiness emanating from this speaking picture,
gentlemen?

“Mme. Li-Fo is the most virtuous of women, adoring her husband and
idolizing her children. Being virtuous she is happy; for the wise
Confucius says, ‘The ways of virtue are more pleasant than the ways of
vice.’”

Mme. Fauvel had left her seat, and approached nearer to the clown.

“Do you see anything on the banner like what he is describing?” asked
the melancholy Punch of his neighbor.

“No, not a thing. Do you?”

The fact is, that the daubs of paint on the canvas represented one thing
as well as another, and the clown could call them whatever he pleased.

“Picture No. 2!” he cried, after a flourish of music. “This old lady,
seated before a mirror tearing out her hair--especially the gray
ones--you have seen before; do you recognize her? No, you do not. She is
the fair mandarine of the first picture. I see the tears in your eyes,
ladies and gentlemen. Ah! you have cause to weep; for she is no longer
virtuous, and her happiness has departed with her virtue. Alas, it is
a sad tale! One fatal day she met, on the streets of Pekin, a young
ruffian, fiendish, but beautiful as an angel, and she loved him--the
unfortunate woman loved him!”

The last words were uttered in the most tragic tone as he raised his
clasped hands to heaven.

During this tirade he had whirled around, so that he found himself
facing the banker’s wife, whose countenance he closely watched while he
was speaking.

“You are surprised, gentlemen,” he continued; “I am not. The great
Bilboquet has proved to us that the heart never grows old, and that the
most vigorous wall-flowers flourish on old ruins. This unhappy woman is
nearly fifty years old--fifty years old, and in love with a youth! Hence
this heart-rending scene which should serve as a warning to us all.”

“Really!” grumbled a cook dressed in white satin, who had passed the
evening in carrying around bills of fare, which no one read, “I thought
he was going to amuse us.”

“But,” continued the clown, “you must go inside of the booth to
witness the effects of the mandarine’s folly. At times a ray of reason
penetrates her diseased brain, and then the sight of her anguish would
soften a heart of stone. Enter, and for the small sum of ten sous you
shall hear sobs such as the Odeon never echoed in its halcyon days. The
unhappy woman has waked up to the absurdity and inanity of her blind
passion; she confesses to herself that she is madly pursuing a phantom.
She knows but too well that he, in the vigor and beauty of youth, cannot
love a faded old woman like herself, who vainly makes pitiable efforts
to retain the last remains of her once entrancing beauty. She feels
that the sweet words he once whispered in her charmed ear were deceitful
falsehoods. She knows that the day is near when she will be left alone,
with nothing save his mantle in her hand.”

As the clown addressed this voluble description to the crowd before him,
he narrowly watched the countenance of the banker’s wife.

But nothing he had said seemed to affect her. She leaned back in her
arm-chair perfectly calm, and occasionally smiled at the tragic manner
of the showman.

“Good heavens!” muttered the clown uneasily, “can I be on the wrong
track?”

He saw that his circle of listeners was increased by the presence of the
doge, M. de Clameran.

“The third picture,” he said, after a roll of drums, “depicts the
old mandarine after she has dismissed that most annoying of
guests--remorse--from her bosom. She promises herself that interest
shall supply the place of love in chaining the too seductive youth to
her side. It is with this object that she invests him with false honors
and dignity, and introduces him to the chief mandarins of the capital
of the Celestial Empire; then, since so handsome a youth must cut a fine
figure in society, and as a fine figure cannot be cut without money,
the lady must needs to sacrifice all of her possessions for his sake.
Necklaces, rings, bracelets, diamonds, and pearls, all are surrendered.
The monster carries all these jewels to the pawnbrokers on Tien-Tsi
Street, and then has the cruelty to refuse her the tickets, so that she
may have a chance of redeeming her treasures.”

The clown thought that at last he had hit the mark. Mme. Fauvel began to
betray signs of agitation.

Once she made an attempt to rise from her chair; but it seemed as if her
strength failed her, and she sank back, forced to listen to the end.

“Finally, ladies and gentlemen,” continued the clown, “the richly stored
jewel-cases became empty. The day came when the mandarine had nothing
more to give. It was then that the young scoundrel conceived the project
of carrying off the jasper button belonging to the Mandarin Li-Fo--a
splendid jewel of incalculable value, which, being the badge of his
dignity, was kept in a granite chest, and guarded by three soldiers
night and day. Ah! the mandarine resisted a long time! She knew the
innocent soldiers would be accused and crucified, as is the custom in
Pekin; and this thought restrained her. But her lover besought her so
tenderly, that she finally yielded to his entreaties; and--the jasper
button was stolen. The fourth picture represents the guilty couple
stealthily creeping down the private stairway: see their frightened
look--see--”

He abruptly stopped. Three or four of his auditors rushed to the
assistance of Mme. Fauvel, who seemed about to faint; and at the same
time he felt his arm roughly seized by someone behind him.

He turned around and faced De Clameran and Lagors, both of whom were
pale with anger.

“What do you want, gentlemen?” he inquired politely.

“To speak to you,” they both answered.

“I am at your service.”

And he followed them to the end of the picture-gallery, near a window
opening on a balcony.

Here they were unobserved except by the man in the Venetian cloak, whom
the clown had so respectfully addressed as “M. the Count.”

The minuet having ended, the orchestras were resting, and the crowd
began to rapidly fill the gallery.

The sudden faintness of Mme. Fauvel had passed off unnoticed save by a
few, who attributed it to the heat of the room. M. Fauvel had been sent
for; but when he came hurrying in, and found his wife composedly
talking to Madeleine, his alarm was dissipated, and he returned to the
card-tables.

Not having as much control over his temper as Raoul, M. de Clameran
angrily said:

“In the first place, monsieur, I would like to know who you are.”

The clown determined to answer as if he thought the question were a
jest, replied in the bantering tone of a buffoon:

“You want my passport, do you, my lord doge? I left it in the hands of
the city authorities; it contains my name, age, profession, domicile,
and every detail--”

With an angry gesture, M. de Clameran interrupted him.

“You have just committed a gross insult!”

“I, my lord doge?”

“Yes, you! What do you mean by telling this abominable story in this
house?”

“Abominable! You may call it abominable; but I, who composed it, have a
different opinion of it.”

“Enough, monsieur; you will at least have the courage to acknowledge
that your performance was a vile insinuation against Mme. Fauvel?”

The clown stood with his head thrown back, and mouth wide open, as if
astounded at what he heard.

But anyone who knew him would have seen his bright black eyes sparkling
with malicious satisfaction.

“Bless my heart!” he cried, as if speaking to himself. “This is the
strangest thing I ever heard of! How can my drama of the Mandarine Li-Fo
have any reference to Mme. Fauvel, whom I don’t know from Adam or Eve?
I can’t think how the resemblance----unless----but no, that is
impossible.”

“Do you pretend,” said M. de Clameran, “to be ignorant of M. Fauvel’s
misfortune?”

The clown looked very innocent, and asked:

“What misfortune?”

“The robbery of which M. Fauvel was the victim. It has been in
everyone’s mouth, and you must have heard of it.”

“Ah, yes, yes; I remember. His cashier ran off with three hundred and
fifty thousand francs. Pardieu! It is a thing that almost daily happens.
But, as to discovering any connection between this robbery and my play,
that is another matter.”

M. de Clameran made no reply. A nudge from Lagors had calmed him as if
by enchantment.

He looked quietly at the clown, and seemed to regret having uttered the
significant words forced from him by angry excitement.

“Very well,” he finally said in his usual haughty tone; “I must have
been mistaken. I accept your explanation.”

But the clown, hitherto so humble and silly-looking, seemed to take
offence at the word, and, assuming a defiant attitude, said:

“I have not made, nor do I intend making, any explanation.”

“Monsieur,” began De Clameran.

“Allow me to finish, if you please. If, unintentionally, I have offended
the wife of a man whom I highly esteem, it is his business to seek
redress, and not yours. Perhaps you will tell me he is too old to demand
satisfaction: if so, let him send one of his sons. I saw one of them in
the ball-room to-night; let him come. You asked me who I am; in return I
ask you who are you--you who undertake to act as Mme. Fauvel’s champion?
Are you her relative, friend, or ally? What right have you to insult
her by pretending to discover an allusion to her in a play invented for
amusement?”

There was nothing to be said in reply to this. M. de Clameran sought a
means of escape.

“I am a friend of M. Fauvel,” he said, “and this title gives me the
right to be as jealous of his reputation as if it were my own. If this
is not a sufficient reason for my interference, I must inform you that
his family will shortly be mine: I regard myself as his nephew.”

“Ah!”

“Next week, monsieur, my marriage with Madeleine will be publicly
announced.”

This news was so unexpected, so startling that for a moment the clown
was dumb; and now his surprise was genuine.

But he soon recovered himself, and, bowing with deference, said, with
covert irony:

“Permit me to offer my congratulations, monsieur. Besides being the
belle to-night, Mlle. Madeleine is worth, I hear, half a million.”

Raoul de Lagors had anxiously been watching the people near them, to see
if they overheard this conversation.

“We have had enough of this gossip,” he said, in a disdainful tone;
“I will only say one thing more, master clown, and that is, that your
tongue is too long.”

“Perhaps it is, my pretty youth, perhaps it is; but my arm is still
longer.”

De Clameran here interrupted them by saying:

“It is impossible for one to seek an explanation from a man who conceals
his identity under the guise of a fool.”

“You are at liberty, my lord doge, to ask the master of the house who I
am--if you dare.”

“You are,” cried Clameran, “you are--”

A warning look from Raoul checked the forge-master from using an epithet
which would have led to an affray, or at least a scandalous scene.

The clown stood by with a sardonic smile, and, after a moment’s silence,
stared M. de Clameran steadily in the face, and in measured tones said:

“I was the best friend, monsieur, that your brother Gaston ever had. I
was his adviser, and the confidant of his last wishes.”

These few words fell like a clap of thunder upon De Clameran.

He turned deadly pale, and stared back with his hands stretched out
before him, as if shrinking from a phantom.

He tried to answer, to protest against this assertion, but the words
froze on his lips. His fright was pitiable.

“Come, let us go,” said Lagors, who was perfectly cool.

And he dragged Clameran away, half supporting him, for he staggered like
a drunken man, and clung to every object he passed, to prevent falling.

“Oh,” exclaimed the clown, in three different tones, “oh, oh!”

He himself was almost as much astonished as the forge-master, and
remained rooted to the spot, watching the latter as he slowly left the
room.

It was with no decided object in view that he had ventured to use the
last mysteriously threatening words, but he had been inspired to do
so by his wonderful instinct, which with him was like the scent of a
blood-hound.

“What can this mean?” he murmured. “Why was he so frightened? What
terrible memory have I awakened in his base soul? I need not boast of my
penetration, or the subtlety of my plans. There is a great master, who,
without any effort, in an instant destroys all my chimeras; he is called
‘Chance.’”

His mind had wandered far from the present scene, when he was brought
back to his situation by someone touching him on the shoulder. It was
the man in the Venetian cloak.

“Are you very satisfied, M. Verduret?” he inquired.

“Yes, and no, M. the Count. No, because I have not completely achieved
the object I had in view when I asked you for an invitation here
to-night; yes, because these two rascals behaved in a manner which
dispels all doubt.”

“And yet you complain--”

“I do not complain, M. the Count: on the contrary, I bless chance, or
rather Providence, which has just revealed to me the existence of a
secret that I did not before even suspect.”

Five or six people approached the count, and he went off with them after
giving the clown a friendly nod.

The latter instantly threw aside his banner, and started in pursuit of
Mme. Fauvel. He found her sitting on a sofa in the large salon, engaged
in an animated conversation with Madeleine.

“Of course they are talking over the scene; but what has become of
Lagors and De Clameran?”

He soon saw them wandering among the groups scattered about the room,
and eagerly asking questions.

“I will bet my head these honorable gentlemen are trying to find out
who I am. Keep it up, my friends, ask everybody in the room; I wish you
success!”

They soon gave it up, but were so preoccupied, and anxious to be alone
in order to reflect and deliberate, that, without waiting for supper,
they took leave of Mme. Fauvel and her niece, saying they were going
home.

The clown saw them go up to the dressing-room for their cloaks, and in a
few minutes leave the house.

“I have nothing more to do here,” he murmured; “I might as well go too.”

He completely covered his dress with a domino, and started for home,
thinking the cold frosty air would cool his confused brain.

He lit a cigar, and, walking up the Rue St. Lazare, crossed the Rue
Notre Dame de Lorette, and struck into the Faubourg Montmartre.

A man suddenly started out from some place of concealment, and rushed
upon him with a dagger.

Fortunately the clown had a cat-like instinct, which enabled him
to protect himself against immediate danger, and detect any which
threatened.

He saw, or rather divined, the man crouching in the dark shadow of a
house, and had the presence of mind to strike an attitude which enabled
him to ward off the assassin by spreading out his arms before him.

This movement certainly saved his life; for he received in his arm a
furious stab, which would have instantly killed him had it penetrated
his breast.

Anger, more than pain, made him cry out:

“Ah, you villain!”

And recoiling a few feet, he put himself on the defensive.

But the precaution was useless.

Seeing his blow miss, the assassin did not return to the attack, but
made rapidly off.

“That was certainly Lagors,” said the clown, “and Clameran must be
somewhere near. While I walked around one side of the church, they must
have gone the other and lain in wait for me.”

His wound began to pain him; he stood under a gas-lamp to examine it.

It did not appear to be dangerous, but the arm was cut through to the
bone.

He tore his handkerchief into four bands, and tied his arm up with the
dexterity of a surgeon.

“I must be on the track of some great crime, since these fellows are
resolved upon murder. When such cunning rogues are only in danger of the
police court, they do not gratuitously risk the chance of being tried
for murder.”

He thought by enduring a great deal of pain he might still use his arm;
so he started in pursuit of his enemy, taking care to keep in the middle
of the road, and avoid all dark corners.

Although he saw no one, he was convinced that he was being pursued.

He was not mistaken. When he reached the Boulevard Montmartre, he
crossed the street, and, as he did so, distinguished two shadows which
he recognized. They crossed the same street a little higher up.

“I have to deal with desperate men,” he muttered. “They do not even take
pains to conceal their pursuit of me. They seem to be accustomed to this
kind of adventure, and the carriage trick which fooled Fanferlot would
never succeed with them. Besides, my light hat is a perfect beacon to
lead them on in the night.” He continued his way up the boulevard, and,
without turning his head, was sure that his enemies were thirty feet
behind him.

“I must get rid of them somehow,” he said to himself. “I can neither
return home nor to the Archangel with these devils at my heels. They are
following me to find out where I live, and who I am. If they discover
that the clown is M. Verduret, and that M. Verduret is M. Lecoq, my
plans will be ruined. They will escape abroad with the money, and I
shall be left to console myself with a wounded arm. A pleasant ending to
all my exertions!”

The idea of Raoul and Clameran escaping him so exasperated him that for
an instant he thought of having them arrested at once.

This was easy; for he had only to rush upon them, scream for help,
and they would all three be arrested, carried to the watch-house, and
consigned to the commissary of police.

The police often resort to this ingenious and simple means of arresting
a malefactor for whom they are on the lookout, and whom they cannot
seize without a warrant.

The next day there is a general explanation, and the parties, if
innocent, are dismissed.

The clown had sufficient proof to sustain him in the arrest of Lagors.
He could show the letter and the mutilated prayer-book, he could reveal
the existence of the pawnbroker’s tickets in the house at Vesinet, he
could display his wounded arm. He could force Raoul to confess how
and why he had assumed the name of Lagors, and what his motive was in
passing himself off for a relative of M. Fauvel.

On the other hand, in acting thus hastily, he was insuring the safety of
the principal plotter, De Clameran. What proofs had he against him? Not
one. He had strong suspicions, but no well-grounded charge to produce
against him.

On reflection the clown decided that he would act alone, as he had thus
far done, and that alone and unaided he would discover the truth of all
his suspicions.

Having reached this decision, the first step to be taken was to put his
followers on the wrong scent.

He walked rapidly up the Rue Sebastopol, and, reaching the square of
the Arts et Metiers, he abruptly stopped, and asked some insignificant
questions of two constables who were standing talking together.

The manoeuvre had the result he expected; Raoul and Clameran stood
perfectly still about twenty steps off, not daring to advance.

Twenty steps! That was as much start as the clown wanted. While talking
with the constables, he had pulled the bell of the door before which
they were standing, and its hollow sound apprised him that the door was
open. He bowed, and entered the house.

A minute later the constables had passed on, and Lagors and Clameran in
their turn rang the bell. When the concierge appeared, they asked who it
was that had just gone in disguised as a clown.

They were told that no such person had entered, and that none of
the lodgers had gone out disguised that night. “However,” added the
concierge, “I am not very sure, for this house has a back door which
opens on the Rue St. Denis.”

“We are tricked,” interrupted Lagors, “and will never know who the clown
is.”

“Unless we learn it too soon for our own good,” said Clameran musingly.

While Lagors and Clameran were anxiously trying to devise some means of
discovering the clown’s identity, Verduret hurried up the back street,
and reached the Archangel as the clock struck three.

Prosper, who was watching from his window, saw him in the distance, and
ran down to open the door for him.

“What have you learned?” he said; “what did you find out? Did you see
Madeleine? Were Raoul and Clameran at the ball?”

But M. Verduret was not in the habit of discussing private affairs where
he might be overheard.

“First of all, let us go into your room, and get some water to wash this
cut, which burns like fire.”

“Heavens! Are you wounded?”

“Yes, it is a little souvenir of your friend Raoul. Ah, I will soon
teach him the danger of chopping up a man’s arm!”

Prosper was surprised at the look of merciless rage on his friend’s
face, as he calmly washed and dressed his arm.

“Now, Prosper, we will talk as much as you please. Our enemies are on
the alert, and we must crush them instantly, or not at all. I have made
a mistake. I have been on the wrong track; it is an accident liable
to happen to any man, no matter how intelligent he may be. I took the
effect for the cause. The day I was convinced that culpable relations
existed between Raoul and Mme. Fauvel, I thought I held the end of
the thread that must lead us to the truth. I should have been more
mistrustful; this solution was too simple, too natural.”

“Do you suppose Mme. Fauvel to be innocent?”

“Certainly not. But her guilt is not such as I first supposed. I
imagined that, infatuated with a seductive young adventurer, Mme. Fauvel
had first bestowed upon him the name of one of her relatives, and then
introduced him as her nephew. This was an adroit stratagem to gain him
admission to her husband’s house.

“She began by giving him all the money she could could dispose of; later
she let him take her jewels to the pawnbrokers; when she had nothing
more to give, she allowed him to steal the money from her husband’s
safe. That is what I first thought.”

“And in this way everything was explained?”

“No, this did not explain everything, as I well knew at the time, and
should, consequently, have studied my characters more thoroughly. How
is Clameran’s position to be accounted for, if my first idea was the
correct one?”

“Clameran is Lagors’s accomplice of course.”

“Ah, there is the mistake! I for a long time believed Lagors to be the
principal person, when, in fact, he is not. Yesterday, in a dispute
between them, the forge-master said to his dear friend, ‘And, above all
things, my friend, I would advise you not to resist me, for if you do I
will crush you to atoms.’ That explains all. The elegant Lagors is not
the lover of Mme. Fauvel, but the tool of Clameran. Besides, did our
first suppositions account for the resigned obedience of Madeleine? It
is Clameran, and not Lagors, whom Madeleine obeys.”

Prosper began to remonstrate.

M. Verduret shrugged his shoulders. To convince Prosper he had only to
utter one word: to tell him that three hours ago Clameran had announced
his intended marriage with Madeleine; but he did not.

“Clameran,” he continued, “Clameran alone has Mme. Fauvel in his power.
Now, the question is, what is the secret of this terrible influence he
has gained over her? I have positive proof that they have not met
since their early youth until fifteen months ago; and, as Mme. Fauvel’s
reputation has always been above the reach of slander, we must seek in
the past for the cause of her resigned obedience to his will.”

“We can never discover it,” said Prosper mournfully.

“We can discover it as soon as we know Clameran’s past life. Ah,
to-night he turned as white as a sheet when I mentioned his brother
Gaston’s name. And then I remembered that Gaston died suddenly, while
his brother Louis was making a visit.”

“Do you think he was murdered?”

“I think the men who tried to assassinate me would do anything. The
robbery, my friend, has now become a secondary detail. It is quite
easily explained, and, if that were all to be accounted for, I would say
to you, My task is done, let us go ask the judge of instruction for a
warrant of arrest.”

Prosper started up with sparkling eyes.

“Ah, you know--is it possible?”

“Yes, I know who gave the key, and I know who told the secret word.”

“The key might have been M. Fauvel’s. But the word----”

“The word you were foolish enough to give. You have forgotten, I
suppose. But fortunately Gypsy remembered. You know that, two days
before the robbery, you took Lagors and two other friends to sup with
Mme. Gypsy? Nina was sad, and reproached you for not being more devoted
to her.”

“Yes, I remember that.”

“But do you remember what you replied to her?”

“No, I do not,” said Prosper after thinking a moment.

“Well, I will tell you: ‘Nina, you are unjust in reproaching me with
not thinking constantly of you; for at this very moment your dear name
guards M. Fauvel’s safe.’”

The truth suddenly burst upon Prosper like a thunderclap. He wrung his
hands despairingly, and cried:

“Yes, oh, yes! I remember now.”

“Then you can easily understand the rest. One of the scoundrels went to
Mme. Fauvel, and compelled her to give up her husband’s key; then, at
a venture, placed the movable buttons on the name of Gypsy, opened the
safe, and took the three hundred and fifty thousand francs. And Mme.
Fauvel must have been terribly frightened before she yielded. The day
after the robbery the poor woman was near dying; and it was she who at
the greatest risk sent you the ten thousand francs.”

“But which was the thief, Raoul or Clameran? What enables them to thus
tyrannize over Mme. Fauvel? And how does Madeleine come to be mixed up
in the affair?”

“These questions, my dear Prosper, I cannot yet answer; therefore I
postpone seeing the judge. I only ask you to wait ten days; and, if I
cannot in that time discover the solution of this mystery, I will return
and go with you to report to M. Patrigent all that we know.”

“Are you going to leave the city?”

“In an hour I shall be on the road to Beaucaire. It was from that
neighborhood that Clameran came, as well as Mme. Fauvel, who was a Mlle.
de la Verberie before marriage.”

“Yes, I knew both families.”

“I must go there to study them. Neither Raoul nor Clameran can escape
during my absence. The police are watching them. But you, Prosper, must
be prudent. Promise me to remain a prisoner here during my trip.”

All that M. Verduret asked, Prosper willingly promised. But he did not
wish to be left in complete ignorance of his projects for the future, or
of his motives in the past.

“Will you not tell me, monsieur, who you are, and what reasons you had
for coming to my rescue?”

The extraordinary man smiled sadly, and said:

“I tell, in the presence of Nina, on the day before your marriage with
Madeleine.”

Once left to his own reflections, Prosper began to appreciate the
powerful assistance rendered by his friend.

Recalling the field of investigation gone over by his mysterious
protector, he was amazed at its extent.

How many facts had been discovered in a week, and with what precision,
although he had pretended to be on the wrong track! Verduret had grouped
his evidence, and reached a result which Prosper felt he never could
have hoped to attain by his own exertions.

He was conscious that he possessed neither Verduret’s penetration nor
his subtlety. He did not possess this art of compelling obedience,
of creating friends at every step, and the science of making men and
circumstances unite in the attainment of a common result.

He began to regret the absence of his friend, who had risen up in the
hour of adversity. He missed the sometimes rough but always kindly
voice, which had encouraged and consoled him.

He felt wofully lost and helpless, not daring to act or think for
himself, more timid than a child when deserted by his nurse.

He had the good sense to follow the recommendations of his mentor. He
remained shut up in the Archangel, not even appearing at the windows.

Twice he had news of M. Verduret. The first time he received a letter in
which this friend said he had seen his father, and had had a long talk
with him. Afterward, Dubois, M. de Clameran’s valet, came to tell him
that his “patron” reported everything as progressing finely.

On the ninth day of his voluntary seclusion, Prosper began to feel
restless, and at ten o’clock at night set forth to take a walk, thinking
the fresh air would relieve the headache which had kept him awake the
previous night.

Mme. Alexandre, who seemed to have some knowledge of M. Verduret’s
affairs, begged Prosper to remain at home.

“What can I risk by taking a walk at this time, in a quiet part of
the city?” he asked. “I can certainly stroll as far as the Jardin des
Plantes without meeting anyone.”

Unfortunately he did not strictly follow this programme; for, having
reached the Orleans railway station, he went into a cafe near by, and
called for a glass of ale.

As he sat sipping his glass, he picked up a daily paper, _The Sun_, and
under the head of “Fashionable Gossip,” signed Jacques Durand, read the
following:


“We understand that the niece of one of our most prominent bankers,
M. Andre Fauvel, will shortly be married to M. le Marquis Louis de
Clameran. The engagement has been announced.”


This news, coming upon him so unexpectedly, proved to Prosper the
justness of M. Verduret’s calculations.

Alas! why did not this certainty inspire him with absolute faith? why
did it not give him courage to wait, the strength of mind to refrain
from acting on his own responsibility?

Frenzied by distress of mind, he already saw Madeleine indissolubly
united to this villain, and, thinking that M. Verduret would perhaps
arrive too late to be of use, determined at all risks to throw an
obstacle in the way of the marriage.

He called for pen and paper, and forgetting that no situation can excuse
the mean cowardice of an anonymous letter, wrote in a disguised hand the
following lines to M. Fauvel:


“DEAR SIR--You consigned your cashier to prison; you acted prudently,
since you were convinced of his dishonesty and faithlessness.

“But, even if he stole three hundred and fifty thousand francs from
your safe, does it follow that he also stole Mme. Fauvel’s diamonds, and
pawned them at the Mont-de-Piete, where they now are?

“Warned as you are, if I were you, I would not be the subject of public
scandal. I would watch my wife, and would be distrustful of handsome
cousins.

“Moreover, I would, before signing the marriage contract of Mlle.
Madeleine, inquire at the Prefecture of Police, and obtain some
information concerning the noble Marquis de Clameran.

“A FRIEND.”


Prosper hastened off to post his letter. Fearing that it would not reach
M. Fauvel in time, he walked up to the Rue Cardinal Lemoine, and put it
in the main letter-box, so as to be certain of its speedy delivery.

Until now he had not doubted the propriety of his action.

But now when too late, when he heard the sound of his letter falling
into the box, a thousand scruples filled his mind. Was it not wrong to
act thus hurriedly? Would not this letter interfere with M. Verduret’s
plans? Upon reaching the hotel, his doubts were changed into bitter
regrets.

Joseph Dubois was waiting for him; he had received a despatch from his
patron, saying that his business was finished, and that he would return
the next evening at nine o’clock.

Prosper was wretched. He would have given all he had to recover the
anonymous letter.

And he had cause for regret.

At that very hour M. Verduret was taking his seat in the cars at
Tarascon, meditating upon the most advantageous plan to be adopted in
pursuance of his discoveries.

For he had discovered everything, and now must bring matters to a
crisis.

Adding to what he already knew, the story of an old nurse of Mlle. de
la Verberie, the affidavit of an old servant who had always lived in the
Clameran family, and the depositions of the Vesinet husband and wife who
attended M. Lagors at his country house, the latter having been sent to
him by Dubois (Fanferlot), with a good deal of information obtained from
the prefecture of police, he had worked up a complete case, and could
now act upon a chain of evidence without a missing link.

As he had predicted, he had been compelled to search into the distant
past for the first causes of the crime of which Prosper had been the
victim.

The following is the drama, as he wrote it out for the benefit of the
judge of instruction, knowing that it would contain grounds for an
indictment against the malefactors.




XII

THE DRAMA

About two leagues from Tarascon, on the left bank of the Rhone, not
far from the wonderful gardens of M. Audibert, stood the chateau of
Clameran, a weather-stained, neglected, but massive structure.

Here lived, in 1841, the old Marquis de Clameran and his two sons,
Gaston and Louis.

The marquis was an eccentric old man. He belonged to the race of nobles,
now almost extinct, whose watches stopped in 1789, and who kept time
with the past century.

More attached to his illusions than to his life, the old marquis
insisted upon considering all the stirring events which had happened
since the first revolution as a series of deplorable practical jokes.

Emigrating with the Count d’Artois, he did not return to France until
1815, with the allies.

He should have been thankful to Heaven for the recovery of a portion of
his immense family estates; a comparatively small portion, to be sure,
but full enough to support him comfortably: he said, however, that he
did not think the few paltry acres were worth thanking God for.

At first, he tried every means to obtain an appointment at court; but
seeing all his efforts fail, he resolved to retire to his chateau, which
he did, after cursing and pitying his king, whom he had worshipped.

He soon became accustomed to the free and indolent life of a country
gentleman.

Possessing fifteen thousand francs a year, he spent twenty-five or
thirty thousand, borrowing from every source, saying that a genuine
restoration would soon take place, and that then he would regain
possession of all his properties.

Following his example, his younger son lived extravagantly. Louis was
always in pursuit of adventure, and idled away his time in drinking and
gambling. The elder son, Gaston, anxious to participate in the stirring
events of the time, prepared himself for action by quietly working,
studying, and reading certain papers and pamphlets surreptitiously
received, the very mention of which was considered a hanging matter by
his father.

Altogether the old marquis was the happiest of mortals, living well,
drinking high, hunting much, tolerated by the peasants, and execrated
by the gentlemen of the neighborhood, who regarded him with contempt and
raillery.

Time never hung heavy on his hands, except in mid-summer, when the
valley of the Rhone was intensely hot; and even then he had infallible
means of amusement, always new, though ever the same.

He detested, above all, his neighbor the Countess de la Verberie.

The Countess de la Verberie, the “bete noire” of the marquis, as he
ungallantly termed her, was a tall, dry woman, angular in appearance and
character, cold and arrogant toward her equals, and domineering over her
inferiors.

Like her noble neighbor, she too had emigrated; and her husband was
afterward killed at Lutzen, but unfortunately not in the French ranks.

In 1815, the countess came back to France. But while the Marquis de
Clameran returned to comparative ease, she could obtain nothing from
royal munificence, but the small estate and chateau of La Verberie.

It is true that the chateau of La Verberie would have contented most
people; but the countess never ceased to complain of her unmerited
poverty, as she called it.

The pretty chateau was more modest in appearance than the manor of the
Clamerans; but it was equally comfortable, and much better regulated by
its proud mistress.

It was built in the middle of a beautiful park, one of the wonders of
that part of the country. It reached from the Beaucaire road to the
river-bank, a marvel of beauty, with its superb old oaks, yoke-elms, and
lovely groves, its meadow, and clear stream of water winding in among
the trees.

The countess had but one child--a lovely girl of eighteen, named
Valentine; fair, slender, and graceful, with large, soft eyes, beautiful
enough to make the stone saints of the village church thrill in their
niches, when she knelt piously at their feet.

The renown of her great beauty, carried on the rapid waters of the
Rhone, was spread far and wide.

Often the bargemen and the robust wagoners, driving their powerful
horses along the road, would stop to gaze with admiration upon Valentine
seated under some grand old tree on the banks of the river, absorbed in
her book.

At a distance her white dress and flowing tresses made her seem a
mysterious spirit from another world, these honest people said; they
thought it a good omen when they caught a glimpse of her as they passed
up the river. All along between Arles and Valence she was spoken of as
the “lovely fairy” of La Verberie.

If M. de Clameran detested the countess, Mme. de la Verberie execrated
the marquis. If he nicknamed her “the witch,” she never called him
anything but “the old gander.”

And yet they should have agreed, for at heart they cherished the same
opinions, with different ways of viewing them.

He considered himself a philosopher, scoffed at everything, and had an
excellent digestion. She nursed her rancor, and grew yellow and thin
from rage and envy.

Nevertheless, they might have spent many pleasant evenings together,
for, after all, they were neighbors. From Clameran could be seen
Valentine’s greyhound running about the park of La Verberie; from La
Verberie glimpses were had of the lights in the dining-room windows of
Clameran.

And, as regularly as these lights appeared, every evening, the countess
would say, in a spiteful tone:

“Ah, now their orgies are about to commence!”

The two chateaux were only separated by the fast-flowing Rhone, which at
this spot was rather narrow.

But between the two families existed a hatred deeper and more difficult
to avert than the course of the Rhone.

What was the cause of this hatred?

The countess, no less than the marquis, would have found it difficult to
tell.

It was said that under the reign of Henri IV. or Louis XIII. a La
Verberie betrayed the affections of a fair daughter of the Clamerans.

This misdeed led to a duel and bloodshed.

This groundwork of facts had been highly embellished by fiction; handed
down from generation to generation, it had now become a long tragic
history of robbery, murder, and rapine, which precluded any intercourse
between the two families.

The usual result followed, as it always does in real life, and often in
romances, which, however exaggerated they may be, generally preserve a
reflection of the truth which inspires them.

Gaston met Valentine at an entertainment; he fell in love with her at
first sight.

Valentine saw Gaston, and from that moment his image filled her heart.

But so many obstacles separated them!

For over a year they both religiously guarded their secret, buried like
a treasure in the inmost recesses of their hearts.

And this year of charming, dangerous reveries decided their fate. To
the sweetness of the first impression succeeded a more tender sentiment;
then came love, each having endowed the other with superhuman qualities
and ideal perfections.

Deep, sincere passion can only expand in solitude; in the impure air of
a city it fades and dies, like the hardy plants which lose their color
and perfume when transplanted to hot-houses.

Gaston and Valentine had only seen each other once, but seeing was to
love; and, as the time passed, their love grew stronger, until at last
the fatality which had presided over their first meeting brought them
once more together.

They both happened to be spending the day with the old Duchess
d’Arlange, who had returned to the neighborhood to sell her property.

They spoke to each other, and like old friends, surprised to find that
they both entertained the same thoughts and echoed the same memories.

Again they were separated for months. But soon, as if by accident, they
happened to be at a certain hour on the banks of the Rhone, and would
sit and gaze across at each other.

Finally, one mild May evening, when Mme. de la Verberie had gone to
Beaucaire, Gaston ventured into the park, and appeared before Valentine.

She was not surprised or indignant. Genuine innocence displays none
of the startled modesty assumed by conventional innocence. It never
occurred to Valentine that she ought to bid Gaston to leave her.

She leaned upon his arm, and strolled up and down the grand old avenue
of oaks. They did not say they loved each other, they felt it; but they
did say that their love was hopeless. They well knew that the inveterate
family feud could never be overcome, and that it would be folly to
attempt it. They swore never, never to forget each other, and tearfully
resolved never to meet again; never, not even once more!

Alas! Valentine was not without excuse. With a timid, loving heart, her
expansive affection was repressed and chilled by a harsh mother. Never
had there been one of those long private talks between the Countess
de la Verberie and Valentine which enabled a good mother to read her
daughter’s heart like an open book.

Mme. de la Verberie saw nothing but her daughter’s beauty. She was wont
to rub her hands, and say:

“Next winter I will borrow enough money to take the child to Paris, and
I am much mistaken if her beauty does not win her a rich husband who
will release me from poverty.”

She called this loving her daughter!

The second meeting was not the last. Gaston dared not trust to a
boatman, so he was obliged to walk a league in order to cross the
bridge. Then he thought it would be shorter to swim the river; but he
could not swim well, and to cross the Rhone where it ran so rapidly was
rash for the most skilful swimmers.

One evening, however, Valentine was startled by seeing him rise out of
the water at her feet.

She made him promise never to attempt this exploit again. He repeated
the feat and the promise the next evening and every successive evening.

As Valentine always imagined he was being drowned in the furious
current, they agreed upon a signal. At the moment of starting, Gaston
would put a light in his window at Clameran, and in fifteen minutes he
would be at his idol’s feet.

What were the projects and hopes of the lovers? Alas! they projected
nothing, they hoped for nothing.

Blindly, thoughtlessly, almost fearlessly, they abandoned themselves to
the dangerous happiness of a daily rendezvous; regardless of the storm
that must erelong burst over their devoted heads, they revelled in their
present bliss.

Is not every sincere passion thus? Passion subsists upon itself and in
itself; and the very things which ought to extinguish it, absence
and obstacles, only make it burn more fiercely. It is exclusive and
undisturbed; reflects neither of the past nor of the future; excepting
the present, it sees and cares for nothing.

Moreover, Valentine and Gaston believed everyone ignorant of their
secret.

They had always been so cautious! they had kept such strict watch! They
had flattered themselves that their conduct had been a masterpiece of
dissimulation and prudence.

Valentine had fixed upon the hour when she was certain her mother would
not miss her. Gaston had never confided to anyone, not even to his
brother Louis. They never breathed each other’s name. They denied
themselves a last sweet word, a last kiss, when they felt it would be
more safe.

Poor blind lovers! As if anything could be concealed from the idle
curiosity of country gossips; from the slanderous and ever-watchful
enemies who are incessantly on the lookout for some new bit of
tittle-tattle, good or bad, which they improve upon, and eagerly spread
far and near.

They believed their secret well kept, whereas it had long since
been made public; the story of their love, the particulars of their
rendezvous, were topics of conversation throughout the neighborhood.

Sometimes, at dusk, they would see a bark gliding along the water, near
the shore, and would say to each other:

“It is a belated fisherman, returning home.”

They were mistaken. The boat contained malicious spies, who delighted
in having discovered them, and hastened to report, with a thousand false
additions, the result of their expedition.

One dreary November evening, Gaston was awakened to the true state of
affairs. The Rhone was so swollen by heavy rains that an inundation was
daily expected. To attempt to swim across this impetuous torrent, would
be tempting God. Therefore Gaston went to Tarascon, intending to cross
the bridge there, and walk along the bank to the usual place of meeting
at La Verberie. Valentine expected him at eleven o’clock.

Whenever Gaston went to Tarascon, he dined with a relative living there;
but on this occasion a strange fatality led him to accompany a friend to
the hotel of the “Three Emperors.”

After dinner, they went not the Cafe Simon, their usual resort, but to
the little cafe in the market-place, where the fairs were held.

The small dining-hall was filled with young men. Gaston and his friend
called for a bottle of beer, and began to play billiards.

After they had been playing a short time, Gaston’s attention was
attracted by peals of laughter from a party at the other end of the
room.

From this moment, preoccupied by this continued laughter, of which he
was evidently the subject, he knocked the balls carelessly in every
direction. His conduct surprised his friend, who said to him:

“What is the matter? You are missing the simplest shots.”

“It is nothing.”

The game went on a while longer, when Gaston suddenly turned as white as
a sheet, and, throwing down his cue, strode toward the table which was
occupied by five young men, playing dominoes and drinking wine.

He addressed the eldest of the group, a handsome man of twenty-six, with
fierce-looking eyes, and a heavy black mustache, named Jules Lazet.

“Repeat, if you dare,” he said, in a voice trembling with passion, “the
remark you just now made!”

“I certainly will repeat it,” said Lazet, calmly. “I said, and I say
it again, that a nobleman’s daughter is no better than a mechanic’s
daughter; that virtue does not always accompany a titled name.”

“You mentioned a particular name!”

Lazet rose from his chair as if he knew his answer would exasperate
Gaston, and that from words they would come to blows.

“I did,” he said, with an insolent smile: “I mentioned the name of the
pretty little fairy of La Verberie.”

All the coffee-drinkers, and even two travelling agents who were dining
in the cafe, rose and surrounded the two young men.

The provoking looks, the murmurs, or rather shouts, which welcomed him
as he walked up to Lazet, proved to Gaston that he was surrounded by
enemies.

The wickedness and evil tongue of the old marquis were bearing their
fruit. Rancor ferments quickly and fiercely among the people of
Provence.

Gaston de Clameran was not a man to yield, even if his foes were a
hundred, instead of fifteen or twenty.

“No one but a coward,” he said, in a clear, ringing voice, which the
pervading silence rendered almost startling, “no one but a contemptible
coward would be infamous enough to calumniate a young girl who has
neither father nor brother to defend her honor.”

“If she has no father or brother,” sneered Lazet, “she has her lovers,
and that suffices.”

The insulting words, “her lovers,” enraged Gaston beyond control; he
slapped Lazet violently in the face.

Everyone in the cafe simultaneously uttered a cry of terror. Lazet’s
violence of character, his herculean strength and undaunted courage,
were well known. He sprang across the table between them, and seized
Gaston by the throat. Then arose a scene of excitement and confusion.
Clameran’s friend, attempting to assist him, was knocked down with
billiard-cues, and kicked under a table.

Equally strong and agile, Gaston and Lazet struggled for some minutes
without either gaining an advantage.

Lazet, as loyal as he was courageous, would not accept assistance from
his friends. He continually called out:

“Keep away; let me fight it out alone!”

But the others were too excited to remain inactive spectators of the
scene.

“A quilt!” cried one of them, “a quilt to make the marquis jump!”

Five or six young men now rushed upon Gaston, and separated him from
Lazet. Some tried to throw him down, others to trip him up.

He defended himself with the energy of despair, exhibiting in his
furious struggles a strength of which he himself had not been conscious.
He struck right and left as he showered fierce epithets upon his
adversaries for being twelve against one.

He was endeavoring to get around the billiard-table so as to be near the
door, and had almost succeeded, when an exultant cry arose:

“Here is the quilt! the quilt!” they cried.

“Put him in the quilt, the pretty fairy’s lover!”

Gaston heard these cries. He saw himself overcome, and suffering an
ignoble outrage at the hands of these enraged men.

By a dexterous movement he extricated himself from the grasp of the
three who were holding him, and felled a fourth to the ground.

His arms were free; but all his enemies returned to the charge.

Then he seemed to lose his head, and, seizing a knife which lay on the
table where the travelling agents had been dining, he plunged it into
the breast of the first man who rushed upon him.

This unfortunate man was Jules Lazet. He dropped to the ground.

There was a second of silent stupor.

Then four or five of the young men rushed forward to raise Lazet. The
landlady ran about wringing her hands, and screaming with fright. Some
of the assailants rushed into the street shouting, “Murder! Murder!”

The others once more turned upon Gaston with cries of “Vengeance! kill
him!”

He saw that he was lost. His enemies had seized the first objects they
could lay their hands upon, and he received several wounds. He jumped
upon the billiard-table, and, making a rapid spring, dashed through the
large glass window of the cafe. He was fearfully cut by the broken glass
and splinters, but he was free.

Gaston had escaped, but he was not yet saved. Astonished and
disconcerted at his desperate feat, the crowd for a moment were
stupefied; but, recovering their presence of mind, they started in
pursuit of him.

The weather was bad, the ground wet and muddy, and heavy black clouds
were rolling westward; but the night was not dark.

Gaston ran on from tree to tree, making frequent turnings, every moment
on the point of being seized and surrounded, and asking himself what
course he should take.

Finally he determined, if possible, to regain Clameran.

With incredible rapidity he darted diagonally across the fair-ground, in
the direction of the levee which protected the valley of Tarascon from
inundations.

Unfortunately, upon reaching this levee, planted with magnificent trees
which made it one of the most charming walks of Provence, Gaston forgot
that the entrance was closed by a gate with three steps, such as are
always placed before walks intended for foot-passengers, and rushed
against it with such violence that he was thrown back and badly bruised.

He quickly sprang up; but his pursuers were upon him.

This time he could expect no mercy. The infuriated men at his heels
yelled that fearful cry which in the evil days of lawless bloodshed had
often echoed in that valley: “In the Rhone with him! In the Rhone with
the marquis!”

His reason had abandoned him; he no longer knew what he did. His
forehead was cut, and the blood trickled from the wound into his eyes,
and blinded him.

He must escape, or die in the attempt.

He had tightly clasped the bloody knife with which he had stabbed Lazet.
He struck his nearest foe; the man fell to the ground with a heavy
groan.

A second blow gained him a moment’s respite, which gave him time to open
the gate and rush along the levee.

Two men were kneeling over their wounded companion, and five others
resumed the pursuit.

But Gaston flew fast, for the horror of his situation tripled his
energy; excitement deadened the pain of his wounds; with elbows held
tight to his sides, and holding his breath, he went along at such a
speed that he soon distanced his pursuers; the noise of their feet
became gradually more indistinct, and finally ceased.

Gaston ran on for a mile, across fields and over hedges; fences and
ditches were leaped without effort and when he knew he was safe from
capture he sank down at the foot of a tree to rest.

This terrible scene had taken place with inconceivable rapidity. Only
forty minutes had elapsed since Gaston and his friend entered the cafe.

But during this short time how much had happened! These forty minutes
had given more cause for sorrow and remorse than the whole of his
previous life put together.

Entering this tavern with head erect and a happy heart, enjoying present
existence, and looking forward to a yet better future, he left it
ruined; for he was a murderer! Henceforth he would be under a ban--an
outcast!

He had killed a man, and still convulsively held the murderous
instrument; he cast it from him with horror.

He tried to account for the dreadful circumstances which had just taken
place; as if it were of any importance to a man lying at the bottom of
an abyss to know which stone had slipped, and precipitated him from the
summit.

Still, if he alone had been ruined! But Valentine was dragged down with
him: she was disgraced yet more than himself; her reputation was gone.
And it was his want of self-command which had cast to the winds this
honor, confided to his keeping, and which he held far dearer than his
own.

But he could not remain here bewailing his misfortune. The police must
soon be on his track. They would certainly go to the chateau of Clameran
to seek him; and before leaving home, perhaps forever, he wished to say
good-by to his father, and once more press Valentine to his heart.

He started to walk, but with great pain, for the reaction had come, and
his nerves and muscles, so violently strained, had now begun to relax;
the intense heat caused by his struggling and fast running was replaced
by a cold perspiration, aching limbs, and chattering teeth. His hip and
shoulder pained him almost beyond endurance. The cut on his forehead had
stopped bleeding, but the coagulated blood around his eyes blinded him.

After a painful walk he reached his door at ten o’clock.

The old valet who admitted him started back terrified.

“Good heavens, monsieur! what is the matter?”

“Silence!” said Gaston in the brief, compressed tone always inspired by
imminent danger, “silence! where is my father?”

“M. the marquis is in his room with M. Louis. He has had a sudden
attack of the gout, and cannot put his foot to the ground; but you,
monsieur----”

Gaston did not stop to listen further. He hurried to his father’s room.

The old marquis, who was playing backgammon with Louis, dropped his
dice-box with a cry of horror, when he looked up and saw his eldest son
standing before him covered with blood.

“What is the matter? what have you been doing, Gaston?”

“I have come to embrace you for the last time, father, and to ask for
assistance to escape abroad.”

“Do you wish to fly the country?”

“I must fly, father, and instantly; I am pursued, the police may be here
at any moment. I have killed two men.”

The marquis was so shocked that he forgot the gout, and attempted to
rise; a violent twinge made him drop back in his chair.

“Where? When?” he gasped.

“At Tarascon, in a cafe, an hour ago; fifteen men attacked me, and I
seized a knife to defend myself.”

“The old tricks of ‘93,” said the marquis. “Did they insult you, Gaston?
What was the cause of the attack?”

“They insulted in my presence the name of a noble young girl.”

“And you punished the rascals? Jarnibleu! You did well. Who ever heard
of a gentleman allowing insolent puppies to speak disrespectfully of a
lady of quality in his presence? But who was the lady you defended?”

“Mlle. Valentine de la Verberie.”

“What!” cried the marquis, “what! the daughter of that old witch! Those
accursed de la Verberies have always brought misfortune upon us.”

He certainly abominated the countess; but his respect for her noble
blood was greater than his resentment toward her individually, and he
added:

“Nevertheless, Gaston, you did your duty.”

Meanwhile, the curiosity of St. Jean, the marquis’s old valet, made him
venture to open the door, and ask:

“Did M. the marquis ring?”

“No, you rascal,” answered M. de Clameran: “you know very well I did
not. But, now you are here, be useful. Quickly bring some clothes for
M. Gaston, some fresh linen, and some warm water: hasten and dress his
wounds.”

These orders were promptly executed, and Gaston found he was not so
badly hurt as he had thought. With the exception of a deep stab in his
left shoulder, his wounds were not serious.

After receiving all the attentions which his condition required, Gaston
felt like a new man, ready to brave any peril. His eyes sparkled with
renewed energy and excitement.

The marquis made a sign to the servants to leave the room.

“Do you still think you ought to leave France?” he asked Gaston.

“Yes, father.”

“My brother ought not to hesitate,” interposed Louis: “he will be
arrested here, thrown into prison, vilified in court, and--who knows?”

“We all know well enough that he will be convicted,” grumbled the old
marquis. “These are the benefits of the immortal revolution, as it is
called. Ah, in my day we three would have taken our swords, jumped on
our horses, and, dashing into Tarascon, would soon have--. But those
good old days are passed. To-day we have to run away.”

“There is no time to lose,” observed Louis.

“True,” said the marquis, “but to fly, to go abroad, one must have
money; and I have none by me to give him.”

“Father!”

“No, I have none. Ah, what a prodigal old fool I have been! If I only
had a hundred louis!”

Then he told Louis to open the secretary, and hand him the money-box.

The box contained only nine hundred and twenty francs in gold.

“Nine hundred and twenty francs,” cried the marquis: “it will never
do for the eldest son of our house to fly the country with this paltry
sum.”

He sat lost in reflection. Suddenly his brow cleared, and he told Louis
to open a secret drawer in the secretary, and bring him a small casket.

Then the marquis took from his neck a black ribbon, to which was
suspended the key of the casket.

His sons observed with what deep emotion he unlocked it, and slowly
took out a necklace, a large cross, several rings, and other pieces of
jewelry.

His countenance assumed a solemn expression.

“Gaston, my dear son,” he said, “at a time like this your life may
depend upon bought assistance; money is power.”

“I am young, father, and have courage.”

“Listen to me. The jewels belonged to the marquise, your sainted mother,
a noble, holy woman, who is now in heaven watching over us. These
jewels have never left me. During my days of misery and want, when I was
compelled to earn a livelihood by teaching music in London, I piously
treasured them. I never thought of selling them; and to mortgage them,
in the hour of direst need, would have seemed to be a sacrilege. But now
you must take them, my son, and sell them for twenty thousand livres.”

“No, father no; I cannot take them!”

“You must, Gaston. If your mother were on earth, she would tell you
to take them, as I do now. I command you to take and use them. The
salvation, the honor, of the heir of the house of Clameran, must not be
imperilled for want of a little gold.”

With tearful eyes, Gaston sank on his knees, and, carrying his father’s
hand to his lips, said:

“Thanks, father, thanks! In my heedless, ungrateful presumption I have
hitherto misjudged you. I did not know your noble character. Forgive me.
I accept; yes, I accept these jewels worn by my dear mother; but I take
them as a sacred deposit, confided to my honor, and for which I will
some day account to you.”

In their emotion, the marquis and Gaston forgot the threatened danger.
But Louis was not touched by the affecting scene.

“Time presses,” he said: “you had better hasten.”

“He is right,” cried the marquis: “go, Gaston, go, my son; and God
protect the heir of the Clamerans!”

Gaston slowly got up and said, with an embarrassed air:

“Before leaving you, my father, I must fulfil a sacred duty. I have
not told you everything. I love Valentine, the young girl whose honor I
defended this evening.”

“Oh!” cried the marquis, thunderstruck, “oh, oh!”

“And I entreat you, father, to ask Mme. de la Verberie for the hand of
her daughter. Valentine will gladly join me abroad, and share my exile.”

Gaston stopped, frightened at the effect of his words. The old marquis
had become crimson, or rather purple, as if struck by apoplexy.

“Preposterous!” he gasped. “Impossible! Perfect folly!”

“I love her, father, and have promised her never to marry another.”

“Then always remain a bachelor.”

“I shall marry her!” cried Gaston, excitedly. “I shall marry her because
I have sworn I would, and I will not be so base as to desert her.”

“Nonsense!”

“I tell you, Mlle. de la Verberie must and shall be my wife. It is too
late for me to draw back. Even if I no longer loved her, I would still
marry her, because she has given herself to me; because, can’t you
understand--what was said at the cafe to-night was true: I have but one
way of repairing the wrong I have done Valentine--by marrying her.”

Gaston’s confession, forced from him by circumstances, produced a
very different impression from that which he had expected. The enraged
marquis instantly became cool, and his mind seemed relieved of an
immense weight. A wicked joy sparkled in his eyes, as he replied:

“Ah, ha! she yielded to your entreaties, did she? Jarnibleu! I am
delighted. I congratulate you, Gaston: they say she is a pretty little
fool.”

“Monsieur,” interrupted Gaston, indignantly; “I have told you that I
love her, and have promised to marry her. You seem to forget.”

“Ta, ta ta!” cried the marquis, “your scruples are absurd. You know full
well that her great-grandfather led our great-grandmother astray. Now we
are quits! I am delighted at the retaliation, for the old witch’s sake.”

“I swear by the memory of my mother, that Valentine shall be my wife!”

“Do you dare assume that tone toward me?” cried the exasperated marquis.
“Never, understand me clearly; never will I give my consent. You know
how dear to me is the honor of our house. Well, I would rather see you
tried for murder, and even chained to the galleys, than married to this
worthless jade!”

This last word was too much for Gaston.

“Then your wish shall be gratified, monsieur. I will remain here, and be
arrested. I care not what becomes of me! What is life to me without the
hope of Valentine? Take back these jewels: they are useless now.”

A terrible scene would have taken place between the father and son, had
they not been interrupted by a domestic who rushed into the room, and
excitedly cried:

“The gendarmes! here are the gendarmes!”

At this news the old marquis started up, and seemed to forget his gout,
which had yielded to more violent emotions.

“Gendarmes!” he cried, “in my house at Clameran! They shall pay dear for
their insolence! You will help me, will you not, my men?”

“Yes, yes,” answered the servants. “Down with the gendarmes! down with
them!”

Fortunately Louis, during all this excitement, preserved his presence of
mind.

“To resist would be folly,” he said. “Even if we repulsed the gendarmes
to-night, they would return to-morrow with reinforcements.”

“Louis is right,” said the marquis, bitterly. “Might is right, as they
said in ‘93. The gendarmes are all powerful. Do they not even have the
impertinence to come up to me while I am hunting, and ask to see my
shooting-license?--I, a Clameran, show a license!”

“Where are they?” asked Louis of the servants.

“At the outer gate,” answered La Verdure, one of the grooms. “Does not
monsieur hear the noise they are making with their sabres?”

“Then Gaston must escape over the garden wall.”

“It is guarded, monsieur,” said La Verdure, “and the little gate in
the park besides. There seems to be a regiment of them. They are even
stationed along the park walls.”

This was only too true. The rumor of Lazet’s death had spread like
wildfire throughout the town of Tarascon, and everybody was in a state
of excitement. Not only mounted gendarmes, but a platoon of hussars from
the garrison, had been sent in pursuit of the murderer.

At least twenty young men of Tarascon were volunteer guides to the armed
force.

“Then,” said the marquis, “we are surrounded?”

“Not a single chance for escape,” groaned St. Jean.

“We shall see about that, Jarnibleu!” cried the marquis. “Ah, we are not
the strongest, but we can be the most adroit. Attention! Louis, my son,
you and La Verdure go down to the stable, and mount the fastest horses;
then as quietly as possible station yourselves, you, Louis, at the park
gate, and you, La Verdure, at the outer gate. Upon the signal I shall
give you by firing a pistol, let every door be instantly opened, while
Louis and Verdure dash through the gates, and make the gendarmes pursue
them.”

“I will make them fly,” said La Verdure.

“Listen. During this time, Gaston, aided by St. Jean, will scale the
park wall, and hasten along the river to the cabin of Pilorel, the
fisherman. He is an old sailor of the republic, and devoted to our
house. He will take Gaston in his boat; and, when they are once on the
Rhone, there is nothing to be feared save the wrath of God. Now go, all
of you: fly!”

Left alone with his son, the old man slipped the jewelry into a silk
purse, and, handing them once more to Gaston, said, as he stretched out
his arms toward him:

“Come here, my son, and let me embrace you, and bestow my blessing.”

Gaston hesitated.

“Come,” insisted the old man in broken tones, “I must embrace you for
the last time: I may never see you again. Save yourself, save your name,
Gaston, and then--you know how I love you, my son: take back the jewels.
Come.”

For an instant the father and son clung to each other, overpowered by
emotion.

But the continued noise at the gates now reaches their ears.

“We must part!” said M. de Clameran, “go!” And, taking from his desk
a little pair of pistols, he handed them to his son, and added, with
averted eyes, “You must not be captured alive, Gaston!”

Gaston did not immediately descend to the park.

He yearned to see Valentine, and give her one last kiss before leaving
France, and determined to persuade Pilorel to stop the boat as they went
by the park of La Verberie.

He hastened to his room, placed the signal in the window so that
Valentine might know he was coming, and waited for an answering light.

“Come, M. Gaston,” entreated old St. Jean, who could not understand the
strange conduct. “For God’s sake make haste! your life is at stake!”

At last he came running down the stairs, and had just reached the
vestibule when a pistol-shot, the signal given by the marquis, was
heard.

The loud swinging open of the large gate, the rattling of the sabres
of the gendarmes, the furious galloping of many horses, and a chorus of
loud shouts and angry oaths, were next heard.

Leaning against the window, his brow beaded with cold perspiration, the
Marquis de Clameran breathlessly awaited the issue of this expedient,
upon which depended the life of his eldest son.

His measures were excellent, and deserved success. As he had ordered,
Louis and La Verdure dashed out through the gate, one to the right, the
other to the left, each one pursued by a dozen mounted men. Their horses
flew like arrows, and kept far ahead of the pursuers.

Gaston would have been saved, but for the interference of fate; but was
it fate, or was it malice?

Suddenly Louis’s horse stumbled, and fell to the ground with his rider.
The gendarmes rode up, and at once recognized the second son of M. de
Clameran.

“This is not the assassin!” they cried. “Let us hurry back, else he will
escape!”

They returned just in time to see, by the uncertain light of the moon
peeping from behind a cloud, Gaston climbing the garden wall.

“There is our man!” exclaimed the corporal. “Keep your eyes open, and
gallop after him!”

They spurred their horses, and hastened to the spot where Gaston had
jumped from the wall.

On a wooded piece of ground, even if it be hilly, an agile man, if he
preserves his presence of mind, can escape a number of horsemen. The
ground on this side of the park was favorable to Gaston. He found
himself in an immense madder-field; and, as is well known, as this
valuable root must remain in the ground three years, the furrows are
necessarily ploughed very deep. Horses cannot even walk over its uneven
surface; indeed, they can scarcely stand steadily upon it.

This circumstance brought the gendarmes to a dead halt.

Four rash hussars ventured in the field, but they and their beasts were
soon rolling between hillocks.

Jumping from ridge to ridge, Gaston soon reached a large field, freshly
ploughed, and planted with young chestnuts.

As his chances of escape increased, the excitement grew more intense.
The pursuers urged each other on, and called out to head him off, every
time they saw Gaston run from one clump of trees to another.

Being familiar with the country, young De Clameran was confident of
eluding his pursuers. He knew that the next field was a thistle-field,
and was separated from the chestnut by a long, deep ditch.

He resolved to jump into this ditch, run along the bottom, and climb out
at the farther end, while they were looking for him among the trees.

But he had forgotten the swelling of the river. Upon reaching the ditch,
he found it full of water.

Discouraged but not disconcerted, he was about to jump across, when
three horsemen appeared on the opposite side.

They were gendarmes who had ridden around the madder-field and
chestnut-trees, knowing they could easily catch him on the level ground
of the thistle-field.

At the sight of these three men, Gaston stood perplexed.

He should certainly be captured if he attempted to run through the
field, at the end of which he could see the cabin of Pilorel the
ferryman.

To retrace his steps would be surrendering to the hussars.

At a little distance on his right was a forest, but he was separated
from it by a road upon which he heard the sound of approaching horses.
He would certainly be caught there.

Foes in front of him, foes behind him, foes on the right of him! What
was on his left?

On his left was the surging, foaming river.

What hope was left? The circle of which he was the centre was fast
narrowing.

Must he, then, fall back upon suicide? Here in an open field, tracked by
police like a wild beast, must he blow his brains out? What a death for
a De Clameran!

No! He would seize the one chance of salvation left him: a forlorn,
desperate, perilous chance, but still a chance--the river.

Holding a pistol in either hand, he ran and leaped upon the edge of a
little promontory, projecting three yards into the Rhone.

This cape of refuge was formed by the immense trunk of a fallen tree.

The tree swayed and cracked fearfully under Gaston’s weight, as he stood
on the extreme end, and looked around upon his pursuers; there were
fifteen of them, some on the right, some on the left, all uttering cries
of joy.

“Do you surrender?” called out the corporal.

Gaston did not answer; he was weighing his chances. He was above the
park of La Verberie; would he be able to swim there, granting that he
was not swept away and drowned the instant he plunged into the angry
torrent before him?

He pictured Valentine, at this very moment, watching, waiting, and
praying for him on the other shore.

“For the last time I command you to surrender!” cried the corporal.

The unfortunate man did not hear; he was deafened by the waters which
were roaring and rushing around him.

In a supreme moment like this, with his foot upon the threshold of
another world, a man sees his past life rise before him, and seldom does
he find cause for self-approval.

Although death stared him in the face, Gaston calmly considered which
would be the best spot to plunge into, and commended his soul to God.

“He will stand there until we go after him,” said a gendarme: “so we
might as well advance.”

Gaston had finished his prayer.

He flung his pistols in the direction of the gendarmes: he was ready.

He made the sign of the cross, then, with outstretched arms, dashed head
foremost into the Rhone.

The violence of his spring detached the few remaining roots of the old
tree; it oscillated a moment, whirled over, and then drifted away.

The spectators uttered a cry of horror and pity; anger seemed to have
deserted them in their turn.

“That is an end of him,” muttered one of the gendarmes. “It is useless
for one to fight against the Rhone; his body will be picked up at Arles
to-morrow.”

The hussars seemed really remorseful at the tragic fate of the brave,
handsome young man, whom a moment before they had pursued with so much
bitter zeal. They admired his spirited resistance, his courage, and
especially his resignation, his resolution to die.

True French soldiers, their sympathies were now all upon the side of the
vanquished, and every man of them would have done all in his power to
assist in saving the drowning man, and aiding his escape.

“An ugly piece of work!” grumbled the old quartermaster who had command
of the hussars.

“Bast!” exclaimed the philosophic corporal, “the Rhone is no worse than
the court of assizes: the result would be the same. Right about, men;
march! The thing that troubles me is the idea of that poor old man
waiting to hear his son’s fate. I would not be the one to tell him what
has happened. March!”




XIII

Valentine knew, that fatal evening, that Gaston would have to walk to
Tarascon, to cross the bridge over the Rhone which connected Tarascon
with Beaucaire, and did not expect to see him until eleven o’clock, the
hour which they had fixed upon the previous evening.

But, happening to look up at the windows of Clameran, she saw lights
hurrying to and fro in an unusual manner, even in rooms that she knew to
be unoccupied.

A presentiment of impending misfortune chilled her blood, and stopped
the beatings of her heart.

A secret and imperious voice within told her that something
extraordinary was going on at the chateau of Clameran.

What was it? She could not imagine; but she knew, she felt, that some
dreadful misfortune had happened.

With her eyes fastened upon the dark mass of stone looming in the
distance, she watched the going and coming of the lights, as if their
movements would give her a clew to what was taking place within those
walls.

She raised her window, and tried to listen, fancying she could hear an
unusual sound, even at such a distance. Alas! she heard nothing but the
rushing roar of the angry river.

Her anxiety grew more insufferable every moment; and she felt as if she
would faint were this torturing suspense to last much longer, when the
well-known, beloved signal appeared suddenly in Gaston’s window, and
told her that her lover was about to swim across the Rhone.

She could scarcely believe her eyes; she must be under the influence of
a dream; her amazement prevented her answering the signal, until it had
been repeated three times.

Then, more dead than alive, with trembling limbs she hastened along the
park to the river-bank.

Never had she seen the Rhone so furious. Since Gaston was risking his
life in order to see her, she could no longer doubt that something
fearful had occurred at Clameran.

She fell on her knees, and with clasped hands, and her wild eyes fixed
upon the dark waters, besought the pitiless waves to yield up her dear
Gaston.

Every dark object which she could distinguish floating in the middle of
the torrent assumed the shape of a human form.

At one time, she thought she heard, above the roaring of the water, the
terrible, agonized cry of a drowning man.

She watched and prayed, but her lover came not.

Still she waited.

While the gendarmes and hussars slowly and silently returned to the
chateau of Clameran, Gaston experienced one of those miracles which
would seem incredible were they not confirmed by the most convincing
proof.

When he first plunged into the river, he rolled over five or six times,
and was then drawn toward the bottom. In a swollen river the current is
unequal, being much stronger in some places than in others; hence the
great danger.

Gaston knew it, and guarded against it. Instead of wasting his strength
in vain struggles, he held his breath, and kept still. About twenty-five
yards from the spot where he had plunged in, he made a violent spring
which brought him to the surface.

Rapidly drifting by him was the old tree.

For an instant, he was entangled in the mass of weeds and debris which
clung to its roots, and followed in its wake; an eddy set him free. The
tree and its clinging weeds swept on. It was the last familiar friend,
gone.

Gaston dared not attempt to reach the opposite shore. He would have to
land where the waves dashed him.

With great presence of mind he put forth all his strength and dexterity
to slowly take an oblique course, knowing well that there was no hope
for him if the current took him crosswise.

This fearful current is as capricious as a woman, which accounts for
the strange effects of inundations; sometimes it rushes to the right,
sometimes to the left, sparing one shore and ravaging the other.

Gaston was familiar with every turn of the river; he knew that just
below Clameran was an abrupt turning, and relied upon the eddy formed
thereby, to sweep him in the direction of La Verberie.

His hopes were not deceived. An oblique current suddenly swept him
toward the right shore, and, if he had not been on his guard, would have
sunk him.

But the eddy did not reach as far as Gaston supposed, and he was still
some distance from the shore, when, with the rapidity of lightning, he
was swept by the park of La Verberie.

As he floated by, he caught a glimpse of a white shadow among the trees;
Valentine still waited for him.

He was gradually approaching the bank, as he reached the end of La
Verberie, and attempted to land.

Feeling a foothold, he stood up twice, and each time was thrown down by
the violence of the waves. He escaped being swept away by seizing some
willow branches, and, clinging to them, raised himself, and climbed up
the steep bank.

He was safe at last.

Without taking time to breathe, he darted in the direction of the park.

He came just in time. Overcome by the intensity of her emotions,
Valentine had fainted, and lay apparently lifeless on the damp
river-bank.

Gaston’s entreaties and kisses aroused her from her stupor.

“Gaston!” she cried, in a tone that revealed all the love she felt for
him. “Is it indeed you? Then God heard my prayers, and had pity on us.”

“No, Valentine,” he murmured. “God has had no pity.”

The sad tones of Gaston’s voice convinced her that her presentiment of
evil was true.

“What new misfortune strikes us now?” she cried. “Why have you thus
risked your life--a life far dearer to me than my own? What has
happened?”

“This is what has happened, Valentine: our love-affair is the jest of
the country around; our secret is a secret no longer.”

She shrank back, and, burying her face in her hands, moaned piteously.

“This,” said Gaston, forgetting everything but his present misery, “this
is the result of the blind enmity of our families. Our noble and pure
love, which ought to be a glory in the eyes of God and man, has to be
concealed, and, when discovered, becomes a reproach as though it were
some evil deed.”

“Then all is known--all is discovered!” murmured Valentine. “Oh, Gaston,
Gaston!”

While struggling for his life against furious men and angry elements,
Gaston had preserved his self-possession; but the heart-broken tone of
his beloved Valentine overcame him. He swung his arms above his head,
and exclaimed:

“Yes, they know it; and oh, why could I not crush the villains for
daring to utter your adored name? Ah, why did I only kill two of the
scoundrels!”

“Have you killed someone, Gaston?”

Valentine’s tone of horror gave Gaston a ray of reason.

“Yes,” he replied with bitterness, “I have killed two men. It was for
that that I have crossed the Rhone. I could not have my father’s name
disgraced by being tried and convicted for murder. I have been tracked
like a wild beast by mounted police. I have escaped them, and now I am
flying my country.”

Valentine struggled to preserve her composure under this last unexpected
blow.

“Where do you hope to find an asylum?” she asked.

“I know not. Where I am to go, what will become of me, God only knows!
I only know that I am going to some strange land, to assume a false name
and a disguise. I shall seek some lawless country which offers a refuge
to murderers.”

Gaston waited for an answer to this speech. None came, and he resumed
with vehemence:

“And before disappearing, Valentine, I wished to see you, because now,
when I am abandoned by everyone else, I have relied upon you, and had
faith in your love. A tie unites us, my darling, stronger and more
indissoluble than all earthly ties--the tie of love. I love you more
than life itself, my Valentine; before God you are my wife; I am
yours and you are mine, for ever and ever! Would you let me fly alone,
Valentine? To the pain and toil of exile, to the sharp regrets of a
ruined life, would you, could you, add the torture of separation?”

“Gaston, I implore you--”

“Ah, I knew it,” he interrupted, mistaking the sense of her exclamation;
“I knew you would not let me go off alone. I knew your sympathetic heart
would long to share the burden of my miseries. This moment effaces the
wretched suffering I have endured. Let us go! Having our happiness to
defend, having you to protect, I fear nothing; I can brave all, conquer
all. Come, my Valentine, we will escape, or die together! This is the
long-dreamed-of happiness! The glorious future of love and liberty open
before us!”

He had worked himself into a state of delirious excitement. He seized
Valentine around the waist, and tried to draw her toward the gate.

As Gaston’s exaltation increased, Valentine became composed and almost
stolid in her forced calmness.

Gently, but with a quiet firmness, she withdrew herself from his
embrace, and said sadly, but resolutely:

“What you wish is impossible, Gaston!”

This cold, inexplicable resistance confounded her lover.

“Impossible? Why, Valentine----”

“You know me well enough, Gaston, to be convinced that sharing the
greatest hardships with you would to me be the height of happiness. But
above the tones of your voice to which I fain would yield, above the
voice of my own heart which urges me to follow the one being upon whom
all its affections are centred, there is another voice--a powerful,
imperious voice--which bids me to stay: the voice of duty.”

“What! Would you think of remaining here after the horrible affair of
to-night, after the scandal that will be spread to-morrow?”

“What do you mean? That I am lost, dishonored? Am I any more so to-day
than I was yesterday? Do you think that the jeers and scoffs of
the world could make me suffer more than do the pangs of my guilty
conscience? I have long since passed judgment upon myself, Gaston; and,
although the sound of your voice and the touch of your hand would make
me forget all save the bliss of your love, no sooner were you away than
I would weep tears of shame and remorse.”

Gaston listened immovable, stupefied. He seemed to see a new Valentine
standing before him, an entirely different woman from the one whose
tender soul he thought he knew so well.

“Your mother, what will she say?” he asked.

“It is my duty to her that keeps me here. Do you wish me to prove an
unnatural daughter, and desert a poor, lonely, friendless old woman, who
has nothing but me to cling to? Could I abandon her to follow a lover?”

“But our enemies will inform her of everything, Valentine, and think how
she will make you suffer!”

“No matter. The dictates of conscience must be obeyed. Ah, why can I
not, at the price of my life, spare her the agony of hearing that her
only daughter, her Valentine, has disgraced her name? She may be hard,
cruel, pitiless toward me; but have I not deserved it? Oh, my only
friend, we have been revelling in a dream too beautiful to last! I have
long dreaded this awakening. Like two weak, credulous fools we imagined
that happiness could exist beyond the pale of duty. Sooner or later
stolen joys must be dearly paid for. After the sweet comes the bitter;
we must bow our heads, and drink the cup to the dregs.”

This cold reasoning, this sad resignation, was more than the fiery
nature of Gaston could bear.

“You shall not talk thus!” he cried. “Can you not feel that the bare
idea of your suffering humiliation drives me mad?”

“Alas! I see nothing but disgrace, the most fearful disgrace, staring me
in the face.”

“What do you mean, Valentine?”

“I have not told you, Gaston, I am----”

Here she stopped, hesitated, and then added:

“Nothing! I am a fool.”

Had Gaston been less excited, he would have suspected some new
misfortune beneath this reticence of Valentine; but his mind was too
full of one idea--that of possessing her.

“All hope is not lost,” he continued. “My father is kind-hearted, and
was touched by my love and despair. I am sure that my letters, added to
the intercession of my brother Louis, will induce him to ask Mme. de la
Verberie for your hand.”

This proposition seemed to frighten Valentine.

“Heaven forbid that the marquis should take this rash step!”

“Why, Valentine?”

“Because my mother would reject his offer; because, I must confess it
now, she has sworn I shall marry none but a rich man; and your father is
not rich, Gaston, so you will have very little.”

“Good heavens!” cried Gaston, with disgust, “is it to such an unnatural
mother that you sacrifice me?”

“She is my mother; that is sufficient. I have not the right to judge
her. My duty is to remain with her, and remain I shall.”

Valentine’s manner showed such determined resolution, that Gaston saw
that further prayers would be in vain.

“Alas!” he cried, as he wrung his hands with despair, “you do not love
me; you have never loved me!”

“Gaston, Gaston! you do not think what you say! Have you no mercy?”

“If you loved me,” he cried, “you could never, at this moment of
separation, have the cruel courage to coldly reason and calculate. Ah,
far different is my love for you. Without you the world is void; to lose
you is to die. What have I to live for? Let the Rhone take back this
worthless life, so miraculously saved; it is now a burden to me!”

And he rushed toward the river, determined to bury his sorrow beneath
its waves; Valentine seized his arm, and held him back.

“Is this the way to show your love for me?” she asked.

Gaston was absolutely discouraged.

“What is the use of living?” he said, dejectedly. “What is left to me
now?”

“God is left to us, Gaston; and in his hands lies our future.”

As a shipwrecked man seizes a rotten plank in his desperation, so
Gaston eagerly caught at the word “_future_,” as a beacon in the gloomy
darkness surrounding him.

“Your commands shall be obeyed,” he cried with enthusiasm. “Away with
weakness! Yes, I will live, and struggle, and triumph. Mme. de la
Verberie wants gold; well, she shall have it; in three years I will be
rich, or I shall be dead.”

With clasped hands Valentine thanked Heaven for this sudden
determination, which was more than she had dared hope for.

“But,” said Gaston, “before going away I wish to confide to you a sacred
deposit.”

He drew from his pocket the purse of jewels, and, handing them to
Valentine, added:

“These jewels belonged to my poor mother; you, my angel, are alone
worthy of wearing them. I thought of you when I accepted them from my
father. I felt that you, as my affianced wife, were the proper person to
have them.”

Valentine refused to accept them.

“Take them, my darling, as a pledge of my return. If I do not come back
within three years, you may know that I am dead, and then you must keep
them as a souvenir of him who so much loved you.”

She burst into tears, and took the purse.

“And now,” said Gaston, “I have a last request to make. Everybody
believes me dead, but I cannot let my poor old father labor under this
impression. Swear to me that you will go yourself to-morrow morning, and
tell him that I am still alive.”

“I will tell him, myself,” she said.

Gaston felt that he must now tear himself away before his courage failed
him; each moment he was more loath to leave the only being who bound
him to this world; he enveloped Valentine in a last fond embrace, and
started up.

“What is your plan of escape?” she asked.

“I shall go to Marseilles, and hide in a friend’s house until I can
procure a passage to America.”

“You must have assistance; I will secure you a guide in whom I have
unbounded confidence; old Menoul, the ferryman, who lives near us. He
owns the boat which he plies on the Rhone.”

The lovers passed through the little park gate, of which Gaston had the
key, and soon reached the boatman’s cabin.

He was asleep in an easy-chair by the fire. When Valentine stood before
him with Gaston, the old man jumped up, and kept rubbing his eyes,
thinking it must be a dream.

“Pere Menoul,” said Valentine, “M. Gaston is compelled to fly the
country; he wants to be rowed out to sea, so that he can secretly
embark. Can you take him in your boat as far as the mouth of the Rhone?”

“It is impossible,” said the old man, shaking his head; “I would not
dare venture on the river in its present state.”

“But, Pere Menoul, it would be of immense service to me; would you not
venture for my sake?”

“For your sake? certainly I would, Mlle. Valentine: I will do anything
to gratify you. I am ready to start.”

He looked at Gaston, and, seeing his clothes wet and covered with mud,
said to him:

“Allow me to offer you my dead son’s clothes, monsieur; they will serve
as a disguise: come this way.”

In a few minutes Pere Menoul returned with Gaston, whom no one would
have recognized in his sailor dress.

Valentine went with them to the place where the boat was moored. While
the old man was unfastening it, the disconsolate lovers tearfully
embraced each other for the last time.

“In three years, my own Valentine; promise to wait three years for me!
If alive, I will then see you.”

“Adieu, mademoiselle,” interrupted the boatman; “and you, monsieur, hold
fast, and keep steady.”

Then with a vigorous stroke of the boat-hook he sent the bark into the
middle of the stream.

Three days later, thanks to the assistance of Pere Menoul, Gaston was
concealed on the three-masted American vessel, Tom Jones, which was to
start the next day for Valparaiso.




XIV

Cold and white as a marble statue, Valentine stood on the bank of the
river, watching the frail bark which was carrying her lover away. It
flew along the Rhone like a bird in a tempest, and after a few seconds
appeared like a black speck in the midst of the heavy fog which floated
over the water, then was lost to view.

Now that Gaston was gone, Valentine had no motive for concealing her
despair; she wrung her hands and sobbed as if her heart would break. All
her forced calmness, her bravery and hopefulness, were gone. She felt
crushed and lost, as if the sharp pain in her heart was the forerunner
of the torture in store for her; as if that swiftly gliding bark had
carried off the better part of herself.

While Gaston treasured in the bottom of his heart a ray of hope, she
felt there was nothing to look forward to but shame and sorrow.

The horrible facts which stared her in the face convinced her that
happiness in this life was over; the future was worse than blank. She
wept and shuddered at the prospect.

She slowly retraced her footsteps through the friendly little gate which
had so often admitted poor Gaston; and, as she closed it behind her,
she seemed to be placing an impassable barrier between herself and
happiness.

Before entering, Valentine walked around the chateau, and looked up at
the windows of her mother’s chamber.

They were brilliantly lighted, as usual at this hour, for Mme. de la
Verberie passed half the night in reading, and slept till late in the
day.

Enjoying the comforts of life, which are little costly in the country,
the selfish countess disturbed herself very little about her daughter.

Fearing no danger in their isolation, she left her at perfect liberty;
and day and night Valentine might go and come, take long walks, and sit
under trees for hours at a time, without restriction.

But on this night Valentine feared being seen. She would be called upon
to explain the torn, muddy condition of her dress, and what answer could
she give?

Fortunately she could reach her room without meeting anyone.

She needed solitude in order to collect her thoughts, and to pray for
strength to bear the heavy burden of her sorrows, and to withstand the
angry storm about to burst over her head.

Seated before her little work-table, she emptied the purse of jewels,
and mechanically examined them.

It would be a sweet, sad comfort to wear the simplest of the rings, she
thought, as she slipped the sparkling gem on her finger; but her mother
would ask her where it came from. What answer could she give? Alas,
none.

She kissed the purse, in memory of Gaston, and then concealed the sacred
deposit in her bureau.

When she thought of going to Clameran, to inform the old marquis of the
miraculous preservation of his son’s life, her heart sank.

Blinded by his passion, Gaston did not think, when he requested this
service, of the obstacles and dangers to be braved in its performance.

But Valentine saw them only too clearly; yet it did not occur to her for
an instant to break her promise by sending another, or by delaying to go
herself.

At sunrise she dressed herself.

When the bell was ringing for early mass, she thought it a good time to
start on her errand.

The servants were all up, and one of them named Mihonne, who always
waited on Valentine, was scrubbing the vestibule.

“If mother asks for me,” said Valentine to the girl, “tell her I have
gone to early mass.”

She often went to church at this hour, so there was nothing to be feared
thus far; Mihonne looked at her sadly, but said nothing.

Valentine knew that she would have difficulty in returning to breakfast.
She would have to walk a league before reaching the bridge, and it was
another league thence to Clameran; in all she must walk four leagues.

She set forth at a rapid pace. The consciousness of performing an
extraordinary action, the feverish anxiety of peril incurred, increased
her haste. She forgot that she had worn herself out weeping all night;
that this fictitious strength could not last.

In spite of her efforts, it was after eight o’clock when she reached the
long avenue leading to the main entrance of the chateau of Clameran.

She had only proceeded a few steps, when she saw old St. Jean coming
down the path.

She stopped and waited for him; he hastened his steps at sight of her,
as if having something to tell her.

He was very much excited, and his eyes were swollen with weeping.

To Valentine’s surprise, he did not take off his hat to bow, and when he
came up to her, he said, rudely:

“Are you going up to the chateau, mademoiselle?”

“Yes.”

“If you are going after M. Gaston,” said the servant, with an
insolent sneer, “you are taking useless trouble. M. the count is dead,
mademoiselle; he sacrificed himself for the sake of a worthless woman.”

Valentine turned white at this insult, but took no notice of it.
St. Jean, who expected to see her overcome by the dreadful news, was
bewildered at her composure.

“I am going to the chateau,” she said, quietly, “to speak to the
marquis.”

St. Jean stifled a sob, and said:

“Then it is not worth while to go any farther.”

“Why?”

“Because the Marquis of Clameran died at five o’clock this morning.”

Valentine leaned against a tree to prevent herself from falling.

“Dead!” she gasped.

“Yes,” said St. Jean, fiercely; “yes, dead!”

A faithful servant of the old regime, St. Jean shared all the passions,
weaknesses, friendships, and enmities of his master. He had a horror of
the La Verberies. And now he saw in Valentine the woman who had caused
the death of the marquis whom he had served for forty years, and of
Gaston whom he worshipped.

“I will tell you how he died,” said the bitter old man. “Yesterday
evening, when those hounds came and told the marquis that his eldest
son was dead, he who was as hardy as an oak, and could face any danger,
instantly gave way, and dropped as if struck by lightning. I was there.
He wildly beat the air with his hands, and fell without opening his
lips; not one word did he utter. We put him to bed, and M. Louis
galloped into Tarascon for a doctor. But the blow had struck too deeply.
When Dr. Raget arrived he said there was no hope.

“At daybreak, the marquis recovered consciousness enough to ask for M.
Louis, with whom he remained alone for some minutes. The last words he
uttered were, ‘Father and son the same day; there will be rejoicing at
La Verberie.’”

Valentine might have soothed the sorrow of the faithful servant, by
telling him Gaston still lived; but she feared it would be indiscreet,
and, unfortunately, said nothing.

“Can I see M. Louis?” she asked after a long silence.

This question seemed to arouse all the anger slumbering in the breast of
poor St. Jean.

“You! You would dare take such a step, Mlle. de la Verberie? What! would
you presume to appear before him after what has happened? I will never
allow it! And you had best, moreover, take my advice, and return home at
once. I will not answer for the tongues of the servants here, when they
see you.”

And, without waiting for an answer, he hurried away.

What could Valentine do? Humiliated and miserable, she could only
wearily drag her aching limbs back the way she had so rapidly come early
that morning. On the road, she met many people coming from the town,
where they had heard of the events of the previous night; and the poor
girl was obliged to keep her eyes fastened to the ground in order
to escape the insulting looks and mocking salutations with which the
gossips passed her.

When Valentine reached La Verberie, she found Mihonne waiting for her.

“Ah, mademoiselle,” she said, “make haste, and go in the house. Madame
had a visitor this morning, and ever since she left has been crying
out for you. Hurry; and take care what you say to her, for she is in a
violent passion.”

Much has been said in favor of the patriarchal manners of our ancestors.

Their manners may have been patriarchal years and years ago; but our
mothers and wives nowadays certainly have not such ready hands and quick
tongues, and are sometimes, at least, elegant in manner, and choice in
their language.

Mme. de La Verberie had preserved the manners of the good old times,
when grand ladies swore like troopers, and impressed their remarks by
slaps in the face.

When Valentine appeared, she was overwhelmed with coarse epithets and
violent abuse.

The countess had been informed of everything, with many gross additions
added by public scandal. An old dowager, her most intimate friend, had
hurried over early in the morning, to offer her this poisoned dish of
gossip, seasoned with her own pretended condolences.

In this sad affair, Mme. de la Verberie mourned less over her daughter’s
loss of reputation, than over the ruin of her own projects--projects
of going to Paris, making a grand marriage for Valentine, and living in
luxury the rest of her days.

A young girl so compromised would not find it easy to get a husband.
It would now be necessary to keep her two years longer in the country,
before introducing her into Parisian society. The world must have time
to forget this scandal.

“You worthless wretch!” cried the countess with fury; “is it thus you
respect the noble traditions of our family? Heretofore it has never been
considered necessary to watch the La Verberies; they could take care of
their honor: but you must take advantage of your liberty to cover our
name with disgrace!”

With a sinking heart, Valentine had foreseen this tirade. She felt
that it was only a just punishment for her conduct. Knowing that the
indignation of her mother was just, she meekly hung her head like a
repentant sinner at the bar of justice.

But this submissive silence only exasperated the angry countess.

“Why do you not answer me?” she screamed with flashing eyes and a
threatening gesture. “Speak! you----”

“What can I say, mother?”

“Say, miserable girl? Say that they lied when they accused a La Verberie
of disgracing her name! Speak: defend yourself!”

Valentine mournfully shook her head, but said nothing.

“It is true, then?” shrieked the countess, beside herself with rage;
“what they said is true?”

“Forgive me, mother: have mercy! I am so miserable!” moaned the poor
girl.

“Forgive! have mercy! Do you dare to tell me I have not been deceived by
this gossip to-day? Do you have the insolence to stand there and glory
in your shame? Whose blood flows in your veins? You seem to be ignorant
that some faults should be persistently denied, no matter how glaring
the evidence against them. And you are my daughter! Can you not
understand that an ignominious confession like this should never be
forced from a woman by any human power? But no, you have lovers, and
unblushingly avow it. Why not run over the town and tell everybody?
Boast of it, glory in it: it would be something new!”

“Alas! you are pitiless, mother!”

“Did you ever have any pity on me, my dutiful daughter? Did it ever
occur to you that your disgrace would kill me? No: I suppose you
and your lover have often laughed at my blind confidence; for I had
confidence in you: I had perfect faith in you. I believed you to be
as innocent as when you lay in your cradle. And it has come to this:
drunken men make a jest of your name in a billiard-room, then fight
about you, and kill each other. I intrusted to you the honor of
our name, and what did you do with it? You handed it over to the
first-comer!”

This was too much for Valentine. The words, “first-comer,” wounded
her pride more than all the other abuse heaped upon her. She tried to
protest against this unmerited insult.

“Ah, I have made a mistake in supposing this to be the first one,” said
the countess. “Among your many lovers, you choose the heir of our worst
enemy, the son of those detested Clamerans. Among all, you select a
coward who publicly boasted of your favors; a wretch who tried to avenge
himself for the heroism of our ancestors by ruining you and me--an old
woman and a child!”

“No, mother, you do him wrong. He loved me, and hopes for your consent.”

“Wants to marry you, does he? Never, never shall that come to pass! I
would rather see you lower than you are, in the gutter, laid in your
coffin, than see you the wife of that man!”

Thus the hatred of the countess was expressed very much in the terms
which the old marquis had used to his son.

“Besides,” she added, with a ferocity of which only a bad woman is
capable, “your lover is drowned, and the old marquis is dead. God is
just; we are avenged.”

The words of St. Jean, “There will be rejoicing at La Verberie,” rung
in Valentine’s ears, as she saw the countess’s eyes sparkle with wicked
joy.

This was too much for the unfortunate girl.

For half an hour she had been exerting all of her strength to bear this
cruel violence from her mother; but her physical endurance was not equal
to the task. She turned pale, and with half-closed eyes tried to seize a
table, as she felt herself falling; but her head fell against a bracket,
and with bleeding forehead she dropped at her mother’s feet.

The cold-hearted countess felt no revival of maternal love, as she
looked at her daughter’s lifeless form. Her vanity was wounded, but
no other emotion disturbed her. Hers was a heart so full of anger and
hatred that there was no room for any nobler sentiment.

She rang the bell; and the affrighted servants, who were trembling in
the passage at the loud and angry tones of that voice, of which they all
stood in terror, came running in.

“Carry mademoiselle to her room,” she ordered: “lock her up, and bring
me the key.”

The countess intended keeping Valentine a close prisoner for a long
time.

She well knew the mischievous, gossiping propensities of country people,
who, from mere idleness, indulge in limitless scandal. A poor fallen
girl must either leave the country, or drink to the very dregs the
chalice of premeditated humiliations, heaped up and offered her by her
neighbors. Each clown delights in casting a stone at her.

The plans of the countess were destined to be disconcerted.

The servants came to tell her that Valentine was restored to
consciousness, but seemed to be very ill.

She replied that she would not listen to such absurdities, that it was
all affectation; but Mihonne insisted upon her going up and judging for
herself. She unwillingly went to her daughter’s room, and saw that her
life was in danger.

The countess betrayed no apprehension, but sent to Tarascon for Dr.
Raget, who was the oracle of the neighborhood; he was with the Marquis
of Clameran when he died.

Dr. Raget was one of those men who leave a blessed memory, which lives
long after they have left this world.

Intelligent, noble-hearted, and wealthy, he devoted his life to his art;
going from the mansions of the rich to the hovels of the poor, without
ever accepting remuneration for his services.

At all hours of the night and day, his gray horse and old buggy might
be seen, with a basket of wine and soup under the seat, for his poorer
patients.

He was a little, bald-headed man of fifty, with a quick, bright eye, and
pleasant face.

The servant fortunately found him at home; and he was soon standing
at Valentine’s bed-side, with a grave, perplexed look upon his usually
cheerful face.

Endowed with profound perspicacity, quickened by practice, he studied
Valentine and her mother alternately; and the penetrating gaze which
he fastened on the old countess so disconcerted her that she felt her
wrinkled face turning very red.

“This child is very ill,” he abruptly said.

Mme. de la Verberie made no reply.

“I desire,” continued the doctor, “to remain alone with her for a few
minutes.”

The countess dared not resist the authority of a man of Dr. Raget’s
character, and retired to the next room, apparently calm, but in reality
disturbed by the most gloomy forebodings.

At the end of half an hour--it seemed a century--the doctor entered the
room where she was waiting. He, who had witnessed so much suffering
and misery all his life, was agitated and nervous after talking with
Valentine.

“Well,” said the countess, “what is the matter?”

“Summon all your courage, madame,” he answered sadly, “and be prepared
to grant indulgence and pardon to your suffering child. Mlle. Valentine
will soon become a mother.”

“The worthless creature! I feared as much.”

The doctor was shocked at this dreadful expression of the countess’s
eye. He laid his hand on her arm, and gave her a penetrating look,
beneath which she instantly quailed.

The doctor’s suspicions were correct.

A dreadful idea had flashed across Mme. de la Verberie’s mind--the idea
of destroying this child which would be a living proof of Valentine’s
sin.

Feeling that her evil intention was divined, the proud woman’s eyes fell
beneath the doctor’s obstinate gaze.

“I do not understand you, Dr. Raget,” she murmured.

“But I understand you, madame; and I simply tell you that a crime does
not obliterate a fault.”

“Doctor!”

“I merely say what I think, madame. If I am mistaken in my impression,
so much the better for you. At present, the condition of your daughter
is serious, but not dangerous. Excitement and distress of mind have
unstrung her nerves, and she now has a high fever; but I hope by great
care and good nursing that she will soon recover.”

The countess saw that the good doctor’s suspicions were not dissipated;
so she thought she would try affectionate anxiety, and said:

“At least, doctor, you can assure me that the dear child’s life is not
in danger?”

“No, madame,” answered Dr. Raget with cutting irony, “your maternal
tenderness need not be alarmed. All the poor child needs is rest of
mind, which you alone can give her. A few kind words from you will do
her more good than all of my prescriptions. But remember, madame,
that the least shock or nervous excitement will produce the most fatal
consequences.”

“I am aware of that,” said the hypocritical countess, “and shall be very
careful. I must confess that I was unable to control my anger upon first
hearing your announcement.”

“But now that the first shock is over, madame, being a mother and a
Christian, you will do your duty. My duty is to save your daughter and
her child. I will call to-morrow.”

Mme. de la Verberie had no idea of having the doctor go off in this
way. She called him back, and, without reflecting that she was betraying
herself, cried out:

“Do you pretend to say, monsieur, that you will prevent my taking every
means to conceal this terrible misfortune that has fallen upon me? Do
you wish our shame to be made public, to make me the laughing-stock of
the neighborhood?”

The doctor reflected without answering; the condition of affairs was
grave.

“No, madame,” he finally said; “I cannot prevent your leaving La
Verberie: that would be overstepping my powers. But it is my duty to
hold you to account for the child. You are at liberty to go where you
please; but you must give me proof of the child’s living, or at least
that no attempts have been made against its life.”

After uttering these threatening words he left the house, and it was in
good time; for the countess was choking with suppressed rage.

“Insolent upstart!” she said, “to presume to dictate to a woman of my
rank! Ah, if I were not completely at his mercy!”

But she was at his mercy, and she knew well enough that it would be
safest to obey.

She stamped her foot with anger, as she thought that all her ambitious
plans were dashed to the ground.

No more hopes of luxury, of a millionaire son-in-law, of splendid
carriages, rich dresses, and charming card-parties where she could lose
money all night without disturbing her mind.

She would have to die as she had lived, neglected and poor; and this
future life of deprivation would be harder to bear than the past,
because she no longer had bright prospects to look forward to. It was a
cruel awakening from her golden dreams.

And it was Valentine who brought this misery upon her.

This reflection aroused all her inherent bitterness, and she felt toward
her daughter one of those implacable hatreds which, instead of being
quenched, are strengthened by time.

She wished she could see Valentine lying dead before her; above all
would she like the accursed infant to come to grief.

But the doctor’s threatening look was still before her, and she dared
not attempt her wicked plans. She even forced herself to go and say a
few forgiving words to Valentine, and then left her to the care of the
faithful Mihonne.

Poor Valentine! she prayed that death might kindly end her sufferings.
She had neither the moral nor physical courage to fight against her
fate, but hopelessly sank beneath the first blow, and made no attempt to
rally herself.

She was, however, getting better. She felt that dull, heavy sensation
which always follows violent mental or physical suffering; she was still
able to reflect, and thought:

“Well, it is over; my mother knows everything. I no longer have her
anger to fear, and must trust to time for her forgiveness.”

This was the secret which Valentine had refused to reveal to Gaston,
because she feared that he would refuse to leave her if he knew it; and
she wished him to escape at any price of suffering to herself. Even now
she did not regret having followed the dictates of duty, and remained at
home.

The only thought which distressed her was Gaston’s danger. Had he
succeeded in embarking? How would she find out? The doctor had allowed
her to get up; but she was not well enough to go out, and she did not
know when she should be able to walk as far as Pere Menoul’s cabin.

Happily the devoted old boatman was intelligent enough to anticipate her
wishes.

Hearing that the young lady at the chateau was very ill, he set about
devising some means of informing her of her friend’s safety. He went to
La Verberie several times on pretended errands, and finally succeeded in
seeing Valentine. One of the servants was present, so he could not speak
to her; but he made her understand by a significant look that Gaston was
out of danger.

This knowledge contributed more toward Valentine’s recovery than all the
medicines administered by the doctor, who, after visiting her daily for
six weeks, now pronounced his patient sufficiently strong to bear the
fatigues of a journey.

The countess had waited with the greatest impatience for this decision.
In order to prevent any delay, she had already sold at a discount half
of her incoming rents, supposing that the sum thus raised, twenty-five
thousand francs, would suffice for all contingent expenses.

For a fortnight she had been calling on all of her neighbors to bid them
farewell, saying that her daughter had entirely recovered her health,
and that she was going to take her to England to visit a rich old uncle,
who had repeatedly written for her.

Valentine looked forward to this journey with terror, and shuddered
when, on the evening that the doctor gave her permission to set out, her
mother came to her room, and said:

“We will start the day after to-morrow.”

Only one day left! And Valentine had been unable to let Louis de
Clameran know that his brother was still living.

In this extremity she was obliged to confide in Mihonne, and sent her
with a letter to Louis.

But the faithful servant had a useless walk.

The chateau of Clameran was deserted; all the servants had been
dismissed, and M. Louis, whom they now called the marquis, had gone
abroad.

At last they started. Mme. de la Verberie, feeling that she could trust
Mihonne, decided to take her along; but first made her sacredly promise
eternal secrecy.

It was in a little village near London that the countess, under the
assumed name of Mrs. Wilson, took up her abode with her daughter and
maid-servant.

She selected England, because she had lived there a long time, and was
well acquainted with the manners and habits of the people, and spoke
their language as well as she did her own.

She had also kept up her acquaintanceship with some of the English
nobility, and often dined and went to the theatre with her friends in
London. On these occasions she always took the humiliating precaution of
locking up Valentine until she should return.

It was in this sad, solitary house, in the month of May, that the son
of Valentine de la Verberie was born. He was taken to the parish
priest, and christened Valentin-Raoul Wilson. The countess had prepared
everything, and engaged an honest farmer’s wife to adopt the child,
bring him up as her own, and, when old enough, have him taught a trade.
For doing this the countess paid her five hundred pounds.

Little Raoul was given over to his adopted parent a few hours after his
birth.

The good woman thought him the child of an English lady, and there
seemed no probability that he would ever discover the secret of his
birth.

Restored to consciousness, Valentine asked for her child. She yearned
to clasp it to her bosom; she implored to be allowed to hold her babe in
her arms for only one minute.

But the cruel countess was pitiless.

“Your child!” she cried, “you must be dreaming; you have no child. You
have had brain fever, but no child.”

And as Valentine persisted in saying that she knew the child was alive,
and that she must see it, the countess was forced to change her tactics.

“Your child is alive, and shall want for nothing,” she said sharply;
“let that suffice; and be thankful that I have so well concealed your
disgrace. You must forget what has happened, as you would forget a
painful dream. The past must be ignored--wiped out forever. You know me
well enough to understand that I will be obeyed.”

The moment had come when Valentine should have asserted her maternal
rights, and resisted the countess’s tyranny.

She had the idea, but not the courage to do so.

If, on one side, she saw the dangers of an almost culpable
resignation--for she, too, was a mother!--on the other she felt crushed
by the consciousness of her guilt.

She sadly yielded; surrendered herself into the hands of a mother whose
conduct she refrained from questioning, to escape the painful necessity
of condemning it.

But she secretly pined, and inwardly rebelled against her sad
disappointment; and thus her recovery was delayed for several months.

Toward the end of July, the countess took her back to La Verberie.
This time the mischief-makers and gossips were skilfully deceived. The
countess went everywhere, and instituted secret inquiries, but heard no
suspicions of the object of her long trip to England. Everyone believed
in the visit to the rich uncle.

Only one man, Dr. Raget, knew the truth; and, although Mme. de la
Verberie hated him from the bottom of her heart, she did him the justice
to feel sure that she had nothing to fear from his indiscretion.

Her first visit was paid to him.

When she entered the room, she abruptly threw on the table the official
papers which she had procured especially for him.

“These will prove to you, monsieur, that the child is living, and well
cared for at a cost that I can ill afford.”

“These are perfectly right, madame,” he replied, after an attentive
examination of the papers, “and, if your conscience does not reproach
you, of course I have nothing to say.”

“My conscience reproaches me with nothing, monsieur.”

The old doctor shook his head, and gazing searchingly into her eyes,
said:

“Can you say that you have not been harsh, even to cruelty?”

She turned away her head, and, assuming her grand air, answered:

“I have acted as a woman of my rank should act; and I am surprised to
find in you an advocate and abettor of misconduct.”

“Ah, madame,” said the doctor, “it is your place to show kindness to the
poor girl; and if you feel none yourself, you have no right to complain
of it in others. What indulgence do you expect from strangers toward
your unhappy daughter, when you, her mother, are so pitiless?”

This plain-spoken truth offended the countess, and she rose to leave.

“Have you finished what you have to say, Dr. Raget?” she asked,
haughtily.

“Yes, madame; I have done. My only object was to spare you eternal
remorse. Good-day.”

The good doctor was mistaken in his idea of Mme. de la Verberie’s
character. She was utterly incapable of feeling remorse; but she
suffered cruelly when her selfish vanity was wounded, or her comfort
disturbed.

She resumed her luxurious mode of living, but, having disposed of a part
of her income, found it difficult to make both ends meet.

This furnished her with an inexhaustible text for complaint; and at
every meal she reproached Valentine so unmercifully, that the poor girl
shrank from coming to the table.

She seemed to forget her own command, that the past should be buried in
oblivion, and constantly recurred to it for food for her anger; a day
seldom passed, that she did not say to Valentine:

“Your conduct has ruined me.”

One day her daughter could not refrain from replying:

“I suppose you would have pardoned the fault, had it enriched us.”

But these revolts of Valentine were rare, although her life was a series
of tortures inflicted with inquisitorial cruelty.

Even the memory of Gaston had become a suffering.

Perhaps, discovering the uselessness of her sacrifice, of her courage,
and her devotion to what she had considered her duty, she regretted not
having followed him. What had become of him? Might he not have contrived
to send her a letter, a word to let her know that he was still alive?
Perhaps he was not dead. Perhaps he had forgotten her. He had sworn to
return a rich man before the lapse of three years. Would he ever return?

There was a risk in his returning under any circumstances. His
disappearance had not ended the terrible affair of Tarascon. He was
supposed to be dead; but as there was no positive proof of his death,
and his body could not be found, the law was compelled to yield to the
clamor of public opinion.

The case was brought before the assize court; and, in default of
appearance, Gaston de Clameran was sentenced to several years of close
confinement.

As to Louis de Clameran, no one knew positively what had become of
him. Some people said he was leading a life of reckless extravagance in
Paris.

Informed of these facts by her faithful Mihonne, Valentine became
more gloomy and hopeless than ever. Vainly did she question the dreary
future; no ray appeared upon the dark horizon of her life.

Her elasticity was gone; and she had finally reached that state of
passive resignation peculiar to people who are oppressed and cowed at
home.

In this miserable way, passed four years since the fatal evening when
Gaston left her.

Mme. de la Verberie had spent these years in constant discomfort. Seeing
that she could not live upon her income, and having too much pride to
sell her land, which was so badly managed that it only brought her in
two per cent, she mortgaged her estate in order to raise money only to
be spent as soon as borrowed.

In such matters, it is the first step that costs; and, after having once
commenced to live upon her capital, the countess made rapid strides in
extravagance, saying to herself, “After me, the deluge!” Very much as
her neighbor, the late Marquis of Clameran, had managed his affairs, she
was now conducting hers, having but one object in view--her own comfort
and pleasure.

She made frequent visits to the neighboring towns of Nimes and Avignon;
she sent to Paris for the most elegant toilets, and entertained a great
deal of company. All the luxury that she had hoped to obtain by the
acquisition of a rich son-in-law, she determined to give herself,
utterly regardless of the fact that she was reducing her child to
beggary. Great sorrows require consolation!

The summer that she returned from London, she did not hesitate to
indulge her fancy for a horse; it was rather old, to be sure, but, when
harnessed to a second-hand carriage bought on credit at Beaucaire, made
quite a good appearance.

She would quiet her conscience, which occasionally reproached her for
this constant extravagance, by saying, “I am so unhappy!”

The unhappiness was that this luxury cost her dear, very dear.

After having sold the rest of her rents, the countess first mortgaged
the estate of La Verberie, and then the chateau itself.

In less than four years she owed more than forty thousand francs, and
was unable to pay the interest of her debt.

She was racking her mind to discover some means of escape from her
difficulties, when chance came to her rescue.

For some time a young engineer, employed in surveys along the Rhone, had
made the village of Beaucaire the centre of his operations.

Being handsome, agreeable, and of polished manners, he had been warmly
welcomed by the neighboring society, and the countess frequently met
him at the houses of her friends where she went to play cards in the
evenings.

This young engineer was named Andre Fauvel.

The first time he met Valentine he was struck by her beauty, and after
once looking into her large, melancholy eyes, his admiration deepened
into love; a love so earnest and passionate, that he felt that he could
never be happy without her.

Before being introduced to her, his heart had surrendered itself to her
charms.

He was wealthy; a splendid career was open to him, he was free; and he
swore that Valentine should be his.

He confided all his matrimonial plans to an old friend of Mme. de la
Verberie, who was as noble as a Montmorency, and as poor as Job.

With the precision of a graduate of the polytechnic school, he had
enumerated all his qualifications for being a model son-in-law.

For a long time the old lady listened to him without interruption;
but, when he had finished, she did not hesitate to tell him that his
pretensions were presumptuous.

What! he, a man of no pedigree, a Fauvel, a common surveyor, to aspire
to the hand of a La Verberie!

After having enumerated all the superior advantages of that superior
order of beings, the nobility, she condescended to take a common-sense
view of the case, and said:

“However, you may succeed. The poor countess owes money in every
direction; not a day passes without the bailiffs calling upon her; so
that, you understand, if a rich suitor appeared, and agreed to her terms
for settlements--well, well, there is no knowing what might happen.”

Andre Fauvel was young and sentimental: the insinuations of the old lady
seemed to him preposterous.

On reflection, however, when he had studied the character of the
nobility in the neighborhood, who were rich in nothing but prejudices,
he clearly saw that pecuniary considerations alone would be strong
enough to decide the proud Countess de la Verberie to grant him her
daughter’s hand.

This certainly ended his hesitations, and he turned his whole attention
to devising a plan for presenting his claim.

He did not find this an easy thing to accomplish. To go in quest of a
wife with her purchase-money in his hand was repugnant to his feelings,
and contrary to his ideas of delicacy. But he had no one to urge his
suit for him on his own merits; so he was compelled to shut his eyes to
the distasteful features of his task, and treat his passion as a matter
of business.

The occasion so anxiously awaited, to explain his intentions, soon
presented itself.

One day he entered a hotel at Beaucaire, and, as he sat down to dinner,
he saw that Mme. de la Verberie was at the adjoining table. He blushed
deeply, and asked permission to sit at her table, which was granted with
a most encouraging smile.

Did the countess suspect the love of the young engineer? Had she been
warned by her friend?

At any rate, without giving Andre time to gradually approach the subject
weighing on his mind, she began to complain of the hard times, the
scarcity of money, and the grasping meanness of the trades-people.

She had come to Beaucaire, indeed, to borrow money, and found every bank
and cash-box closed against her; and her lawyer had advised her to sell
her land for what it would bring. This made her very angry.

Temper, joined to that secret instinct of the situation of affairs which
is the sixth sense of a woman, loosened her tongue, and made her more
communicative to this comparative stranger than she had ever been to
her bosom friends. She explained to him the horror of her situation,
her present needs, her anxiety for the future, and, above all, her great
distress at not being able to marry off her beloved daughter. If she
only had a dowry for her child!

Andre listened to these complaints with becoming commiseration, but in
reality he was delighted.

Without giving her time to finish her tale, he began to state what he
called his view of the matter.

He said that, although he sympathized deeply with the countess, he could
not account for her uneasiness about her daughter.

What? Could she be disturbed at having no dowry for her? Why, the rank
and beauty of Mlle. Valentine were a fortune in themselves, of which any
man might be proud.

He knew more than one man who would esteem himself only too happy if
Mlle. Valentine would accept his name, and confer upon him the sweet
duty of relieving her mother from all anxiety and care. Finally, he did
not think the situation of the countess’s affairs nearly so desperate as
she imagined. How much money would be necessary to pay off the mortgages
upon La Verberie? About forty thousand francs, perhaps? Indeed! That was
but a mere trifle.

Besides, this sum need not be a gift from the son-in-law; if she chose,
it might be a loan, because the estate would be his in the end, and in
time the land would be double its present value; it would be a pity to
sell now. A man, too, worthy of Valentine’s love could never let his
wife’s mother want for the comforts and luxuries due to a lady of her
age, rank, and misfortunes. He would be only too glad to offer her a
sufficient income, not only to provide comfort, but even luxury.

As Andre spoke, in a tone too earnest to be assumed, it seemed to the
countess that a celestial dew was dropping upon her pecuniary wounds.
Her countenance was radiant with joy, her fierce little eyes beamed with
the most encouraging tenderness, her thin lips were wreathed in the most
friendly smiles.

One thought disturbed the young engineer.

“Does she understand me seriously?” he thought.

She certainly did, as her subsequent remarks proved. He saw that the
would-be sentimental old lady had an eye to business.

“Alas!” she sighed, “La Verberie cannot be saved by forty thousand
francs; the principal and interest of the debt amount to sixty
thousand.”

“Oh, either forty or sixty thousand is nothing worth speaking of.”

“Four thousand francs is not enough to support a lady respectably,”
 she said after a pause. “Everything is so dear in this section of the
country! But with six thousand francs--yes, six thousand francs would
make me happy!”

The young man thought that her demands were becoming excessive, but with
the generosity of an ardent lover he said:

“The son-in-law of whom we are speaking cannot be very devoted to Mlle.
Valentine, if the paltry sum of two thousand francs were objected to for
an instant.”

“You promise too much!” muttered the countess.

“The imaginary son-in-law,” she finally added, “must be an honorable man
who will fulfil his promises. I have my daughter’s happiness too much
at heart to give her to a man who did not produce--what do you call
them?--securities, guarantees.”

“Decidedly,” thought Fauvel with mortification, “we are making a bargain
and sale.”

Then he said aloud:

“Of course, your son-in-law would bind himself in the marriage contract
to--”

“Never! monsieur, never! Put such an agreement in the marriage contract!
Think of the impropriety of the thing! What would the world say?”

“Permit me, madame, to suggest that your pension should be mentioned as
the interest of a sum acknowledged to have been received from you.”

“Well, that might do very well; that is very proper.”

The countess insisted upon taking Andre home in her carriage. During
the drive, no definite plan was agreed upon between them; but they
understood each other so well, that, when the countess set the young
engineer down at his own door, she invited him to dinner the next day,
and held out her skinny hand which Andre kissed with devotion, as he
thought of the rosy fingers of Valentine.

When Mme. de la Verberie returned home, the servants were dumb with
astonishment at her good-humor: they had not seen her in this happy
frame of mind for years.

And her day’s work was of a nature to elevate her spirits: she had been
unexpectedly raised from poverty to affluence. She, who boasted of
such proud sentiments, never stopped to think of the infamy of the
transaction in which she had been engaged: it seemed quite right in her
selfish eyes.

“A pension of six thousand francs!” she thought, “and a thousand crowns
from the estate, that makes nine thousand francs a year! My daughter
will live in Paris after she is married, and I can spend the winters
with my dear children without expense.”

At this price, she would have sold, not only one, but three daughters,
if she had possessed them.

But suddenly her blood ran cold at a sudden thought, which crossed her
mind.

“Would Valentine consent?”

Her anxiety to set her mind at rest sent her straightway to her
daughter’s room. She found Valentine reading by the light of a
flickering candle.

“My daughter,” she said abruptly, “an estimable young man has demanded
your hand in marriage, and I have promised it to him.”

On this startling announcement, Valentine started up and clasped her
hands.

“Impossible!” she murmured, “impossible!”

“Will you be good enough to explain why it is impossible?”

“Did you tell him, mother, who I am, what I am? Did you confess----”

“Your past fully? No, thank God, I am not fool enough for that, and I
hope you will have the sense to imitate my example, and keep silent on
the subject.”

Although Valentine’s spirit was completely crushed by her mother’s
tyranny, her sense of honor made her revolt against this demand.

“You certainly would not wish me to marry an honest man, mother, without
confessing to him everything connected with the past? I could never
practise a deception so base.”

The countess felt very much like flying into a passion; but she knew
that threats would be of no avail in this instance, where resistance
would be a duty of conscience with her daughter. Instead of commanding,
she entreated.

“Poor child,” she said, “my poor, dear Valentine. If you only knew the
dreadful state of our affairs, you would not talk in this heartless way.
Your folly commenced our ruin; now it is at its last stage. Do you know
that our creditors threaten to drive us away from La Verberie? Then what
will become of us, my poor child? Must I in my old age go begging from
door to door? We are on the verge of ruin, and this marriage is our only
hope of salvation.”

These tearful entreaties were followed by plausible arguments.

The fair-spoken countess made use of strange and subtle theories.
What she formerly regarded as a monstrous crime, she now spoke of as a
peccadillo.

She could understand, she said, her daughter’s scruples if there were
any danger of the past being brought to light; but she had taken such
precautions that there was no fear of that.

Would it make her love her husband any the less? No. Would he be made
any happier for hearing that she had loved before? No. Then why say
anything about the past?

Shocked, bewildered, Valentine asked herself if this was really her
mother? The haughty woman, who had always been such a worshipper of
honor and duty, to contradict every word she had uttered during her
life! Valentine could not understand the sudden change.

But she would have understood it, had she known to what base deeds a
mind blunted by selfishness and vanity can lend itself.

The countess’s subtle arguments and shameful sophistry neither moved
nor convinced her; but she had not the courage to resist the tearful
entreaties of her mother, who ended by falling on her knees, and with
clasped hands imploring her child to save her from worse than death.

Violently agitated, distracted by a thousand conflicting emotions,
daring neither to refuse nor to promise, fearing the consequences of a
decision thus forced from her, the unhappy girl begged her mother for a
few hours to reflect.

Mme. de la Verberie dared not refuse this request, and acquiesced.

“I will leave you, my daughter,” she said, “and I trust your own heart
will tell you how to decide between a useless confession and your
mother’s salvation.”

With these words she left the room indignant but hopeful.

And she had grounds for hope. Placed between two obligations equally
sacred, equally binding, but diametrically opposite, Valentine’s
troubled mind could no longer clearly discern the path of duty. Could
she reduce her mother to want and misery? Could she basely deceive the
confidence and love of an honorable man? However she decided, her future
life would be one of suffering and remorse.

Alas! why had she not a wise and kind adviser to point out the right
course to pursue, and assist her in struggling against evil influences?
Why had she not that gentle, discreet friend who had inspired her with
hope and courage in her first dark sorrow--Dr. Raget?

Formerly the memory of Gaston had been her guiding star: now this
far-off memory was nothing but a faint mist--a sort of vanishing dream.

In romance we meet with heroines of lifelong constancy: real life
produces no such miracles.

For a long time Valentine’s mind had been filled with the image of
Gaston. As the hero of her dreams she dwelt fondly on his memory; but
the shadows of time had gradually dimmed the brilliancy of her idol, and
now only preserved a cold relic, over which she sometimes wept.

When she arose the next morning, pale and weak from a sleepless, tearful
night, she had almost resolved to confess everything to her suitor.

But when evening came, and she went down to see Andre Fauvel, the
presence of her mother’s threatening, supplicating eye destroyed her
courage.

She said to herself, “I will tell him to-morrow.” Then she said, “I will
wait another day; one more day can make no difference.”

The countess saw all these struggles, but was not made uneasy by them.

She knew by experience that, when a painful duty is put off, it is never
performed.

There was some excuse for Valentine in the horror of her situation.
Perhaps, unknown to herself, she felt a faint hope arise within her. Any
marriage, even an unhappy one, offered the prospect of a change, of
a new life, a relief from the insupportable suffering she was now
enduring.

Sometimes, in her ignorance of human life, she imagined that time and
close intimacy would take it easier for her to confess her terrible
fault; that it would be the most natural thing in the world for Andre to
pardon her, and insist upon marrying her, since he loved her so deeply.

That he sincerely loved her, she knew full well. It was not the
impetuous passion of Gaston, with its excitements and terrors, but
a calm, steady affection, more lasting than the intoxicating love of
Gaston was ever likely to be. She felt a sort of blissful rest in its
legitimacy and constancy.

Thus Valentine gradually became accustomed to Andre’s soothing presence,
and was surprised into feeling very happy at the constant delicate
attentions and looks of affection that he lavished upon her. She did not
feel any love for him yet; but a separation would have distressed her
deeply.

During the courtship the countess’s conduct was a masterpiece.

She suddenly ceased to importune her daughter, and with tearful
resignation said she would not attempt to influence her decision, that
her happy settlement in life was the only anxiety that weighed upon her
mind.

But she went about the house sighing and groaning as if she were upon
the eve of starving to death. She also made arrangements to be tormented
by the bailiffs. Attachments and notices to quit poured in at La
Verberie, which she would show to Valentine and, with tears in her eyes,
say:

“God grant we may not be driven from the home of our ancestors before
your marriage, my darling!”

Knowing that her presence was sufficient to freeze any confession on her
daughter’s lips, she never left her alone with Andre.

“Once married,” she thought, “they can settle the matter to suit
themselves. I shall not then be disturbed by it.”

She was as impatient as Andre, and hastened the preparations for the
wedding. She gave Valentine no opportunity for reflection. She kept her
constantly busy, either in driving to town to purchase some article of
dress, or in paying visits.

At last the eve of the wedding-day found her anxious and oppressed with
fear lest something should prevent the consummation of her hopes and
labors. She was like a gambler who had ventured his last stake.

On this night, for the first time, Valentine found herself alone with
the man who was to become her husband.

She was sitting at twilight, in the parlor, miserable and trembling,
anxious to unburden her mind, and yet frightened at the very thought of
doing so, when Andre entered. Seeing that she was agitated, he pressed
her hand, and gently begged her to tell him the cause of her sorrow.

“Am I not your best friend,” he said, “and ought I not to be the
confidant of your troubles, if you have any? Why these tears, my
darling?”

Now was the time for her to confess, and throw herself upon his
generosity. But her trembling lips refused to open when she thought of
his pain and anguish, and the anger of her mother, which would be caused
by the few words she would utter. She felt that it was too late; and,
bursting into tears, she cried out, “I am afraid--What shall I do?”

Imagining that she was merely disturbed by the vague fears experienced
by most young girls when about to marry, he tried, with tender, loving
words, to console and reassure her, promising to shield her from every
care and sorrow, if she would only trust to his devoted love. But what
was his surprise to find that his affectionate words only increased her
distress; she buried her face in her hands, and wept as if her heart
would break.

While she was thus summoning her courage, and he was entreating her
confidence, Mme. de la Verberie came hurrying into the room for them to
sign the contract.

The opportunity was lost; Andre Fauvel was left in ignorance.

The next day, a lovely spring morning, Andre Fauvel and Valentine de la
Verberie were married at the village church.

Early in the morning, the chateau was filled with the bride’s friends,
who came, according to custom, to assist at her wedding toilet.

Valentine forced herself to appear calm, even smiling; but her face was
whiter than her veil; her heart was torn by remorse. She felt as though
the sad truth were written upon her brow; and this pure white dress was
a bitter irony, a galling humiliation.

She shuddered when her most intimate school-mate placed the wreath of
orange-blossoms upon her head. These emblems of purity seemed to burn
her like a band of red-hot iron. One of the wire stems of the flowers
scratched her forehead, and a drop of blood fell upon her snowy robe.

What an evil omen! Valentine was near fainting when she thought of the
past and the future connected by this bloody sign of woe.

But presages are deceitful, as it proved with Valentine; for she became
a happy woman and a loving wife.

Yes, at the end of her first year of married life, she confessed to
herself that her happiness would be complete if she could only forget
the terrible past.

Andre adored her. He had been wonderfully successful in his business
affairs; he wished to be immensely rich, not for himself, but for the
sake of his beloved wife, whom he would surround with every luxury. He
thought her the most beautiful woman in Paris, and determined that she
should be the most superbly dressed.

Eighteen months after her marriage, Madame Fauvel presented her husband
with a son. But neither this child, nor a second son born a year later,
could make her forget the first one of all, the poor, forsaken babe who
had been thrown upon strangers, mercenaries, who valued the money, but
not the child for whom it was paid.

She would look at her two sons, surrounded by every luxury which money
could give, and murmur to herself:

“Who knows if the abandoned one has bread to eat?”

If she only knew where he was: if she only dared inquire! But she was
afraid.

Sometimes she would be uneasy about Gaston’s jewels, constantly fearing
that their hiding-place would be discovered. Then she would think, “I
may as well be tranquil; misfortune has forgotten me.”

Poor, deluded woman! Misfortune is a visitor who sometimes delays his
visits, but always comes in the end.




XV

Louis de Clameran, the second son of the marquis, was one of those
self-controlled men who, beneath a cool, careless manner, conceal a
fiery temperament, and ungovernable passions.

All sorts of extravagant ideas had begun to ferment in his disordered
brain, long before the occurrence which decided the destiny of the
Clameran family.

Apparently occupied in the pursuit of pleasure, this precocious
hypocrite longed for a larger field in which to indulge his evil
inclinations, secretly cursing the stern necessity which chained him
down to this dreary country life, and the old chateau, which to him was
more gloomy than a prison, and as lifeless as the grave.

This existence, dragged out in the country and the small neighboring
towns, was too monotonous for his restless nature. The paternal
authority, though so gently expressed, exasperated his rebellious
temper. He thirsted for independence, riches, excitement, and all the
unknown pleasures that pall upon the senses simultaneously with their
attainment.

Louis did not love his father, and he hated his brother Gaston.

The old marquis, in his culpable thoughtlessness, had kindled this
burning envy in the heart of his second son.

A strict observer of traditional rights, he had always declared that the
eldest son of a noble house should inherit all the family possessions,
and that he intended to leave Gaston his entire fortune.

This flagrant injustice and favoritism inspired Louis with envious
hatred for his brother.

Gaston always said that he would never consent to profit by this
paternal partiality, but would share equally with his brother. Judging
others by himself, Louis placed no faith in this assertion, which he
called an ostentatious affectation of generosity.

Although this hatred was unsuspected by the marquis and Gaston, it was
betrayed by acts significant enough to attract the attention of the
servants, who often commented upon it.

They were so fully aware of Louis’s sentiments toward his brother that,
when he was prevented from escaping because of the stumbling horse, they
refused to believe it an accident; and, whenever Louis came near would
mutter, “Fratricide!”

A deplorable scene took place between Louis and St. Jean, who was
allowed, on account of his fifty years’ faithful service, to take
liberties which he sometimes abused by making rough speeches to his
superiors.

“It is a great pity,” said the old servant, “that a skilful rider like
yourself should have fallen at the very moment when your brother’s life
depended upon your horsemanship.”

At this broad insinuation, Louis turned pale, and threateningly cried
out:

“You insolent dog, what do you mean?”

“You know well enough what I mean, monsieur,” the old man said,
significantly.

“I do not know! Explain your impertinence: speak, I tell you!”

The man only answered by a meaning look, which so incensed Louis that
he rushed toward him with upraised whip, and would have beaten him
unmercifully, had not the other servants interfered, and dragged St.
Jean from the spot.

This altercation occurred while Gaston was in the madder-field trying to
escape his pursuers.

After a while the gendarmes and hussars returned, with slow tread and
sad faces, to say that Gaston de Clameran had plunged into the Rhone,
and was instantly drowned.

This melancholy news was received with groans and tears by everyone save
Louis, who remained calm and unmoved: not a single muscle of his face
quivered.

But his eyes sparkled with triumph. A secret voice cried within him,
“Now you are assured of the family fortune, and a marquis’s coronet.”

He was no longer the poverty-stricken younger son, but the sole heir of
the Clamerans.

The corporal of the gendarmes had said:

“I would not be the one to tell the poor old man that his son is
drowned.”

Louis felt none of the tender-hearted scruples of the brave old soldier.
He instantly went to his father’s sick-room, and said, in a firm voice:

“My brother had to choose between disgrace and death; he is dead.”

Like a sturdy oak stricken by lightning, the marquis tottered and fell
when these fatal words sounded in his ears. The doctor soon arrived, but
alas! only to say that science was of no avail.

Toward daybreak, Louis, without a tear, received his father’s last sigh.

Louis was now the master.

All the unjust precautions taken by the marquis to elude the law, and
insure beyond dispute the possession of his entire fortune to his eldest
son, turned against him.

By means of a fraudulent deed of trust drawn by his dishonest lawyer,
M. de Clameran had disposed everything so that, on the day of his death,
every farthing he owned would be Gaston’s.

Louis alone was benefited by this precaution. He came into possession
without even being called upon for the certificate of his brother’s
death.

He was now Marquis of Clameran; he was free, he was comparatively rich.
He who had never had twenty-five crowns in his pocket at once, now found
himself the possessor of two hundred thousand francs.

This sudden, unexpected fortune so completely turned his head that he
forgot his skilful dissimulation. His demeanor at the funeral of the
marquis was much censured. He followed the coffin, with his head bowed
and his face buried in a handkerchief; but this did not conceal the
buoyancy of his spirit, and the joy which sparkled in his eyes.

The day after the funeral, Louis sold everything that he could dispose
of, horses, carriages, and family plate.

The next day he discharged all the old servants, who had hoped to end
their days beneath the hospitable roof of Clameran. Several, with
tears in their eyes, took him aside, and entreated him to let them stay
without wages. He roughly ordered them to be gone, and never appear
before his eyes again.

He sent for his father’s lawyer, and gave him a power of attorney to
sell the estate, and received in return the sum of twenty thousand
francs as the first payment in advance.

At the close of the week, he locked up the chateau, with a vow never to
cross its sill again, and left the keys in the keeping of St. Jean, who
owned a little house near Clameran, and would continue to live in the
neighborhood.

Poor St. Jean! little did he think that, in preventing Valentine from
seeing Louis, he had ruined the prospects of his beloved Gaston.

On receiving the keys he asked one question:

“Shall we not search for your brother’s body, M. the marquis?” he
inquired in broken-hearted tones. “And, if it is found, what must be
done with it?”

“I shall leave instructions with my notary,” replied Louis. And he
hurried away from Clameran as if the ground burnt his feet. He went
to Tarascon, where he had already forwarded his baggage, and took the
stage-coach which travelled between Marseilles and Paris, the railroad
not yet being finished.

At last he was off. The lumbering old stage rattled along, drawn by six
horses; and the deep gullies made by the wheels seemed so many abysses
between the past and the future.

Lying back in a corner of the stage, Louis de Clameran enjoyed in
anticipation the fields of pleasure spread before his dazzled eyes. At
the end of the journey, Paris rose up before him, radiant, brilliantly
dazzling as the sun.

Yes, he was going to Paris, the promised land, the city of wonders,
where every Aladdin finds a lamp. There all ambitions are crowned,
all dreams realized, all passions, all desires, good and evil, can be
satisfied.

There the fast-fleeting days are followed by nights of ever-varied
pleasure and excitement. In twenty theatres tragedy weeps, or comedy
laughs; whilst at the opera the most beautiful women in the world,
sparkling with diamonds, are ready to die with ecstasy at the sound of
divine music; everywhere noise, excitement, luxury, and pleasure.

What a dream! The heart of Louis de Clameran was swollen with desire,
and he felt that he should go mad if the horses crawled with such
torturing slowness: he would like to spring from the old stage, and fly
to his haven of delight.

He never once thought of the past with a pang of regret. What mattered
it to him how his father and brother had died? All his energies were
devoted to penetrating the mysterious future that now awaited him.

Was not every chance in his favor? He was young, rich, handsome, and
a marquis. He had a constitution of iron; he carried twenty thousand
francs in his pocket, and would soon have ten times as many more.

He, who had always been poor, regarded this sum as an exhaustless
treasure.

And at nightfall, when he jumped from the stage upon the brilliantly
lighted street of Paris, he seemed to be taking possession of the grand
city, and felt as though he could buy everything in it.

His illusions were those natural to all young men who suddenly come into
possession of a patrimony after years of privation.

It is this ignorance of the real value of money that squanders fortunes,
and fritters away accumulated patrimonies so laboriously earned and
saved in the frugal provinces.

Imbued with his own importance, accustomed to the deference of the
country people, the young marquis came to Paris with the expectation
of being a lion, supposing that his name and fortune were sufficient to
place him upon any pinnacle he might desire.

He was mortified to discover his error. To his great surprise he
discovered that he possessed nothing which constituted a position in
this immense city. He found that in the midst of this busy, indifferent
crowd, he was lost, as unnoticed as a drop of water in a torrent.

But this unflattering reality could not discourage a man who was
determined to gratify his passion at all costs. His ancestral name
gained him but one privilege, disastrous for his future: it opened to
him the doors of the Faubourg St. Germain.

There he became intimate with men of his own age and rank, whose incomes
were larger than his principal.

Nearly all of them confessed that they only kept up their extravagant
style of living by dint of skilful economy behind the scenes, and by
regulating their vices and follies as judiciously as a hosier would
manage his Sunday holidays.

This information astonished Louis, but did not open his eyes. He
endeavored to imitate the dashing style of these economically wasteful
young men, without pretending to conform to their prudential rules. He
learned how to spend, but not how to settle his accounts as they did.

He was Marquis of Clameran, and, having given himself a reputation of
great wealth, he was welcomed by the _elite_ of society; if he made no
friends, he had at least many acquaintances. Among the set into which he
was received immediately upon his arrival, he found ten satellites who
took pleasure in initiating him into the secrets of fashionable life,
and correcting any little provincialisms betrayed in his manners and
conversation.

He profited well and quickly by their lessons. At the end of three
months he was fairly launched; his reputation as a skilful gambler and
one of the fastest men in Paris was fully established.

He had rented handsome apartments, with a coach-house and stable for
three horses.

Although he only furnished this bachelor’s establishment with what was
necessary and comfortable, he found that comforts were very costly in
this instance.

So that the day he took possession of his apartments, and looked
over his bills, he made the startling discovery that this short
apprenticeship of Paris had cost him fifty-thousand francs, one-fourth
of his fortune.

Still he clung to his brilliant friends, although in a state of
inferiority which was mortifying to his vanity, like a poor squire
straining every nerve to make his nag keep up with blooded horses in a
race.

Fifty thousand francs! For a moment Louis had a faint idea of retreating
from the scene of temptation. But what a fall! Besides, his vices
bloomed and flourished in this charming centre. He had heretofore
considered himself fast; but the past was a state of unsophisticated
verdancy, compared with the thousand attractive sins in which he now
indulged.

Then the sight of suddenly acquired fortunes, and the many examples of
the successful results of hazardous ventures, inflamed his mind, and
persuaded him to try his fortune in the game of speculation.

He thought that in this great, rich city, he certainly could succeed in
seizing a share of the loaves and fishes.

But how? He had no idea, and he did not seek to find one. He imagined
that his good fortune would some day come, and that all he had to do was
to wait for it.

This is one of the errors which it is time to destroy.

Fortune is not to be wasted upon idle fools.

In this furious race of self-interest, it requires great skill to
bestride the capricious mare called Opportunity, and make her lead to
the end in view. Every winner must possess a strong will and a dexterous
hand. But Louis did not devote much thought to the matter. Like the
foolish man who wished to draw the prize without contributing to the
raffle, he thought:

“Bast! opportunity, chance, a rich marriage will put me all right
again!”

The rich bride failed to appear, and his last louis had gone the way of
its predecessors.

To a pressing demand for money, his notary replied by a refusal.

“Your lands are all gone,” he wrote; “you now possess nothing but the
chateau. It is very valuable, but it is difficult, if not impossible,
to find a purchaser of so large an amount of real estate, in its
present condition. I will use every effort to make a good sale, and
if successful, will inform you of the fact immediately.” Louis was
thunderstruck at this final catastrophe, as much surprised as if he
could have expected any other result. But what could he do?

Ruined, with nothing to look forward to, the best course was to imitate
the large number of poor fools who each year rise up, shine a moment,
then suddenly disappear.

But Louis could not renounce this life of ease and pleasure which he had
been leading for the last three years. After leaving his fortune on the
battle-ground, he was willing to leave the shreds of his honor.

He first lived on the reputation of his dissipated fortune; on the
credit remaining to a man who has spent much in a short space of time.

This resource was soon exhausted.

The day came when his creditors seized all they could lay their hands
upon, the last remains of his opulence, his carriages, horses, and
costly furniture.

He took refuge in a quiet hotel, but he could not keep away from the
wealthy set whom he considered his friends.

He lived upon them as he had lived upon the tradesmen who furnished his
supplies. Borrowing from one louis up to twenty-five, from anybody who
would lend to him, he never pretended to pay them. Constantly betting,
no one ever saw him pay a wager. He piloted all the raw young men who
fell into his hands, and utilized, in rendering shameful services, an
experience which had cost him two hundred thousand francs; he was half
courtier, half adventurer.

He was not banished, but was made to cruelly expiate the favor of being
tolerated. No one had the least regard for his feelings, or hesitated to
tell him to his face what was thought of his unprincipled conduct.

Thus, when alone in his little den, he would give way to fits of violent
rage. He had not yet reached a state of callousness to be able to endure
these humiliations without the keenest torture to his false pride and
vanity.

Envy and covetousness had long since stifled every sentiment of honor
and self-respect in his base heart. For a few years of opulence he was
ready to commit any crime.

And, though he did not commit a crime, he came very near it, and was
the principal in a disgraceful affair of swindling and extortion, which
raised such an outcry against him that he was obliged to leave Paris.

Count de Commarin, an old friend of his father, hushed up the matter,
and furnished him with money to take him to England.

And how did he manage to live in London?

The detectives of the most corrupt capital in existence were the only
people who knew his means of support.

Descending to the last stages of vice, the Marquis of Clameran finally
found his level in a society composed of shameless women and gamblers.

Compelled to quit London, he travelled over Europe, with no other
capital than his knavish audacity, deep depravity, and his skill at
cards.

Finally, in 1865, he had a run of good luck at Homburg, and returned to
Paris, where he imagined himself entirely forgotten.

Eighteen years had passed since he left Paris.

The first step which he took on his return, before even settling himself
in Paris, was to make a visit to his old home.

Not that he had any relative or friend in that part of the country, from
whom he could expect any assistance; but he remembered the old manor,
which his notary had been unable to sell.

He thought that perhaps by this time a purchaser had appeared, and he
determined to go himself and ascertain how much he should receive for
this old chateau, which had cost one hundred thousand francs in the
building.

On a beautiful October evening he reached Tarascon, and there learned
that he was still the owner of the chateau of Clameran. The next
morning, he set out on foot to visit the paternal home, which he had not
seen for twenty-five years.

Everything was so changed that he scarcely recognized this country,
where he had been born, and passed his youth.

Yet the impression was so strong, that this man, tried by such varied,
strange adventures, for a moment felt like retracing his steps.

He only continued his road because a secret, hopeful voice cried in him,
“Onward, onward!”--as if, at the end of the journey, was to be found a
new life and the long-wished-for good fortune.

As Louis advanced, the changes appeared less striking; he began to be
familiar with the ground.

Soon, through the trees, he distinguished the village steeple, then the
village itself, built upon the gentle rising of a hill, crowned by a
wood of olive-trees.

He recognized the first houses he saw: the farrier’s shed covered with
ivy, the old parsonage, and farther on the village tavern, where he and
Gaston used to play billiards.

In spite of what he called his scorn of vulgar prejudices, he felt a
thrill of strange emotion as he looked on these once familiar objects.

He could not overcome a feeling of sadness as scenes of the past rose up
before him.

How many events had occurred since he last walked along this path, and
received a friendly bow and smile from every villager.

Then life appeared to him like a fairy scene, in which his every wish
was gratified. And now, he had returned, dishonored, worn out, disgusted
with the realities of life, still tasting the bitter dregs of the cup
of shame, stigmatized, poverty-stricken, and friendless, with nothing to
lose, and nothing to look forward to.

The few villagers whom he met turned and stood gazing after this
dust-covered stranger, and wondered who he could be.

Upon reaching St. Jean’s house, he found the door open; he walked into
the immense empty kitchen.

He rapped on the table, and was answered by a voice calling out:

“Who is there?”

The next moment a man of about forty years appeared in the doorway, and
seemed much surprised at finding a stranger standing in his kitchen.

“What will you have, monsieur?” he inquired.

“Does not St. Jean, the old valet of the Marquis of Clameran, live
here?”

“My father died five years ago, monsieur,” replied the man in a sad
tone.

This news affected Louis painfully, as if he had expected this old
man to restore him some of his lost youth; the last link was gone. He
sighed, and, after a silence, said:

“I am the Marquis of Clameran.”

The farmer, at these words, uttered an exclamation of joy. He seized
Louis’s hand, and, pressing it with respectful attention, cried:

“You are the marquis! Alas!” he continued, “why is not my poor father
alive to see you? he would be so happy! His last words were about his
dear masters, and many a time did he sigh and mourn at not receiving any
news of you. He is beneath the sod now, resting after a well-spent life;
but I, Joseph, his son, am here to take his place, and devote my life to
your service. What an honor it is to have you in my house! Ah, my wife
will be happy to see you; she has all her life heard of the Clamerans.”

Here he ran into the garden, and called: “Toinette! I say, Toinette!
Come here quickly!”

This cordial welcome delighted Louis. So many years had gone by since he
had been greeted with an expression of kindness, or felt the pressure of
a friendly hand.

In a few moments a handsome, dark-eyed young woman entered the room, and
stood blushing with confusion at sight of the stranger.

“This is my wife, monsieur,” said Joseph, leading her toward Louis, “but
I have not given her time to put on her finery. This is M. the marquis,
Antoinette.”

The farmer’s wife bowed, and, having nothing to say, gracefully uplifted
her brow upon which the marquis pressed a kiss.

“You will see the children in a few minutes, M. the marquis,” said
Joseph; “I have sent to the school for them.”

The worthy couple overwhelmed the marquis with attentions.

After so long a walk he must be hungry, they said; he must take a glass
of wine now, and breakfast would soon be ready; they would be so proud
and happy if M. the marquis would partake of a country breakfast!

Louis willingly accepted their invitation; and Joseph went to the cellar
after the wine, while Toinette ran to catch her fattest pullet.

In a short time, Louis sat down to a table laden with the best of
everything on the farm, waited upon by Joseph and his wife, who watched
him with respectful interest and awe.

The children came running in from school, smeared with the juice of
berries. After Louis had embraced them they stood off in a corner, and
gazed at him with eyes wide open, as if he were a rare curiosity.

The important news had spread, and a number of villagers and countrymen
appeared at the open door, to speak to the Marquis of Clameran.

“I am such a one, M. the marquis; don’t you remember me?” “Ah! I should
have recognized you anywhere.” “The late marquis was very good to me.”
 Another would say, “Don’t you remember the time when you lent me your
gun to go hunting?”

Louis welcomed with secret delight all these protestations and proofs of
devotion which had not chilled with time.

The kindly voices of these honest people recalled many pleasant moments
of the past, and made him feel once more the fresh sensations of his
youth.

Here, at least, no echoes of his stormy life had been heard; no
suspicions of his shameful career were entertained by these humble
villagers on the borders of the Rhone.

He, the adventurer, the bully, the base accomplice of London swindlers,
delighted in these marks of respect and veneration, bestowed upon him as
the representative of the house of Clameran; it seemed to make him
once more feel a little self-respect, as if the future were not utterly
hopeless.

Ah, had he possessed only a quarter of his squandered inheritance, how
happy he would be to peacefully end his days in this his native village!

But this rest after so many vain excitements, this haven after so many
storms and shipwrecks, was denied him. He was penniless; how could he
live here when he had nothing to live upon?

This thought of his pressing want gave him courage to ask Joseph for the
key of the chateau, that he might go and examine its condition.

“You won’t need the key, except the one to the front door, M. the
marquis,” replied Joseph.

It was but too true. Time had done its work, and the lordly manor
of Clameran was nothing but a ruin. The rain and sun had rotted the
shutters so that they were crumbling and dilapidated.

Here and there were traces of the friendly hand of St. Jean, who had
tried to retard the total ruin of the old chateau; but of what use were
his efforts?

Within, the desolation was still greater. All of the furniture which
Louis had not dared to sell stood in the position he left it, but in
what a state! All of the tapestry hangings and coverings were moth-eaten
and in tatters; nothing seemed left but the dust-covered woodwork of the
chairs and sofas.

Louis was almost afraid to enter these grand, gloomy rooms, where every
footfall echoed until the air seemed to be filled with sounds strange
and ominous.

He almost expected to see the angry old marquis start from some dark
corner, and heap curses on his head for having dishonored the name.

He turned pale with terror, when he suddenly recalled the scene of his
fatal stumble and poor Gaston’s death. The room was surely inhabited by
the spirits of these two murdered men. His nerves could not bear it, and
he hurried out into the open air and sunshine.

After a while, he recovered sufficiently to remember the object of his
visit.

“Poor St. Jean was foolish to let the furniture in the chateau drop to
pieces. Why did he not use it?”

“My father would not have dared to touch anything without receiving an
order, M. the marquis.”

“He was very unwise to wait for an order, when anything was going
to destruction without benefiting anyone. As the chateau is fast
approaching the condition of the furniture, and my fortune does not
permit me to repair it, I will sell it before the walls crumble away.”

Joseph could scarcely believe his ears. He regarded the selling of the
chateau of Clameran as a sacrilege; but he was not bold of speech, like
his father, so he dared not express an opinion.

“Would there be difficulty in selling this ruin?” continued Louis.

“That depends upon the price you ask, M. the marquis; I know a man who
would purchase the property if he could get it cheap.”

“Who is he?”

“M. Fougeroux, who lives on the other side of the river. He came from
Beaucaire, and twelve years ago married a servant-maid of the late
Countess de la Verberie. Perhaps M. the marquis remembers her--a plump,
bright-eyed brunette, named Mihonne.”

Louis did not remember Mihonne.

“When can we see this Fougeroux?” he inquired.

“To-day; I will engage a boat to take us over.”

“Well, let us go now. I have no time to lose.”

An entire generation has passed away since Louis had last crossed the
Rhone in old Pilorel’s boat.

The faithful ferryman had been buried many years, and his duties were
now performed by his son, who, possessing great respect for traditional
opinions, was delighted at the honor of rowing the Marquis of Clameran
in his boat, and soon had it ready for Louis and Joseph to take their
seats.

As soon as they were fairly started, Joseph began to warn the marquis
against the wily Fougeroux.

“He is a cunning fox,” said the farmer; “I have had a bad opinion of him
ever since his marriage, which was a shameful affair altogether. Mihonne
was over fifty years of age, and he was only twenty-four, when he
married her; so you may know it was money, and not a wife, that he
wanted. She, poor fool, believed that the young scamp really loved her,
and gave herself and her money up to him. Women will be trusting fools
to the end of time! And Fougeroux is not the man to let money lie idle.
He speculated with Mihonne’s gold, and is now very rich. But she, poor
thing, does not profit by his wealth; one can easily understand his not
feeling any love for her, when she looks like his grandmother; but he
deprives her of the necessaries of life, and beats her cruelly.”

“He would like to plant her six feet under ground,” said the ferryman.

“Well, it won’t be long before he has the satisfaction of burying her,”
 said Joseph; “the poor old woman has been in almost a dying condition
ever since Fougeroux brought a worthless jade to take charge of the
house, and makes his wife wait upon her like a servant.”

When they reached the opposite shore, Joseph asked young Pilorel to
await their return.

Joseph knocked at the gate of the well-cultivated farm, and inquired for
the master; the farm-boy said that “M. Fougeroux” was out in the field,
but he would go and tell him.

He soon appeared. He was an ill-looking little man, with a red beard and
small, restless eyes.

Although M. Fougeroux professed to despise the nobility and the clergy,
the hope of driving a good bargain made him obsequious to Louis. He
insisted upon ushering his visitor into “the parlor,” with may bows and
repetitions of “M. the marquis.”

Upon entering the room, he roughly ordered an old woman, who was
crouching over some dying embers, to make haste and bring some wine for
M. the marquis of Clameran.

At this name, the old woman started as if she had received an electric
shock. She opened her mouth to say something, but a look from her tyrant
froze the words upon her lips. With a frightened air she hobbled out to
obey his orders, and in a few minutes returned with a bottle of wine and
three glasses.

Then she resumed her seat by the fire, and kept her eyes fastened upon
the marquis.

Could this really be the merry, pretty Mihonne, who had been the
confidant of the little fairy of Verberie?

Valentine herself would never have recognized this poor, shrivelled,
emaciated old woman.

Only those who are familiar with country life know what hard work and
worry can do to make a woman old.

The bargain, meanwhile, was being discussed between Joseph and
Fougeroux, who offered a ridiculously small sum for the chateau, saying
that he would only buy it to tear down, and sell the materials. Joseph
enumerated the beams, joists, ashlars, and the iron-work, and volubly
praised the old domain.

As for Mihonne, the presence of the marquis had a wonderful effect upon
her.

If the faithful servant had hitherto never breathed the secret confided
to her probity, it was none the less heavy for her to bear.

After marrying, and being so harshly treated that she daily prayed for
death to come to her relief, she began to blame everybody but herself
for her misfortunes.

Weakly superstitious, she traced back the origin of her sorrows to the
day when she took the oath on the holy gospel during mass.

Her constant prayers that God would send her a child to soothe her
wounded heart, being unanswered, she was convinced that she was cursed
with barrenness for having assisted in the abandonment of an innocent,
helpless babe.

She often thought, that by revealing everything, she could appease the
wrath of Heaven, and once more enjoy a happy home. Nothing but her
love for Valentine gave her strength to resist a constant temptation to
confess everything.

But to-day the sight of Louis decided her to relieve her mind. She
thought there could be no danger in confiding in Gaston’s brother. Alas
for woman’s tongue!

The sale was finally concluded. It was agreed that Fougeroux should give
five thousand two hundred and eighty francs in cash for the chateau, and
land attached; and Joseph was to have the old furniture.

The marquis and the new owner of the chateau shook hands, and noisily
called out the essential word:

“Agreed!”

Fougeroux went himself to get the “bargain bottle” of old wine.

The occasion was favorable to Mihonne; she walked quickly over to where
the marquis stood, and said in a nervous whisper:

“M. the marquis, I must speak with you apart.”

“What can you want to tell me, my good woman?”

“It is a secret of life and death. This evening, at dusk, meet me in the
walnut wood, and I will tell you everything.”

Hearing her husband’s approaching step, she darted back to her corner by
the fire.

Fougeroux filled the glasses, and drank to the health of Clameran.

As they returned to the boat, Louis tried to think what could be the
object of this singular rendezvous.

“Joseph, what the deuce can that old witch want with me?” he said
musingly.

“Who can tell? She used to be in the service of a lady who was very
intimate with M. Gaston; so my father used to say. If I were in your
place I would go and see what she wanted, monsieur. You can dine with
me, and, after dinner, Pilorel will row you over.”

Curiosity decided Louis to go, about seven o’clock, to the walnut wood,
where he found Mihonne impatiently awaiting him.

“Ah, here you are, at last, M. the marquis,” she said, in a tone of
relief. “I was afraid you would disappoint me.”

“Yes, here I am, my good woman, to listen to what you have to say.”

“I have many things to say. But first tell me some news of your
brother.”

Louis regretted having come, supposing from this request that the old
woman was childish, and might bother him for hours with her senseless
gabble.

“You know well enough that my poor brother was drowned in the Rhone.”

“Good heavens!” cried Mihonne, “are you ignorant, then, of his escape?
Yes, he did what has never been done before; he swam across the swollen
Rhone. The next day Mlle. Valentine went to Clameran to tell the news;
but St. Jean prevented her from seeing you. Afterward I carried a letter
from her, but you had left the country.”

Louis could not believe this strange revelation.

“Are you not mixing up dreams with real events, my good woman?” he said
banteringly.

“No,” she replied, mournfully shaking her head. “If Pere Menoul were
alive, he would tell you how he took charge of your brother until he
embarked for Marseilles. But that is nothing compared to the rest. M.
Gaston has a son.”

“My brother had a son! You certainly have lost your mind, my poor
woman.”

“Alas, no. Unfortunately for my happiness in this world and in the
world to come, I am only telling the truth; he had a child, and Mlle.
Valentine was its mother. I took the poor babe, and carried it to a
woman whom I paid to take charge of it.”

Then Mihonne described the anger of the countess, the journey to London,
and the abandonment of little Raoul.

With the accurate memory natural to people unable to read and write,
she related the most minute particulars--the names of the village, the
nurse, the child’s Christian name, and the exact date of everything
which had occurred.

Then she told of Valentine’s wretched suffering, of the impending ruin
of the countess, and finally how everything was happily settled by the
poor girl’s marriage with an immensely rich man, who was now one of the
richest bankers in Paris, and was named Fauvel.

A harsh voice calling, “Mihonne! Mihonne!” here interrupted the old
woman.

“Heavens!” she cried in a frightened tone, “that is my husband, looking
for me.”

And, as fast as her trembling limbs could carry her, she hurried to the
farm-house.

For several minutes after her departure, Louis stood rooted to the spot.

Her recital had filled his wicked mind with an idea so infamous, so
detestable, that even his vile nature shrank for a moment from its
enormity.

He knew Fauvel by reputation, and was calculating the advantages he
might gain by the strange information of which he was now possessed by
means of the old Mihonne. It was a secret, which, if skilfully managed,
would bring him in a handsome income.

The few faint scruples he felt were silenced by the thought of an old
age spent in poverty. After the price of the chateau was spent, to what
could he look forward? Beggary.

“But first of all,” he thought, “I must ascertain the truth of the old
woman’s story; then I will decide upon a plan.”

This was why, the next day, after receiving the five thousand two
hundred and eighty francs from Fougeroux, Louis de Clameran set out for
London.




XVI

During the twenty years of her married life, Valentine had experienced
but one real sorrow; and this was one which, in the course of nature,
must happen sooner or later.

In 1859 her mother caught a violent cold during one of her frequent
journeys to Paris, and, in spite of every attention which money could
procure, she became worse, and died.

The countess preserved her faculties to the last, and with her dying
breath said to her daughter:

“Ah, well! was I not wise in prevailing upon you to bury the past? Your
silence has made my old age peaceful and happy, and I now thank you for
having done your duty to yourself and to me. You will be rewarded on
earth and in heaven, my dear daughter.”

Mme. Fauvel constantly said that, since the loss of her mother, she had
never had cause to shed a tear.

And what more could she wish for? As years rolled on, Andre’s love
remained steadfast; he was as devoted a husband as the most exacting
woman could wish. To his great love was added that sweet intimacy which
results from long conformity of ideas and unbounded confidence.

Everything prospered with this happy couple. Andre was twice as wealthy
as he had ever hoped to be even in his wildest visions; every wish of
Valentine was anticipated by Andre; their two sons, Lucien and Abel,
were handsome, intelligent young men, whose honorable characters
and graceful bearing reflected credit upon their parents, who had so
carefully watched over their education.

Nothing seemed wanting to insure Valentine’s felicity. When her husband
and sons were at their business, her solitude was cheered by the
intelligent, affectionate companionship of a young girl whom she loved
as her own daughter, and who in return filled the place of a devoted
child.

Madeleine was M. Fauvel’s niece, and when an infant had lost both
parents, who were poor but very worthy people. Valentine begged to adopt
the babe, thinking she could thus, in a measure, atone for the desertion
of the poor little creature whom she had abandoned to strangers.

She hoped that this good work would bring down the blessings of God upon
her.

The day of the little orphan’s arrival, M. Fauvel invested for her ten
thousand francs, which he presented to Madeleine as her dowry.

The banker amused himself by increasing this ten thousand francs in the
most marvellous ways. He, who never ventured upon a rash speculation
with his own money, always invested it in the most hazardous schemes,
and was always so successful, that at the end of fifteen years the ten
thousand francs had become half a million.

People were right when they said that the Fauvel family were to be
envied.

Time had dulled the remorse and anxiety of Valentine. In the
genial atmosphere of a happy home, she had found rest, and almost
forgetfulness. She had suffered so much at being compelled to deceive
Andre that she hoped she was now at quits with fate.

She began to look forward to the future, and her youth seemed buried
in an impenetrable mist, and was, as it were, the memory of a painful
dream.

Yes, she believed herself saved, and her very feeling of security made
the impending danger more fearful in its shock.

One rainy November day, her husband had gone to Provence on business.
She was sitting, gazing into the bright fire, and thankfully meditating
upon her present happiness, when the servant brought her a letter, which
had been left by a stranger, who refused to give his name.

Without the faintest presentiment of evil, she carelessly broke the
seal, and in an instant was almost petrified by the words which met her
terrified eye:


“MADAME--Would it be relying too much upon the memories of the past to
hope for half an hour of your time?

“To-morrow, between two and three, I will do myself the honor of calling
upon you.

“THE MARQUIS OF CLAMERAN.”


Fortunately, Mme. Fauvel was alone.

Trembling like a leaf, she read the letter over and over again, as if
to convince herself that she was not the victim of a horrible
hallucination.

Half a dozen times, with a sort of terror, she whispered that name once
so dear--Clameran! spelling it aloud as if it were a strange name which
she could not pronounce. And the eight letters forming the name seemed
to shine like the lightning which precedes a clap of thunder.

Ah! she had hoped and believed that the fatal past was atoned for,
and buried in oblivion; and now it stood before her, pitiless and
threatening.

Poor woman! As if all human will could prevent what was fated to be!

It was in this hour of security, when she imagined herself pardoned,
that the storm was to burst upon the fragile edifice of her happiness,
and destroy her every hope.

A long time passed before she could collect her scattered thoughts
sufficiently to decide upon a course of conduct.

Then she began to think she was foolish to be so frightened. This
letter was written by Gaston, of course; therefore she need feel no
apprehension. Gaston had returned to France, and wished to see her. She
could understand this desire, and she knew too well this man, upon whom
she had lavished her young affection, to attribute any bad motives to
his visit.

He would come; and finding her the wife of another, the mother of grown
sons, they would exchange thoughts of the past, perhaps a few regrets;
she would restore the jewels which she had faithfully kept for him; he
would assure her of his lifelong friendship, and--that would be all.

But one distressing doubt beset her agitated mind. Should she conceal
from Gaston the birth of his son?

To confess was to expose herself to many dangers. It was placing herself
at the mercy of a man--a loyal, honorable man to be sure--confiding
to him not only her own peace, honor, and happiness, but the honor and
happiness of her family, of her noble husband and loving sons.

Still silence would be a crime. She had abandoned her child, denied him
the cares and affection of a mother; and now should she add to her sin
by depriving him of the name and fortune of his father?

She was still undecided when the servant announced dinner.

But she had not the courage to meet the glance of her sons. She sent
word that she was not well, and would not be down to dinner. For the
first time in her life she rejoiced at her husband’s absence.

Madeleine came hurrying into her aunt’s room to see what was the matter;
but Valentine dismissed her, saying she would try to sleep off her
indisposition.

She wished to be alone in her trouble, and see if she could decide upon
some plan for warding off this impending ruin.

The dreaded morrow came.

She counted the hours until two o’clock. After that, she counted the
minutes.

At half-past two the servant announced:

“M. the Marquis of Clameran.”

Mme. Fauvel had promised herself to be calm, even cold. During a long,
sleepless night, she had mentally arranged beforehand every detail of
this painful meeting. She had even decided upon what she should say.
She would reply this, and ask that; her words were all selected, and her
speech ready.

But, at the dreaded moment, her strength gave way; she turned as cold as
marble, and could not rise from her seat; she was speechless, and, with
a frightened look, silently gazed upon the man who respectfully bowed,
and stood in the middle of the room.

Her visitor was about fifty years of age, with iron-gray hair and
mustache, and a cold, severe cast of countenance; his expression was one
of haughty severity as he stood there in his full suit of black.

The agitated woman tried to discover in his face some traces of the
man whom she had so madly loved, who had pressed her to his heart, and
besought her to remain faithful until he should return from a foreign
land, and lay his fortune at her feet--the father of her son.

She was surprised to discover no resemblance to the youth whose memory
had haunted her life; no, never would she have recognized this stranger
as Gaston.

As he continued to stand motionless before her, she faintly murmured:

“Gaston!”

He sadly shook his head, and replied:

“I am not Gaston, madame. My brother succumbed to the misery and
suffering of exile: I am Louis de Clameran.”

What! it was not Gaston, then, who had written to her; it was not Gaston
who stood before her!

She trembled with terror; her head whirled, and her eyes grew dim.

It was not he! And she had committed herself, betrayed her secret by
calling him “Gaston.”

What could this man want?--this brother in whom Gaston had never
confided? What did he know of the past?

A thousand probabilities, each one more terrible than the other, flashed
across her brain.

Yet she succeeded in overcoming her weakness so that Louis scarcely
perceived it.

The fearful strangeness of her situation, the very imminence of peril,
inspired her with coolness and self-possession.

Haughtily pointing to a chair, she said to Louis with affected
indifference:

“Will you be kind enough, monsieur, to explain the object of this
unexpected visit?”

The marquis, seeming not to notice this sudden change of manner, took a
seat without removing his eyes from Mme. Fauvel’s face.

“First of all, madame,” he began, “I must ask if we can be overheard by
anyone?”

“Why this question? You can have nothing to say to me that my husband
and children should not hear.”

Louis shrugged his shoulders, and said:

“Be good enough to answer me, madame; not for my sake, but for your
own.”

“Speak, then, monsieur; you will not be heard.”

In spite of this assurance, the marquis drew his chair close to the sofa
where Mme. Fauvel sat, so as to speak in a very low tone, as if almost
afraid to hear his own voice.

“As I told you, madame, Gaston is dead; and it was I who closed his
eyes, and received his last wishes. Do you understand?”

The poor woman understood only too well, but was racking her brain to
discover what could be the purpose of this fatal visit. Perhaps it was
only to claim Gaston’s jewels.

“It is unnecessary to recall,” continued Louis, “the painful
circumstances which blasted my brother’s life. However happy your own
lot has been, you must sometimes have thought of this friend of your
youth, who unhesitatingly sacrificed himself in defence of your honor.”

Not a muscle of Mme. Fauvel’s face moved; she appeared to be trying to
recall the circumstances to which Louis alluded.

“Have you forgotten, madame?” he asked with bitterness: “then I must
explain more clearly. A long, long time ago you loved my unfortunate
brother.”

“Monsieur!”

“Ah, it is useless to deny it, madame: I told you that Gaston confided
everything to me--everything,” he added significantly.

But Mme. Fauvel was not frightened by this information. This
“everything” could not be of any importance, for Gaston had gone abroad
in total ignorance of her secret.

She rose, and said with an apparent assurance she was far from feeling:

“You forget, monsieur, that you are speaking to a woman who is now
advanced in life, who is married, and who has grown sons. If your
brother loved me, it was his affair, and not yours. If, young and
ignorant, I was led into imprudence, it is not your place to remind me
of it. This past which you evoke I buried in oblivion twenty years ago.”

“Thus you have forgotten all that happened?”

“Absolutely all; everything.”

“Even your child, madame?”

This question, uttered in a sneer of triumph, fell upon Mme. Fauvel like
a thunder-clap. She dropped tremblingly into her seat, murmuring:

“My God! How did he discover it?”

Had her own happiness alone been at stake, she would have instantly
thrown herself upon a Clameran’s mercy. But she had her family to
defend, and the consciousness of this gave her strength to resist him.

“Do you wish to insult me, monsieur?” she asked.

“Do you pretend to say you have forgotten Valentin-Raoul?”

She saw that this man did indeed know all. How? It little mattered. He
certainly knew; but she determined to deny everything, even the most
positive proofs, if he should produce them.

For an instant she had an idea of ordering the Marquis of Clameran
to leave the house; but prudence stayed her. She thought it best to
discover how much he really knew.

“Well,” she said with a forced laugh, “will you be kind enough to state
what you wish with me?”

“Certainly, madame. Two years ago the vicissitudes of exile took my
brother to London. There, at the house of a friend, he met a young man
by the name of Raoul. Gaston was so struck by the youth’s appearance and
intelligence, that he inquired who he was, and discovered that beyond a
doubt this boy was his son, and your son, madame.”

“This is quite a romance you are relating.”

“Yes, madame, a romance the denouement of which is in your hands. Your
mother certainly used every precaution to conceal your secret; but the
best-laid plans always have some weak point. After your marriage, one of
your mother’s London friends came to Tarascon, and spread the report
of what had taken place at the English village. This lady also revealed
your true name to the nurse who was bringing up the child. Thus
everything was discovered by my brother, who had no difficulty in
obtaining the most positive proofs of the boy’s parentage.”

Louis closely watched Mme. Fauvel’s face to see the effect of his words.

To his astonishment she betrayed not the slightest agitation or alarm;
she was smiling as if entertained by the recital of his romance.

“Well, what next?” she asked carelessly.

“Then, madame, Gaston acknowledged the child. But the Clamerans are
poor; my brother died on a pallet in a lodging-house; and I have only
an income of twelve hundred francs to live upon. What is to become of
Raoul, alone with no relations or friends to assist him? My brother’s
last moments were embittered by anxiety for the welfare of his child.”

“Really, monsieur----”

“Allow me to finish,” interrupted Louis. “In that supreme hour Gaston
opened his heart to me. He told me to apply to you. ‘Valentine,’ said
he, ‘Valentine will remember the past, and will not let our son want for
anything; she is wealthy, she is just and generous; I die with my mind
at rest.’”

Mme. Fauvel rose from her seat, and stood, evidently waiting for her
visitor to retire.

“You must confess, monsieur,” she said, “that I have shown great
patience.”

This imperturbable assurance amazed Louis.

“I do not deny,” she continued, “that I at one time possessed the
confidence of M. Gaston de Clameran. I will prove it by restoring to you
your mother’s jewels, with which he intrusted me on his departure.”

While speaking she took from beneath the sofa-cushion the purse of
jewels, and handed it to Louis.

“These jewels would have been given to the owner the instant they
were called for, monsieur, and I am surprised that your brother never
reclaimed them.”

Louis betrayed his astonishment at the sight of the jewels. He tried to
cover his embarrassment by boldly saying:

“I was told not to mention this sacred trust.”

Mme. Fauvel, without making any reply, laid her hand on the bell-rope
and quietly said:

“You will allow me to end this interview, monsieur, which was only
granted for the purpose of placing in your hands these precious jewels.”

Thus dismissed, M. de Clameran was obliged to take his leave without
attaining his object.

“As you will, madame,” he said, “I leave you; but before doing so I
must tell you the rest of my brother’s dying injunctions: ‘If Valentine
disregards the past, and refuses to provide for our son, I enjoin it
upon you to compel her to do her duty.’ Meditate upon these words,
madame, for what I have sworn to do, upon my honor, shall be done!”

At last Mme. Fauvel was alone. She could give vent to her despair.

Exhausted at her efforts at self-restraint during the presence of
Clameran, she felt weary and crushed in body and spirit.

She had scarcely strength to drag herself up to her chamber, and lock
the door.

Now there was no room for doubt; her fears had become realities. She
could fathom the abyss into which she was about to be hurled, and knew
that in her fall she would drag her family with her.

God alone, in this hour of danger, could help her, could save her from
destruction. She prayed.

“Oh, my God!” she cried, “punish me for my great sin, and I will
evermore adore thy chastising hand! I have been a bad daughter, an
unworthy mother, and a perfidious wife. Smite me, oh, God, and only me!
In thy just anger spare the innocent, have pity upon my husband and my
children!”

What were her twenty years of happiness compared to this hour of misery?
A bitter remorse; nothing more. Ah, why did she listen to her mother?
Why had she committed moral suicide?

Hope had fled; despair had come.

This man who had left her presence with a threat upon his lips would
return to torture her now. How could she escape him?

To-day she had succeeded in subduing her heart and conscience; would she
again have the strength to master her feelings?

She well knew that her calmness and courage were entirely due to the
inaptness of Clameran.

Why did he not use entreaties instead of threats?

When Louis spoke of Raoul, she could scarcely conceal her emotion; her
maternal heart yearned toward the innocent child who was expiating his
mother’s faults.

A chill of horror passed over her at the idea of his enduring the pangs
of hunger.

Her child wanting bread, when she, his mother, was rolling in wealth!

Ah, why could she not lay all her possessions at his feet? With what
delight would she undergo the greatest privations for his sake! If she
could but send him enough money to support him comfortably!

But no; she could not take this step without compromising herself and
her family.

Prudence forbade her acceptance of the intervention of Louis de
Clameran.

To confide in him, was placing herself, and all she held dear, at his
mercy--at the mercy of a man who inspired her with instinctive terror.

Then she began to ask herself if he had spoken the truth, or had trumped
up this story to frighten her?

In thinking over Louis’s story, it seemed improbable and disconnected.

If Gaston had been living in Paris, in the poverty described by his
brother, why had he not demanded of the married woman the deposit
intrusted to the maiden?

Why, when anxious about the future of their child, had he not come to
her, if he had such confidence in her generosity? If he intrusted her on
his death-bed, why had he not shown this trust while living?

A thousand vague apprehensions beset her mind; she felt suspicion and
distrust of everyone and everything.

She was aware that the time had come for her to take a decisive step,
and upon this step depended her whole future peace and happiness. If she
once yielded, what would not be exacted of her in the future? She would
certainly be made to suffer if she refused to yield. If she had only
some wise friend to advise her!

For a moment she thought of throwing herself at her husband’s feet and
confessing all.

Unfortunately, she thrust aside this means of salvation. She pictured
to herself the mortification and sorrow that her noble-hearted husband
would suffer upon discovering, after a lapse of twenty years, how
shamefully he had been deceived, how his confidence and love had been
betrayed.

Having been once deceived, would he ever trust her again? Would he
believe in her fidelity as a wife, when he discovered that she had
uttered her marriage vows to love and honor him, when her heart was
already given to another?

She knew Andre was too magnanimous to ever allude to her horrible fault,
and would use every means to conceal it. But his domestic happiness
would be gone forever. His chair at the fireside would be left empty;
his sons would shun her presence, and every family bond would be
severed.

Then again, would peace be preserved by her silence? Would not Clameran
end by betraying her to Andre?

She thought of ending her doubts by suicide; but her death would not
silence her implacable enemy, who, not being able to disgrace her while
alive, would dishonor her memory.

Fortunately, the banker was still absent; and, during the two days
succeeding Louis’s visit, Mme. Fauvel could keep her room under pretence
of sickness.

But Madeleine, with her feminine instinct, saw that her aunt was
troubled by something worse than nervous headache, for which the
physician was prescribing all sorts of remedies, with no beneficial
effect.

She remembered that this sudden illness dated from the visit of the
melancholy looking stranger, who had been closeted for a long time with
her aunt.

Madeleine supposed something was weighing upon the miserable woman’s
mind, and the second day of her sickness ventured to say:

“What makes you so sad, dear aunt? If you will not tell me, do let me
bring our good cure to see you.”

With a sharpness foreign to her nature, which was gentleness itself,
Mme. Fauvel refused to assent to her niece’s proposition.

What Louis calculated upon happened.

After long reflection, not seeing any issue to her deplorable situation,
Mme. Fauvel determined to yield.

By consenting to everything demanded of her, she had a chance of saving
her husband from suffering and disgrace.

She well knew that to act thus was to prepare a life of torture for
herself; but she alone would be the victim, and, at any rate, she would
be gaining time. Heaven might at last interpose, and save her from ruin.

In the meantime, M. Fauvel had returned home, and Valentine resumed her
accustomed duties.

But she was no longer the happy mother and devoted wife, whose smiling
presence was wont to fill the house with sunshine and comfort. She was
melancholy, anxious, and at times irritable.

Hearing nothing of Clameran, she expected to see him appear at any
moment; trembling at every knock, and turning pale when a strange step
was heard to enter, she dared not leave the house, for fear he should
come during her absence.

Her agony was like that of a condemned man, who, each day as he wakes
from his uneasy slumber, asks himself, “Am I to die to-day?”

Clameran did not come; he wrote, or rather, as he was too prudent to
furnish arms which could be used against him, he had a note written,
which Mme. Fauvel alone might understand, in which he said that he was
quite ill, and unable to call upon her; and hoped she would be so good
as to come to his room the next day; she had only to ask for 317, Hotel
du Louvre.

The letter was almost a relief for Mme. Fauvel. Anything was preferable
to suspense. She was ready to consent to everything.

She burned the letter, and said, “I shall go.”

The next day at the appointed hour, she dressed herself in a plain black
silk, a large bonnet which concealed her face, and, putting a thick veil
in her pocket to be used if she found it necessary, started forth.

After hurriedly walking several squares, she thought she might, without
fear of being recognized, call a coach. In a few minutes she was set
down at the Hotel du Louvre. Here her uneasiness increased. Her circle
of acquaintances being large, she was in terror of being recognized.
What would her friends think if they saw her at the Hotel du Louvre
disguised in this old dress?

Anyone would naturally suspect an intrigue, a rendezvous; and her
character would be ruined forever.

This was the first time since her marriage that she had had occasion for
mystery; and her efforts to escape notice were in every way calculated
to attract attention.

The porter said that the Marquis of Clameran’s rooms were on the third
floor.

She hurried up the stairs, glad to escape the scrutinizing glances of
several men standing near; but, in spite of the minute directions given
by the porter, she lost her way in one of the long corridors of the
hotel.

Finally, after wandering about for some time, she found a door bearing
the number sought--317.

She stood leaning against the wall with her hand pressed to her
throbbing heart, which seemed bursting.

Now, at the moment of risking this decisive step, she felt paralyzed
with fright. She would have given all she possessed to find herself safe
in her own home.

The sight of a stranger entering the corridor ended her hesitation.

With a trembling hand she knocked at the door.

“Come in,” said a voice from within.

She entered the room.

It was not the Marquis of Clameran who stood in the middle of the
room, but a young man, almost a youth, who bowed to Mme. Fauvel with a
singular expression on his handsome face.

Mme. Fauvel thought that she had mistaken the room.

“Excuse me, monsieur,” she said, blushing deeply. “I thought that this
was the Marquis of Clameran’s room.”

“It is his room, madame,” replied the young man; then, seeing she was
silent and about to leave, he added:

“I presume I have the honor of addressing Mme. Fauvel?”

She bowed affirmatively, shuddering at the sound of her own name,
frightened at this proof of Clameran’s betrayal of her secret to a
stranger.

With visible anxiety she awaited an explanation.

“Reassure yourself, madame,” said the young man: “you are as safe here
as if you were in your own house. M. de Clameran desired me to make his
excuses; he will not have the honor of seeing you to-day.”

“But, monsieur, from an urgent letter sent by him yesterday, I was led
to suppose--to infer--that he----”

“When he wrote to you, madame, he had projects in view which he has
since renounced.”

Mme. Fauvel was too agitated and troubled to think clearly. Beyond the
present she could see nothing.

“Do you mean,” she asked with distrust, “that he has changed his
intentions?”

The young man’s face was expressive of sad compassion, as if he shared
the sufferings of the unhappy woman before him.

“The marquis has renounced,” he said, in a melancholy tone, “what he
wrongly considered a sacred duty. Believe me, he hesitated a long time
before he could decide to apply to you on a subject painful to you
both. When he began to explain his apparent intrusion upon your private
affairs, you refused to hear him, and dismissed him with indignant
contempt. He knew not what imperious reasons dictated your conduct.
Blinded by unjust anger, he swore to obtain by threats what you refused
to give voluntarily. Resolved to attack your domestic happiness, he had
collected overwhelming proofs against you. Pardon him: an oath given to
his dying brother bound him.

“These convincing proofs,” he continued, as he tapped his finger on a
bundle of papers which he had taken from the mantel, “this evidence that
cannot be denied, I now hold in my hand. This is the certificate of the
Rev. Dr. Sedley; this is the declaration of Mrs. Dobbin, the farmer’s
wife; and these others are the statements of the physician and of
several persons of high social position who were acquainted with Mme. de
la Verberie during her stay in London. Not a single link is missing. I
had great difficulty in getting these papers away from M. de Clameran.
Had he anticipated my intention of thus disposing of them, they would
never have been surrendered to my keeping.”

As he finished speaking, the young man threw the bundle of papers into
the fire where they blazed up; and in a moment nothing remained of them
but a little heap of ashes.

“All is now destroyed, madame,” he said, with a satisfied air. “The
past, if you desire it, is as completely annihilated as those papers.
If anyone, thereafter, dares accuse you of having had a son before your
marriage, treat him as a vile calumniator. No proof against you can be
produced; none exists. You are free.”

Mme. Fauvel began to understand the sense of this scene; the truth
dawned upon her bewildered mind.

This noble youth, who protected her from the anger of De Clameran, who
restored her peace of mind and the exercise of her own free will, by
destroying all proofs of her past, was, must be, the child whom she had
abandoned: Valentin-Raoul.

In an instant, all was forgotten save the present. Maternal tenderness,
so long restrained, now welled up and overflowed as with intense emotion
she murmured:

“Raoul!”

At this name, uttered in so thrilling a tone, the youth started and
tottered, as if overcome by an unhoped-for happiness.

“Yes, Raoul,” he cried, “Raoul, who would a thousand times rather die
than cause his mother a moment’s pain; Raoul, who would shed his life’s
blood to spare her one tear.”

She made no attempt to struggle against nature’s yearnings; her longing
to clasp to her heart this long-pined-for first-born must be gratified
at all costs.

She opened her arms, and Raoul sprang forward with a cry of joy:

“Mother! my blessed mother! Thanks be to God for this first kiss!”

Alas! this was the sad truth. The deserted child had never been blest by
a mother’s kiss. This dear son whom she had never seen before, had
been taken from her, despite her prayers and tears, without a mother’s
blessing, a mother’s embrace. After twenty years waiting, should it be
denied him now?

But joy so great, following upon so many contending emotions, was more
than the excited mother could bear; she sank back in her chair almost
fainting, and with distended eyes gazed in a bewildered, eager way upon
her long-lost son, who was now kneeling at her feet.

With tenderness she stroked the soft chestnut curls, and drank in the
tenderness of his soft dark eyes, and expressive mouth, as he murmured
words of filial affection in her craving ear.

“Oh, mother!” he said, “words cannot describe my feelings of pain
and anguish upon hearing that my uncle had dared to threaten you. He
threaten you! He repents already of his cruelty; he did not know you as
I do. Yes, my mother, I have known you for a long, long time. Often have
my father and I hovered around your happy home to catch a glimpse of you
through the window. When you passed by in your carriage, he would say
to me, ‘There is your mother, Raoul!’ To look upon you was our greatest
joy. When we knew you were going to a ball, we would wait near the door
to see you enter, in your satin and diamonds. How often have I followed
your fast horses to see you descend from the carriage and enter wealthy
doors, which I could never hope to penetrate! And how my noble father
loved you always! When he told his brother to apply to you in my behalf,
he was unconscious of what he said; his mind was wandering.”

Tears, the sweetest tears she had ever shed, coursed down Mme. Fauvel’s
cheeks, as she listened to the musical tones of Raoul’s voice.

This voice was so like Gaston’s, that she seemed once more to be
listening to the lover of her almost forgotten youth.

She was living over again those stolen meetings, those long hours of
bliss, when Gaston was at her side, as they sat and watched the river
rippling beneath the trees.

It seemed only yesterday that Gaston had pressed her to his faithful
heart; she saw him still saying gently:

“In three years, Valentine! Wait for me!”

Andre, her two sons, Madeleine, all were forgotten in this new-found
affection.

Raoul continued in tender tones:

“Only yesterday I discovered that my uncle had been to demand for me a
few crumbs of your wealth. Why did he take such a step? I am poor, it is
true, very poor; but I am too familiar with poverty to bemoan it. I have
a clear brain and willing hands: that is fortune enough for a young man.
You are very rich. What is that to me? Keep all your fortune, my beloved
mother; but do not repel my affection; let me love you. Promise me
that this first kiss shall not be the last. No one will ever know of
my new-found happiness; not by word or deed will I do aught to let the
world suspect that I possess this great joy.”

And Mme. Fauvel had dreaded this son! Ah, how bitterly did she now
reproach herself for not having flown to meet him the instant she heard
that he was living!

She questioned him regarding the past; she wished to know how he had
lived, what he had been doing.

He replied that he had nothing to conceal; his existence had been that
of every poor boy, who had nothing to look forward to but a life of
labor and privation.

The farmer’s wife who had brought him up was a kind-hearted woman,
and had always treated him with affection. She had even given him an
education superior to his condition in life, because, as she always
said, he would make himself a great name, and attain to wealth, if he
were taught.

When about sixteen years of age, she procured him a situation in a
banking-house; and he was getting a salary, which, though small, was
enough to support him and supply a few luxuries for his adopted mother.

One day a stranger came to him and said:

“I am your father: come with me.”

Since then nothing was wanting to his happiness, save a mother’s
tenderness. He had suffered but one great sorrow, and that was the day
when Gaston de Clameran, his father, had died in his arms.

“But now,” he said, “all is forgotten, that one sorrow is forgotten in
my present happiness. Now that I see you and possess your love, I forget
the past, and ask for nothing more.”

Mme. Fauvel was oblivious of the lapse of time, and was startled when
Raoul exclaimed:

“Why, it is seven o’clock!”

Seven o’clock! What would her family think of this long absence? Her
husband must be even now awaiting dinner.

“Shall I see you again, mother?” asked Raoul in a beseeching tone, as
they were about to separate.

“Oh, yes!” she replied, fondly, “yes, often; every day, to-morrow.”

But now, for the first time since her marriage, Mme. Fauvel perceived
that she was not mistress of her actions. Never before had she had
occasion to wish for uncontrolled liberty.

She left her heart and soul behind her in the Hotel du Louvre, where she
had just found her son. She was compelled to leave him, to undergo the
intolerable agony of composing her face to conceal this great happiness,
which had changed her whole life and being. She was angry with fate
because she could not remain with her first-born son.

Having some difficulty in procuring a carriage, it was half-past seven
before she reached the Rue de Provence, when she found the family
waiting for her.

She thought her husband silly, and even vulgar, when he joked her upon
letting her poor children starve to death, while she was promenading the
boulevards.

So strange are the sudden effects of a new passion, that she regarded
almost with contempt this unbounded confidence reposed in her.

She replied to his jest with a forced calmness, as if her mind were
really as free and undisturbed as it had been before Clameran’s visit.

So intoxicated had been her sensations while with Raoul, that in her joy
she was incapable of desiring anything else, of dreaming of aught save
the renewal of these delightful emotions.

No longer was she a devoted wife, an affectionate mother to this
household which looked up to her as though she were a superior being.
She took no interest in the two sons who were a short while since her
chief pride and joy. They had always been petted and indulged in every
way; they had a father, they were rich; whist the other, the other! oh,
how much reparation was due to him!

She almost regarded her family as responsible for Raoul’s sufferings, so
blinded was she in her devotion to her martyr, as she called him.

Her folly was complete. No remorse for the past, no apprehensions for
the future, disturbed the satisfied present. To her the future was
to-morrow; eternity was the sixteen hours which must elapse before
another interview.

She seemed to think that Gaston’s death absolved the past, and changed
the present.

Her sole regret was her marriage. Free, with no family ties, she could
have consecrated herself exclusively to Raoul. How gladly would she have
sacrificed her affluence to enjoy poverty with him!

She felt no fear that her husband and sons would suspect the thoughts
which absorbed her mind; but she dreaded her niece.

She imagined that Madeleine looked at her strangely on her return from
the Hotel du Louvre. She must suspect something; but did she suspect the
truth?

For several days she asked embarrassing questions, as to where her aunt
went, and with whom she had been during these long absences from home.

This disquietude and seeming curiosity changed the affection which Mme.
Fauvel had hitherto felt for her adopted daughter into positive dislike.

She regretted having placed over herself a vigilant spy from whom she
could not escape. She pondered what means she could take to avoid the
penetrating watchfulness of a girl who was accustomed to read in her
face every thought that crossed her mind.

With unspeakable satisfaction she solved the difficulty in a way which
she thought would please all parties.

During the last two years the banker’s cashier and _protege_, Prosper
Bertomy, had been devoted in his attentions to Madeleine. Mme. Fauvel
decided to do all in her power to hasten matters, so that, Madeleine
once married and out of the house, there would be no one to criticise
her own movements. She could then spend most of her time with Raoul
without fear of detection.

That evening, with a duplicity of which she would have been incapable a
few weeks before, she began to question Madeleine about her sentiments
toward Prosper:

“Ah, ha, mademoiselle,” she said, gayly, “I have discovered your secret.
You are going on at a pretty rate! The idea of your choosing a husband
without my permission!”

“Why, aunt! I thought you----”

“Yes, I know; you thought I had suspected the true state of affairs!
That is precisely what I have done.”

Then, in a serious tone, she said:

“Therefore nothing remains to be done except to obtain the consent of
Master Prosper. Do you think he will grant it?”

“Oh, Aunt Valentine! he would be too happy.”

“Ah, indeed! you seem to know all about it; perhaps you do not care for
any assistance in carrying out your wishes?”

Madeleine, blushing and confused, hung her head, and said nothing. Mme.
Fauvel drew her toward her, and continued affectionately:

“My dear child, do not be distressed: you have done nothing wrong, and
need fear no opposition to your wishes. Is it possible that a person of
your penetration supposed us to be in ignorance of your secret? Did you
think that Prosper would have been so warmly welcomed by your uncle and
myself, had we not approved of him in every respect?”

Madeleine threw her arms around her aunt’s neck, and said:

“Oh, my dear aunt, you make me so happy! I am very grateful for your
love and kindness. I am very glad that you are pleased with my choice.”

Mme. Fauvel said to herself:

“I will make Andre speak to Prosper, and before two months are over the
marriage must take place. Madeleine once married, I shall have nothing
to fear.”

Unfortunately, Mme. Fauvel was so engrossed by her new passion that she
put off from day to day her project of hastening the marriage, until it
was too late. Spending a portion of each day at the Hotel du Louvre with
Raoul, and, when separated from him, devoting her thoughts to insuring
him an independent fortune and a good position, she could think of
nothing else.

She had not yet spoken to him of money or business.

She imagined that she had discovered in him his father’s noble
qualities; that the sensitiveness which is so easily wounded was
expressed in his every word and action.

She anxiously wondered if he would ever accept the least assistance from
her. The Marquis of Clameran quieted her doubts on this point.

She had frequently met him since the day on which he had so frightened
her, and to her first aversion had succeeded a secret sympathy. She felt
kindly toward him for the affection he lavished on her son.

If Raoul, with the heedlessness of youth, mocked at the future, Louis,
the man of the world, looked upon it with different eyes. He was anxious
for the welfare of his nephew, and constantly complained of the idle
life he was now leading.

One day, after praising the attractive qualities of Raoul, he said:

“This pleasant life is very well, as long as it lasts; but people cannot
live upon air, and, as my handsome nephew has no fortune, it would be
only prudent for us to procure him some employment.”

“Ah, my dear uncle, do let me enjoy my present happiness. What is the
use of any change? What do I want?”

“You want for nothing at present, Raoul; but when your resources are
exhausted, and mine, too--which will be in a short time--what will
become of you?”

“_Bast!_ I will enter the army. All the Clamerans are born soldiers; and
if a war comes----”

Mme. Fauvel laid her hand upon his lips, and said in a tone of
reproachful tenderness:

“Cruel boy, become a soldier? would you, then, deprive me of the joy of
seeing you?”

“No, my mother; no.”

“You must agree to whatever plans we make for your good,” said Louis;
“and not be talking of any wild schemes of your own.”

“I am ready to obey; but not yet. One of these days I will go to work,
and make a fortune.”

“How, poor, foolish boy? What can you do?”

“_Dame!_ I don’t know now; but set your mind at rest, I will find a
way.”

Finding it impossible to make this self-sufficient youth listen to
reason, Louis and Mme. Fauvel, after discussing the matter fully,
decided that assistance must be forced upon him, and his path in life
marked out for him.

It was difficult, however, to choose a profession; and Clameran thought
it prudent to wait awhile, and study the bent of the young man’s mind.
In the meanwhile it was decided that Mme. Fauvel should place funds at
Clameran’s disposal for Raoul’s support.

Regarding Gaston’s brother in the light of a father to her child, Mme.
Fauvel soon found him indispensable. She continually longed to see
him, either to consult him concerning some step to be taken for Raoul’s
benefit, or to impress upon him some good advice to be given.

Thus she was well pleased, when one day he requested the honor of being
allowed to call upon her at her own house.

Nothing was easier than to introduce the Marquis of Clameran to her
husband as an old friend of her family; and, after once being admitted,
he might come as often as he chose.

Mme. Fauvel congratulated herself upon this arrangement.

Afraid to go to Raoul every day, and in constant terror lest her letters
to him should be discovered, and his replies fall into her husband’s
hands, she was delighted at the prospect of having news of him from
Clameran.

For a month, things went on very smoothly, when one day the marquis
confessed that Raoul was giving him a great deal of trouble. His
hesitating, embarrassed manner frightened Mme. Fauvel. She thought
something dreadful had happened, and that he was trying to break the bad
news gently.

“What is the matter?” she said, turning pale.

“I am sorry to say,” replied Clameran, “that this young man has
inherited all the pride and passions of his ancestors. He is one
of those natures who stop at nothing, who only find incitement in
opposition; and I can think of no way of checking him in his mad
career.”

“Merciful Heaven! what has he been doing?”

“Nothing especially censurable; that is, nothing irreparable, thus far;
but I am afraid of the future. He is unaware of the liberal allowance
which you have placed in my hands for his benefit; and, although he
thinks that I support him, there is not a single indulgence which
he denies himself; he throws away money as if he were the son of a
millionaire.”

Like all mothers, Mme. Fauvel attempted to excuse her son.

“Perhaps you are a little severe,” she said. “Poor child, he has
suffered so much! He has undergone so many privations during his
childhood, that this sudden happiness and wealth has turned his head;
he seizes it as a starving man seizes a piece of bread. Is it surprising
that he should refuse to listen to reason until hungry nature shall have
been gratified? Ah, only have patience, and he will soon return to
the path of sober duty. He has too noble a heart to do anything really
wrong.”

“He has suffered so much!” was Mme. Fauvel’s constant excuse for Raoul.
This was her invariable reply to M. de Clameran’s complaints of his
nephew’s conduct.

And, having once commenced, he was now constant in his accusations
against Raoul.

“Nothing restrains his extravagance and dissipation,” Louis would say in
a mournful voice; “the instant a piece of folly enters his head, it is
carried out, no matter at what cost.”

Mme. Fauvel saw no reason why her son should be thus harshly judged.

“You must remember,” she said in an aggrieved tone, “that from infancy
he has been left to his own unguided impulses. The unfortunate boy never
had a mother to tend and counsel him. You must remember, too, that he
has never known a father’s guidance.”

“There is some excuse for him, to be sure; but nevertheless he must
change his present course. Could you not speak seriously to him, madame?
You have more influence over him than I.”

She promised, but forgot her good resolution when with Raoul. She had
so little time to devote to him, that it seemed cruel to spend it in
reprimands. Sometimes she would hurry from home for the purpose of
following the marquis’s advice; but, the instant she saw Raoul, her
courage failed; a pleading look from his soft, dark eyes silenced the
rebuke upon her lips; the sound of his voice banished every anxious
thought, and lulled her mind to the present happiness.

But Clameran was not a man to lose sight of the main object, in what he
considered a sentimental wasting of time. He would have no compromise of
duty.

His brother had bequeathed to him, as a precious trust, his son Raoul;
he regarded himself, he said, as his guardian, and would be held
responsible in another world for his welfare.

He entreated Mme. Fauvel to use her influence, when he found himself
powerless in trying to check the heedless youth in his headlong career.
She ought, for the sake of her child, to see more of him, study his
disposition, and daily admonish him in his duty to himself and to her.

“Alas,” the poor woman replied, “that would be my heart’s desire. But
how can I do it? Have I the right to ruin myself? I have other children,
for whom I must be careful of my reputation.”

This answer appeared to astonish Clameran. A fortnight before, Mme.
Fauvel would not have alluded to her other sons.

“I will think the matter over,” said Louis, “And perhaps when I see
you next I shall be able to submit to you a plan which will reconcile
everything.”

The reflections of a man of so much experience could not be fruitless.
He had a relieved, satisfied look, when he called to see Mme. Fauvel on
the following week.

“I think I have solved the problem,” he said.

“What problem?”

“The means of saving Raoul.”

He explained himself by saying, that as Mme. Fauvel could not, without
arousing her husband’s suspicions, continue her daily visits to Raoul,
she must receive him at her own house.

This proposition shocked Mme. Fauvel; for though she had been imprudent,
even culpable, she was the soul of honor, and naturally shrank from the
idea of introducing Raoul into the midst of her family, and seeing him
welcomed by her husband, and perhaps become the friend of his sons.
Her instinctive sense of justice made her declare that she would never
consent to such an infamous step.

“Yes,” said the marquis, thoughtfully, “there is some risk; but then, it
is the only chance of saving your child.”

She resisted with so much firmness and indignation that Louis was
astonished, and for a time nonplussed; though he by no means let the
subject drop, but seized every opportunity of impressing upon her
tortured mind that Raoul’s salvation depended entirely upon her.

“No,” she would always reply, “no! Never will I be so base and
perfidious to my husband!”

Unfortunate woman! little did she know of the pitfalls which stand ever
ready to swallow up wanderers from the path of virtue.

Before a week had passed, she listened to this project, which at first
had filled her with horror, with a willing ear, and even began to devise
means for its speedy execution.

Yes, after a cruel struggle, she finally yielded to the pressure of
Clameran’s politely uttered threats and Raoul’s wheedling entreaties.

“But how,” she asked, “upon what pretext can I receive Raoul?”

“It would be the easiest thing in the world,” replied Clameran, “to
admit him as an ordinary acquaintance, and, indeed, to place him on
the same footing which I myself occupy--that of an intimate friend and
habitue of your drawing-rooms. But Raoul must have more than this; he
needs your constant care.”

After torturing Mme. Fauvel for a long time, he finally revealed his
scheme.

“We have in our hands,” he said, “the solution of this problem, which
may be so easily reached that I regard it as an inspiration.”

Mme. Fauvel eagerly scanned his face as she listened with the pitiable
resignation of a martyr.

“Have you not a cousin, a widow lady, who had two daughters, living at
St. Remy?” asked Louis.

“Yes, Mme. de Lagors.”

“Precisely so. What fortune has she?”

“She is poor, monsieur, very poor.”

“And, but for the assistance you render her secretly, she would be
thrown upon the charity of the world.”

Mme. Fauvel was bewildered at finding the marquis so well informed of
her private affairs.

“How could you have discovered this?” she asked.

“Oh, I know all about this affair, and many others besides. I know, for
example, that your husband has never met any of your relatives, and that
he is not even aware of the existence of your cousin De Lagors. Do you
begin to comprehend my plan?”

She not only understood it, but also knew that she would end by being a
party to it.

“All will succeed if you follow my instructions,” said Louis. “To-morrow
or next day, you will receive a letter from your cousin at St. Remy,
telling you that she has sent her son to Paris on a visit, and begs you
to receive and watch over him. Naturally you show this letter to your
husband; and a few days afterward he warmly welcomes your nephew, Raoul
de Lagors, a handsome, rich, attractive young man, who does everything
he can to please you both.”

“Monsieur,” replied Mme. Fauvel, “my cousin is a pious, honorable woman,
and nothing would induce her to countenance so shameful a transaction.”

The marquis smiled scornfully, and said:

“Who told you that I intended to confide in her?”

“But you would be obliged to do so! How else?”

“You are very simple, madame. The letter which you will receive, and
show to your husband, will be dictated by me, and posted at St. Remy
by a friend of mine. If I spoke of the obligations under which you have
placed your cousin, it was merely to show you that, in case of accident,
her own interest would make her serve you. Do you see any obstacle to
this plan, madame?”

Mme. Fauvel’s eyes flashed with indignation.

“Is my will of no account?” she exclaimed. “You seem to have made your
arrangements without consulting me at all.”

“Excuse me,” said the marquis, with ironical politeness, “but I knew
that you would take the same view of the matter as myself. Your good
sense would convince you of the necessity of using every possible means
of rescuing your child from destruction.”

“But it is a crime, monsieur, that you propose--an abominable crime! My
mind revolts at the very idea of it!”

This speech seemed to arouse all the bad passions slumbering in
Clameran’s bosom; and his pale face had a fiendish expression as he
fiercely replied:

“We had better end this humbuggery, and come to a clear understanding at
once. Before you begin to talk about crime, think over your past life.
You were not so timid and scrupulous when you gave yourself up to your
lover; neither did you hesitate to faithlessly refuse to share his
exile, although for your sake he had just jeopardized his life by
killing two men. You felt no scruples at abandoning your child in
London; although rolling in wealth, you never even inquired if this poor
waif had bread to eat. You felt no scruples about marrying M. Fauvel.
Did you tell your confiding husband of the lines of shame concealed
beneath that orange wreath? Did you hesitate to confirm and strengthen
his happy delusion, that his lips had pressed the first kiss upon your
brow? No! All these crimes you indulged in; and, when in Gaston’s name
I demand reparation, you indignantly refuse. But, mark my words, madame,
it is too late! You ruined the father; but you shall save the son, or,
by all the saints in heaven, I swear you shall no longer cheat the world
of its esteem.”

“I will obey you, monsieur,” murmured the trembling, frightened woman.

The following week Raoul, now Raoul de Lagors, was seated at the
banker’s dinner-table, between Mme. Fauvel and Madeleine.




XVII

It was not without the most painful suffering and self-condemnation that
Mme. Fauvel submitted to the will of the pitiless Marquis of Clameran.

She had used every argument and entreaty to soften him; but he merely
looked upon her with a triumphant, sneering smile, when she knelt at his
feet, implored him to be merciful and spare her the shame and remorse
of committing another crime. Spare her this torture, and she would grant
anything else he wished, give Raoul all she possessed while alive, and
insure him a handsome competency after her death.

Alas! neither tears nor prayers moved him. Disappointed, and almost
desperate, she sought the intercession of her son.

Raoul was in a state of furious indignation at the sight of his mother’s
distress, and hastened to demand an apology from Clameran.

But he had reckoned without his host. He soon returned with downcast
eyes, and moodily angry at his own powerlessness, declaring that safety
demanded a complete surrender to the tyrant.

Now only did the wretched woman fully fathom the abyss into which she
was being dragged, and clearly see the labyrinth of crime of which she
was becoming the victim.

And all this suffering was the consequence of a fault, an interview
granted to Gaston. Ever since that fatal day she had been vainly
struggling against the implacable logic of events. Her life had been
spent in trying to overcome the past, and now it had risen to crush her.

The hardest thing of all to do, the act that most wrung her heart, was
showing to her husband the forged letter from St. Remy, and saying that
she expected to see her rich young nephew in a day or two. ‘Tis hard to
deceive those who trust and love us.

But words cannot paint the torture she endured on the evening that she
introduced Raoul to her family, and saw the honest banker cordially
shake hands with this nephew of whom he had never heard before, and
affectionately say to him:

“I am not surprised that a rich young fellow like yourself should prefer
Paris to St. Remy, and nothing will give me more pleasure than your
visit; for I seldom have an opportunity of welcoming a relative of my
dear wife, for whose sake I take an interest in everyone coming from St.
Remy.”

Raoul exerted his utmost to deserve this warm reception.

If his early education had been neglected, and he lacked those delicate
refinements of manner and conversation which home influence imparts, his
superior tact concealed these defects.

He possessed the happy faculty of reading characters, and adapting his
conversation to the minds of his listeners.

Before a week had gone by, he was a favorite with M. Fauvel, intimate
with Abel and Lucien, and inseparable from Prosper Bertomy, the cashier,
who spent all his evenings with the banker’s family.

Charmed at the favorable impression made by Raoul, Mme. Fauvel recovered
comparative ease of mind, and at times almost congratulated herself
upon having obeyed the marquis, as she saw all around her contented and
happy. Once more she began to hope that peace had not deserted her, that
God had forgiven her.

Alas! she rejoiced too soon.

Raoul’s intimacy with his cousins threw him among a set of rich young
men, whose extravagance he not only imitated, but surpassed. He daily
grew more dissipated and reckless. Gambling, racing, expensive suppers,
made money slip through his fingers like grains of sand.

This proud young man, whose sensitive delicacy not long since made
him refuse to accept aught save affection from his mother, now never
approached her without demanding large sums of money.

At first she gave with pleasure, not stopping to count the rolls of
notes she would eagerly run to bring him. But as he each time increased
his demands, until they finally reached a sum far larger than she
could bestow, her eyes were opened to the ruinous effects of her lavish
generosity.

This rich woman, whose magnificent diamonds, elegant toilets, and
superb equipages were the admiration and envy of Paris, now suffered
the keenest torture. She had no more money to give her son; and what
so pains the female heart as being unable to gratify the wishes of a
beloved being?

Her husband never thought of giving her a fixed sum for the year’s
expenses, or of asking how she disposed of her money. The day after the
wedding he gave her a key to his secretary, and told her, that what was
his was hers, to use as she thought best. And, ever since, she had been
in the habit of freely taking all the money necessary for keeping up the
hospitable, elegant house over which she so gracefully presided; for her
own dress, and many charitable purposes that the world never knew of.

But the fact of her having always been so modest in her personal
expenses that her husband used to jestingly say that he was afraid she
would end by being a miser; and her judicious, well-regulated management
of household expenditures, causing her to spend much the same amount
each year--prevented her now being able to dispose of large sums,
without giving rise to embarrassing questions.

M. Fauvel, the most generous of millionaires, delighted to see his
wife indulge in any extravagance, no matter how foolish; but he would
naturally expect to see traces of the money spent, something to show for
it.

The banker might suddenly discover that double the usual amount of
money was used in the house; and, if he should ask the cause of this
astonishing outlay, what answer could she give?

In three months, Raoul had squandered a little fortune. In the first
place, he was obliged to have bachelor’s apartments, prettily furnished,
and a handsome outfit from a fashionable tailor, besides the thousand
little things indispensable to a society man; he must have a blooded
horse and a coupe. His doting mother felt it her duty to give him these
luxuries, when her other sons were enjoying everything of the sort,
besides many other advantages of which her poor Raoul was deprived.
But each day the extravagance of his fancies increased, and Mme. Fauvel
began to be alarmed when his demands far exceeded her ability to gratify
them.

When she would gently remonstrate, Raoul’s beautiful eyes would fill
with tears, and in a sad, humble tone he would say:

“Alas! you are right to refuse me this gratification. What claim have I?
I must not forget that I am only the poor son of Valentine, not the rich
banker’s child!”

This touching repentance wrung her heart, so that she always ended by
granting him more than he had asked for. The poor boy had suffered
so much that it was her duty to console him, and atone for her past
neglect.

She soon discovered that he was jealous and envious of his two
brothers--for, after all, they were his brothers--Abel and Lucien.

“You never refuse them anything,” he would resentfully say: “they were
fortunate enough to enter life by the golden gate. Their every wish
is gratified; they enjoy wealth, position, home affection, and have a
splendid future awaiting them.”

“But what is lacking to your happiness, my son? Have you not everything
that money can give? and are you not first in my affections?” asked his
distressed mother.

“What do I want? Apparently nothing, in reality everything. Do I possess
anything legitimately? What right have I to your affection, to the
comforts and luxuries you heap upon me, to the name I bear? Is not my
life an extortion, my very birth a fraud?”

When Raoul talked in this strain, she would weep, and overwhelm him with
caresses and gifts, until she imagined that every jealous thought was
vanished from his mind.

As spring approached, she told Raoul she designed him to spend the
summer in the country, near her villa at St. Germain. She wanted to have
him with her all the time, and this was the only way of gratifying her
wish. She was surprised to find her proposal readily acquiesced in. In
a few days he told her he had rented a little house at Vesinet, and
intended having his furniture moved into it.

“Then, just think, dear mother, what a happy summer we will spend
together!” he said, with beaming eyes.

She was delighted for many reasons, one of which was that the expenses
of the prodigal son would necessarily be lessened. Anxiety as to the
exhausted state of her finances made her bold enough to chide him at the
dinner-table one day for having lost two thousand francs at the races
that morning.

“You are severe, my dear,” said M. Fauvel with the carelessness of a
rich man, who considered this sum a mere trifle. “Mamma Lagors won’t
object to footing his bills; mammas are created for the special purpose
of paying bills.”

And, not observing that his wife had turned pale at these jocular words,
he turned to Raoul, and added:

“Don’t disturb yourself about a small sum like this, my boy; when you
want money, come to me.”

What could Mme. Fauvel say? Had she not followed Clameran’s orders, and
told her husband that Raoul was wealthy? She could not go now and tell
him that he would never recover any money which he lent to a penniless
spendthrift.

Why had she been made to tell this unnecessary lie?

She suspected the snare laid for her; but now it was too late to escape
it: struggles would only more deeply entangle her in its meshes.

The banker’s offer was soon accepted. That same week Raoul went to his
uncle’s bank, and boldly borrowed ten thousand francs.

When Mme. Fauvel heard of this piece of audacity, she wrung her hands in
despair.

“What can he want with so much money?” she moaned to herself: “what
wicked extravagance is it for?” For some time Clameran had kept away
from Mme. Fauvel’s house. She decided to write and ask him to come and
advise her as to what steps should be taken to check Raoul.

She hoped that this energetic, determined man, who was so fully awake
to his duties as a guardian and an uncle, would make Raoul listen to
reason, and instantly refund the borrowed money.

When Clameran heard what his graceless nephew had done, his surprise and
anger were unbounded. He expressed so much indignation against Raoul,
that Mme. Fauvel was frightened at the storm she had raised, and began
to make excuses for her son.

While they were discussing the matter, Raoul came in, and a violent
altercation ensued between him and Clameran.

But the suspicions of Mme. Fauvel were aroused; she watched them, and it
seemed to her--could it be possible--that their anger was feigned; that,
although they abused and even threatened each other in the bitterest
language, their eyes twinkled with amusement.

She dared not breathe her doubts; but, like a subtle poison which
disorganizes everything with which it comes in contact, this new
suspicion filled her thoughts, and added to her already intolerable
sufferings.

Yet she never once thought of blaming Raoul; nor for a moment did she
feel displeased with her idolized son. She accused the marquis of taking
advantage of the youthful weakness and inexperience of his nephew.

She knew that she would have to suffer insolence and extortion from this
man who had her completely in his power; but she could not imagine what
object he now had in view, for she plainly saw that he was aiming
at something more than his nephew’s success in life. He constantly
concealed some plan to benefit himself at her expense; but assuredly her
darling Raoul could not be an accomplice in any plot to harass her.

Clameran himself soon cleared her mind of all doubts.

One day, after complaining more bitterly than usual of Raoul, and
proving to Mme. Fauvel that it was impossible for this state of affairs
to continue much longer, and a catastrophe was inevitable, he would up
by saying there was one means of salvation left.

This was that he, Clameran, must marry Madeleine!

Mme. Fauvel was prepared for almost any base proposal save this one. She
knew that his cupidity and insolence stopped at nothing, but never did
she imagine he would have the wild presumption to aspire to Madeleine’s
hand.

If she had renounced all hope of happiness for herself, if she consented
to the sacrifice of her own peace of mind, it was because she thus hoped
to insure the undisturbed felicity of her household, of her husband,
whom she had sinned against.

This unexpected declaration shocked her, and for a moment she was
speechless.

“Do you suppose for an instant, monsieur,” she indignantly exclaimed,
“that I will consent to any such disgraceful project? Sacrifice
Madeleine, and to you!”

“I certainly do suppose so, madame; in fact, I am certain of it,” he
answered with cool insolence.

“What sort of a woman do you think I am, monsieur? Alas, I am to
eternally suffer for a fault committed twenty years ago; have I not
already been more than adequately punished? And does it become you to
be constantly reproaching me with my long-past imprudence? You have no
right to be thus harassing me, till I dare not say my life is my own!
Your power is at an end, and God only knows how deeply I regret having
been insane enough to yield to its base sway! So long as I alone was
to be the tool, you found me weak and timid; but, now that you seek the
ruin of those I love, I rebel against your usurped authority. I have
still a little conscience left, and nothing under heaven will force me
to sacrifice my gentle, pure-hearted Madeleine!”

“May I inquire, madame, why you regard Mlle. Madeleine’s becoming the
Marchioness of Clameran as a disgrace and a sacrifice?”

“My niece chose, of her own free will, a husband whom she will shortly
marry. She loves M. Prosper Bertomy.”

The marquis disdainfully shrugged his shoulders.

“A school-girl love-affair,” said he; “she will forget all about it, if
you wish her to do so.”

“I do not wish it. I wish her to marry him.”

“Listen to me,” he replied, in the low, suppressed tone of a man trying
to control himself: “let us not waste time in these idle discussions.
Hitherto you have always commenced by protesting against my proposed
plans, and in the end acknowledge the good sense and justness of my
arguments; now, for once why not yield without going through with the
customary preliminaries? I ask it as a favor.”

“Never,” said Mme. Fauvel, “never will I yield.”

Clameran paid no attention to this interruption, but went on:

“I insist upon this marriage, mainly on your account, although it will
enable me to re-establish my own affairs, as well as yours and Raoul’s.
Of course you see that the allowance you give your son is insufficient
for his extravagant style of living. The time approaches when, having
nothing more to give him, you will have to encroach upon your husband’s
money-drawer to such an extent that longer concealment will be
impossible. When that day comes what is to be done? Perhaps you have
some feasible plan of escape?”

Mme. Fauvel shuddered. The dreadful day of discovery could not be far
off, and no earthly way was there to escape it.

The marquis went on:

“Assist me now, and, instead of having to make a shameful confession,
you will thank me for having saved you. Mlle. Madeleine is rich: her
dowry will enable me to supply the deficiency, and spare you all further
anxiety about Raoul.”

“I would rather be ruined than be saved by such means.”

“But I will not permit you to ruin us all. Remember, madame, that we are
associated in a common cause, the future welfare of Raoul; and, although
you have a right to rush upon destruction yourself, you certainly shall
not drag us with you.”

“Cease your importunities,” she said, looking him steadily in the eye.
“I have made up my mind irrevocably.”

“To what?”

“To do everything and anything to escape your shameful persecution.
Oh! you need not smile. I shall throw myself at M. Fauvel’s feet, and
confess everything. He is noble-hearted and generous, and, knowing how I
have suffered, will forgive me.”

“Do you think so?” said Clameran derisively.

“You mean to say that he will be pitiless, and banish me from his roof.
So be it; it will only be what I deserve. There is no torture that I
cannot bear, after what I have suffered through you.”

This inconceivable resistance so upset all the marquis’s plans that he
lost all constraint, and, dropping the mask of politeness, appeared in
his true character.

“Indeed!” he said in a fierce, brutal tone, “so you have decided to
confess to your loving, magnanimous husband! A famous idea! What a
pity you did not think of it before; it is rather late to try it now.
Confessing everything the first day I called on you, you might have been
forgiven. Your husband might have pardoned a youthful fault atoned for
by twenty years of irreproachable conduct; for none can deny that you
have been a faithful wife and a good mother. But picture the indignation
of your trusting husband when you tell him that this pretended nephew,
whom you imposed upon his family circle, who sat at his table, who
borrowed his money, is your illegitimate son! M. Fauvel is, no doubt,
an excellent, kind-hearted man; but I scarcely think he will pardon a
deception of this nature, which betrays such depravity, duplicity, and
audacity.”

All that the angry marquis said was horribly true; yet Mme. Fauvel
listened unflinchingly, as if the coarse cruelty of his words
strengthened her resolution to have nothing more to do with him, but to
throw herself on her husband’s mercy.

“Upon my soul,” he went on, “you must be very much infatuated with this
M. Bertomy! Between the honor of your husband’s name, and pleasing
this love-sick cashier, you refuse to hesitate. Well, I suppose he will
console you. When M. Fauvel divorces you, and Abel and Lucien avert
their faces at your approach, and blush at being your sons, you will be
able to say, ‘I have made Prosper happy!’”

“Happen what may, I shall do what is right,” said Mme. Fauvel.

“You shall do what I say!” cried Clameran, threateningly. “Do you
suppose that I will allow your sentimentality to blast all my hopes?
I shall tolerate no such folly, madame, I can assure you. Your niece’s
fortune is indispensable to us, and, more than that--I love the fair
Madeleine, and am determined to marry her.”

The blow once struck, the marquis judged it prudent to await the result.
With cool politeness, he continued:

“I will leave you now, madame, to think the matter over, and you cannot
fail to view it in the same light as I do. You had better take my
advice, and consent to this sacrifice of prejudice, as it will be the
last required of you. Think of the honor of your family, and not of your
niece’s love-affair. I will return in three days for your answer.”

“Your return is unnecessary, monsieur: I shall tell my husband
everything to-night.”

If Mme. Fauvel had not been so agitated herself, she would have detected
an expression of alarm upon Clameran’s face.

But this uneasiness was only momentary. With a shrug, which meant, “Just
as you please,” he said:

“I think you have sense enough to keep your secret.”

He bowed ceremoniously, and left the room, but slammed the front door
after him so violently as to prove that his restrained anger burst forth
before leaving the house.

Clameran had cause for fear. Mme. Fauvel’s determination was not
feigned. She was firm in her resolve to confess.

“Yes,” she cried, with the enthusiasm of a noble resolution, “yes, I
will tell Andre everything!”

She believed herself to be alone, but turned around suddenly at the
sound of footsteps, and found herself face to face with Madeleine, who
was pale and swollen-eyed with weeping.

“You must obey this man, aunt,” she quietly said.

Adjoining the parlor was a little card-room separated only by a heavy
silk curtain, instead of a door.

Madeleine was sitting in this little room when the marquis arrived, and,
as there was no egress save through the parlor, had remained, and thus
overheard the conversation.

“Good Heaven!” cried Mme. Fauvel with terror, “do you know----”

“I know everything, aunt.”

“And you wish me to sacrifice you to this fiend?”

“I implore you to let me save you from misery.”

“You certainly despise and hate M. de Clameran; how can you think I
would let you marry him?”

“I do despise him, aunt, and shall always regard him as the basest of
men; nevertheless I will marry him.”

Mme. Fauvel was overcome by the magnitude of this devotion.

“And what is to become of Prosper, my poor child--Prosper, whom you
love?”

Madeleine stifled a sob, and said in a firm voice:

“To-morrow I will break off my engagement with M. Bertomy.”

“I will never permit such a wrong,” cried Mme. Fauvel. “I will not add
to my sins by suffering an innocent girl to bear their penalty.”

The noble girl sadly shook her head, and replied:

“Neither will I suffer dishonor to fall upon this house, which is my
home, while I have power to prevent it. Am I not indebted to you for
more than life? What would I now be had you not taken pity on me? A
factory girl in my native village. You warmly welcomed the poor orphan,
and became a mother to her. Is it not to your husband that I owe the
fortune which excites the cupidity of this wicked Clameran? Are not Abel
and Lucien brothers to me? And now, when the happiness of all who have
been loving and generous to me is at stake, do you suppose I would
hesitate? No. I will become the wife of Clameran.”

Then began a struggle of self-sacrifice between Mme. Fauvel and her
niece, as to which should be the victim; only the more sublime, because
each offered her life to the other, not from any sudden impulse, but
deliberately and willingly.

But Madeleine carried the day, fired as she was by that holy enthusiasm
of sacrifice which is the sustaining element of martyrs.

“I am responsible to none but myself,” said she, well knowing this to be
the most vulnerable point she could attack; “whilst you, dear aunt, are
accountable to your husband and children. Think of the pain and sorrow
of M. Fauvel if he should learn the truth; it would kill him.”

The generous girl was right. She knew her uncle’s heart.

After having sacrificed her husband to her mother, Mme. Fauvel was about
to immolate her husband and children for Raoul.

As a general thing, a first fault draws many others in its train. As an
impalpable flake is the beginning of an avalanche, so an imprudence is
often the prelude to a great crime.

To false situations there is but one safe issue: truth.

Mme. Fauvel’s resistance grew weaker and more faint, as her niece
pointed out the line for her to pursue: the path of wifely duty.

“But,” she faintly argued, “I cannot accept your sacrifice. What sort of
a life will you lead with this man?”

“We can hope for the best,” replied Madeleine with a cheerfulness she
was far from feeling; “he loves me, he says; perhaps he will be kind to
me.”

“Ah, if I only knew where to obtain money! It is money that the grasping
man wants; money alone will satisfy him.”

“Does he not want it for Raoul? Has not Raoul, by his extravagant
follies, dug an abyss which must be bridged over by money? If I could
only believe M. de Clameran!”

Mme. Fauvel looked at her niece with bewildered curiosity.

What! this inexperienced girl had weighed the matter in its different
lights before deciding upon a surrender; whereas, she, a wife and a
mother, had blindly yielded to the inspirations of her heart!

“What do you mean? Madeleine, what do you suspect?”

“I mean this, aunt: that I do not believe that Clameran has any thought
of his nephew’s welfare. Once in possession of my fortune, he may leave
you and Raoul to your fates. And there is another dreadful suspicion
that tortures my mind.”

“A suspicion?”

“Yes, and I would reveal it to you, if I dared; if I did not fear that
you--”

“Speak!” insisted Mme. Fauvel. “Alas! misfortune has given me strength
to bear all things. There is nothing worse than has already happened. I
am ready to hear anything.”

Madeleine hesitated; she wished to enlighten her credulous aunt, and yet
hesitated to distress her.

“I would like to be certain,” she said, “that some secret understanding
between M. de Clameran and Raoul does not exist. Do you not think they
are acting a part agreed upon for the purpose of extorting money?”

Love is blind and deaf. Mme. Fauvel would not remember the laughing
eyes of the two men, upon the occasion of the pretended quarrel in her
presence. Infatuation had drowned suspicion. She could not, she would
not, believe in such hypocrisy. Raoul plot against the mother? Never!

“It is impossible,” she said, “the marquis is really indignant and
distressed at his nephew’s mode of life, and he certainly would not
countenance any disgraceful conduct. As to Raoul, he is vain, trifling,
and extravagant; but he has a good heart. Prosperity has turned his
head, but he loves me still. Ah, if you could see and hear him, when
I reproach him for his faults, your suspicions would fly to the winds.
When he tearfully promises to be more prudent, and never again give me
trouble, he means to keep his word; but perfidious friends entice
him away, and he commits some piece of folly without thinking of the
consequences.”

Mothers always blame themselves and everyone else for the sins of their
sons. The innocent friends come in for the principal share of censure,
each mother’s son leading the other astray.

Madeleine had not the heart to undeceive her aunt.

“God grant that what you say may be true,” she said; “if so, this
marriage will not be useless. We will write to M. de Clameran to-night.”

“Why to-night, Madeleine? We need not hurry so. Let us wait a little;
something else might happen to save us.”

These words, this confidence in chance, in a mere nothing, revealed
Mme. Fauvel’s true character, and accounted for her troubles. Timid,
hesitating, easily swayed, she never could come to a firm decision, form
a resolution, and abide by it, in spite of all arguments brought to
bear against it. In the hour of peril she would always shut her eyes and
trust to chance for a relief which never came. Never once did she think
to ward off trouble by her own exertions.

Quite different was Madeleine’s character. Beneath her gentle timidity
lay a strong, self-reliant will. Once decided upon what was right and
just, nothing could change her. If it was her duty to make a sacrifice,
it was to be carried out to the letter; no hesitation and sighs for
what might have been; she shut out all deceitful illusions, and walked
straight forward without one look back.

“We had better end the matter at once, dear aunt,” she said, in a
gentle, but firm tone. “Believe me, the reality of misfortune is not as
painful as its apprehension. You cannot bear the shocks of sorrow, and
delusive hopes of happiness, much longer. Do you know what anxiety of
mind has done to you? Have you looked in the mirror during the last four
months?”

She led her aunt up to the glass, and said:

“Look at yourself.”

Mme. Fauvel was indeed a mere shadow of her former self.

She had reached the perfidious age when a woman’s beauty, like a
full-blown rose, fades in a day.

Four months of trouble had made her an old woman. Sorrow had stamped its
fatal seal upon her brow. Her fair, soft skin was wrinkled, her golden
hair was streaked with silver, and her large, soft eyes had a painfully
frightened look.

“Do you not agree with me,” continued Madeleine, pityingly, “that peace
of mind is necessary to you? Do you not see that you are a wreck of your
former self? It is a miracle that M. Fauvel has not noticed this sad
change in you!”

Mme. Fauvel, who flattered herself that she had displayed wonderful
dissimulation, shook her head.

“Alas, my poor aunt! you think you concealed your secret from all: you
may have blinded my uncle, but I suspected all along that something
dreadful was breaking your heart.”

“You suspected what, Madeleine? Not the truth?”

“No, I was afraid--Oh, pardon an unjust suspicion, my dear aunt, but I
was wicked enough to suppose----”

She stopped, too distressed to finish her sentence; then, making a
painful effort, she added, as her aunt signed to her to go on:

“I was afraid that perhaps you loved another man than my uncle; it was
the only construction that I could put upon your strange conduct.”

Mme. Fauvel buried her face, and groaned. Madeleine’s suspicion was, no
doubt, entertained by others.

“My reputation is gone,” she moaned.

“No, dear aunt, no; do not be alarmed about that. No one has had
occasion to observe you as I have; it was only a dreadful thought which
penetrated my mind in spite of my endeavors to dispel it. Have courage:
we two can fight the world and silence our enemies. You shall be saved,
aunt: only trust in me.”

The Marquis of Clameran was agreeably surprised that evening by
receiving a letter from Mme. Fauvel, saying that she consented to
everything, but must have a little time to carry out the plan.

Madeleine, she said, could not break off her engagement with M. Bertomy
in a day. M. Fauvel would make objections, for he had an affection for
Prosper, and had tacitly approved of the match. It would be wiser to
leave to time the smoothing away of certain obstacles which a sudden
attack might render insurmountable.

A line from Madeleine, at the bottom of the letter, assured him that she
fully concurred with her aunt.

Poor girl! she did not spare herself. The next day she took Prosper
aside, and forced from him the fatal promise to shun her in the
future, and to take upon himself the responsibility of breaking their
engagement.

He implored Madeleine to at least explain the reason of this banishment,
which destroyed all of his hopes for happiness.

She quietly replied that her peace of mind and honor depended upon his
blind obedience to her will.

He left her with death in his soul.

As he went out of the house, the marquis entered.

Yes, he had the audacity to come in person, to tell Mme. Fauvel that,
now he had the promise of herself and Madeleine, he would consent to
wait awhile.

He himself saw the necessity of patience, knowing that he was not liked
by the banker.

Having the aunt and niece on his side, or rather in his power, he was
certain of success. He said to himself that the moment would come when a
deficit impossible to be paid would force them to hasten the wedding.

Raoul did all he could to bring matters to a crisis.

Mme. Fauvel went sooner than usual to her country seat, and Raoul at
once moved into his house at Vesinet. But living in the country did not
lessen his expenses.

Gradually he laid aside all hypocrisy, and now only came to see his
mother when he wanted money; and his demands were frequent and more
exorbitant each time.

As for the marquis, he prudently absented himself, awaiting the
propitious moment.

At the end of three weeks he met the banker at a friend’s, and was
invited to dinner the next day.

Twenty people were seated at the table; and, as the dessert was being
served, the banker suddenly turned to Clameran and said:

“I have a piece of news for you, monsieur. Have you any relatives of
your name?”

“None that I know of, monsieur.”

“I am surprised. About a week ago, I became acquainted with another
Marquis of Clameran.”

Although so hardened by crime, impudent enough to deny anything,
Clameran was so taken aback that he sat with pale face and a blank look,
silently staring at M. Fauvel.

But he soon recovered enough self-control to say hurriedly:

“Oh, indeed! That is strange. A Clameran may exist; but I cannot
understand the title of marquis.”

M. Fauvel was not sorry to have the opportunity of annoying a guest
whose aristocratic pretensions had often piqued him.

“Marquis or not,” he replied, “the Clameran in question seems to be able
to do honor to the title.”

“Is he rich?”

“I have reason to suppose that he is very wealthy. I have been notified
to collect for him four hundred thousand francs.”

Clameran had a wonderful faculty of self-control; he had so schooled
himself that his face never betrayed what was passing in his mind. But
this news was so startling, so strange, so pregnant of danger, that his
usual assurance deserted him.

He detected a peculiar look of irony in the banker’s eye.

The only persons who noticed this sudden change in the marquis’s matter
were Madeleine and her aunt. They saw him turn pale, and exchange a
meaning look with Raoul.

“Then I suppose this new marquis is a merchant,” said Clameran after a
moment’s pause.

“That I don’t know. All that I know is, that four hundred thousand
francs are to be deposited to his account by some ship-owners at Havre,
after the sale of the cargo of a Brazilian ship.”

“Then he comes from Brazil?”

“I do not know, but I can give you his Christian name.”

“I would be obliged.”

M. Fauvel arose from the table, and brought from the next room a
memorandum-book, and began to read over the names written in it.

“Wait a moment,” he said, “let me see--the 22nd, no, it was later than
that. Ah, here it is: Clameran, Gaston. His name is Gaston, monsieur.”

But this time Louis betrayed no emotion or alarm; he had had sufficient
time to recover his self-possession, and nothing could not throw him off
his guard.

“Gaston?” he queried, carelessly. “I know who he is now. He must be the
son of my father’s sister, whose husband lived at Havana. I suppose,
upon his return to France, he must have taken his mother’s name, which
is more sonorous than his father’s, that being, if I recollect aright,
Moirot or Boirot.”

The banker laid down his memorandum-book, and, resuming his seat, went
on:

“Boirot or Clameran,” said he, “I hope to have the pleasure of inviting
you to dine with him before long. Of the four hundred thousand francs
which I was ordered to collect for him, he only wishes to draw one
hundred, and tells me to keep the rest on running account. I judge from
this that he intends coming to Paris.”

“I shall be delighted to make his acquaintance.”

Clameran broached another topic, and seemed to have entirely forgotten
the news told him by the banker.

Although apparently engrossed in the conversation of his neighbor at the
table, he closely watched Mme. Fauvel and her niece.

He saw that they were unable to conceal their agitation, and stealthily
exchanged significant looks.

Evidently the same terrible idea had crossed their minds.

Madeleine seemed more nervous and startled than her aunt. When M. Fauvel
uttered Gaston’s name, she saw Raoul begin to draw back in his chair and
glance in a frightened manner toward the window, like a detected thief
looking for means of escape.

Raoul, less experienced than his uncle, was thoroughly discountenanced.
He, the original talker, the lion of a dinner-party, never at a loss
for some witty speech, was now perfectly dumb; he sat anxiously watching
Louis.

At last the dinner ended, and as the guests passed into the
drawing-room, Clameran and Raoul managed to remain last in the
dining-room.

When they were alone, they no longer attempted to conceal their anxiety.

“It is he!” said Raoul.

“I have no doubt of it.”

“Then all is lost; we had better make our escape.”

But a bold adventurer like Clameran had no idea of giving up the ship
till forced to do so.

“Who knows what may happen?” he asked, thoughtfully. “There is hope yet.
Why did not that muddle-headed banker tell us where this Clameran is to
be found?”

Here he uttered a joyful exclamation. He saw M. Fauvel’s memorandum-book
lying on the table.

“Watch!” he said to Raoul.

Seizing the note-book, he hurriedly turned over the leaves, and, in an
undertone, read:

“Gaston, Marquis of Clameran, Oloron, Lower Pyrenees.”

“Well, does finding out his address assist us?” inquired Raoul, eagerly.

“It may save us: that is all. Let us return to the drawing-room; our
absence might be observed. Exert yourself to appear unconcerned and gay.
You almost betrayed us once by your agitation.”

“The two women suspect something.”

“Well, suppose they do?”

“The best thing that we can do is escape; the sooner we leave Paris, the
better.”

“Do you think we should do any better in London? Don’t be so easily
frightened. I am going to plant my batteries, and I warrant they will
prove successful.”

They joined the other guests. But, if their conversation had not been
overheard their movements had been watched.

Madeleine looked through the half-open door, and saw Clameran consulting
her uncle’s note-book, and whispering to Raoul. But what benefit would
she derive from this proof of the marquis’s villany? She knew now that
he was plotting to obtain her fortune, and she would be forced to yield
it to him; that he had squandered his brother’s fortune, and was now
frightened at the prospect of having to account for it. Still this did
not explain Raoul’s conduct. Why did he show such fear?

Two hours later, Clameran was on the road to Vesinet with Raoul,
explaining to him his plans.

“It is my precious brother, and no mistake,” he said. “But that need not
alarm you so easily, my lovely nephew.”

“Merciful powers! Doesn’t the banker expect to see him any day? Is he
not liable to pounce down on me to-morrow?”

“Don’t be an idiot!” interrupted Clameran. “Does he know that Fauvel
is Valentine’s husband? That is what we must find out. If he knows that
little fact, we must take to our heels; if he is ignorant of it, our
case is not desperate.”

“How will you find out?”

“By simply asking him.”

Raoul exclaimed at his ally’s cunning:

“That is a dangerous thing to do,” he said.

“‘Tis not as dangerous as sitting down with our hands folded. And, as to
running away at the first suspicion of alarm, it would be imbecility.”

“Who is going to look for him?”

“I am.”

“Oh, oh, oh!” exclaimed Raoul in three different tones. Clameran’s
audacity confounded him.

“But what am I going to do?” he inquired after a moment’s silence.

“You will oblige me by remaining here and keeping quiet. I will send you
a despatch if there is danger; and then you can decamp.”

As they parted at Raoul’s door, Clameran said:

“Now, remember. Stay here, and during my absence be very intimate at
your devoted mother’s. Be the most dutiful of sons. Abuse me as much as
you please to her; and, above all, don’t indulge in any folly; make no
demands for money; keep your eyes open. Good-by. To-morrow evening I
will be at Oloron talking with this new Clameran.”




XVIII

After leaving Valentine de la Verberie, Gaston underwent great peril and
difficulty in effecting his escape.

But for the experienced and faithful Menoul, he never would have
succeeded in embarking.

Having left his mother’s jewels with Valentine, his sole fortune
consisted of not quite a thousand francs; and with this paltry sum in
his pocket, the murderer of two men, a fugitive from justice, and with
no prospect of earning a livelihood, he took passage for Valparaiso.

But Menoul was a bold and experienced sailor.

While Gaston remained concealed in a farm-house at Camargue, Menoul went
to Marseilles, and that very evening discovered, from some of his sailor
friends, that a three-masted American vessel was in the roadstead, whose
commander, Captain Warth, a not over-scrupulous Yankee, would be glad to
welcome on board an able-bodied man who would be of assistance to him at
sea.

After visiting the vessel, and finding, during a conversation over
a glass of rum with the captain, that he was quite willing to take a
sailor without disturbing himself about his antecedents, Menoul returned
to Gaston.

“Left to my own choice, monsieur,” he said, “I should have settled this
matter on the spot; but you might object to it.”

“What suits you, suits me,” interrupted Gaston.

“You see, the fact is, you will be obliged to work very hard. A sailor’s
life is not boy’s play. You will not find much pleasure in it. And I
must confess that the ship’s company is not the most moral one I ever
saw. You never would imagine yourself in a Christian company. And the
captain is a regular swaggering bully.”

“I have no choice,” said Gaston. “Let us go on board at once.”

Old Menoul’s suspicions were correct.

Before Gaston had been on board the Tom Jones forty-eight hours, he saw
that chance had cast him among a collection of the most depraved bandits
and cut-throats.

The vessel, which seemed to have recruited at all points of the compass,
possessed a crew composed of every variety of thievish knaves; each
country had contributed a specimen.

But Gaston’s mind was undisturbed as to the character of the people with
whom his lot was cast for several months.

It was only his miserable wounded body, that the vessel was carrying
to a new country. His heart and soul rested in the shady park of La
Verberie, beside his lovely Valentine. He took no note of the men around
him, but lived over again those precious hours of bliss beneath the old
tree on the banks of the Rhone, where his beloved had confided her heart
to his keeping, and sworn to love him forever.

And what would become of her now, poor child, when he was no longer
there to love, console, and defend her?

Happily, he had no time for sad reflections.

His every moment was occupied in learning the rough apprenticeship of a
sailor’s life. All his energies were spent in bearing up under the heavy
burden of labor allotted to him. Being totally unaccustomed to manual
work, he found it difficult to keep pace with the other sailors, and for
the first week or two he was often near fainting at his post, from sheer
fatigue; but indomitable energy kept him up.

This was his salvation. Physical suffering calmed and deadened his
mental agony. The few hours relaxation granted him were spent in heavy
sleep; the instant his weary body touched his bunk, his eyes closed, and
no moment did he have to mourn over the past.

At rare intervals, when the weather was calm, and he was relieved
from his constant occupation of trimming the sails, he would anxiously
question the future, and wonder what he should do when this irksome
voyage was ended.

He had sworn that he would return before the end of three years, rich
enough to satisfy the exactions of Mme. de la Verberie. How should he be
able to keep this boastful promise? Stern reality had convinced him
that his projects could never be realized, except by hard work and
long waiting. What he hoped to accomplish in three years was likely to
require a lifetime.

Judging from the conversation of his companions, he was not now on the
road to fortune.

The Tom Jones set sail for Valparaiso, but certainly went in a
roundabout way to reach her destination.

The real fact was, that Captain Warth proposed visiting the Gulf of
Guinea.

A friend of his, the “Black Prince,” he said, with a loud laugh, was
waiting for him at Badagri, to exchange a cargo of “_ebony_” for some
pipes of rum, and a hundred flint-lock muskets which were on board the
Tom Jones.

Gaston soon saw that he was serving his apprenticeship on a slaver, one
of the many ships sent yearly by the free and philanthropic Americans,
who made immense fortunes by carrying on the slave-trade.

Although this discovery filled Gaston with indignation and shame, he was
prudent enough to conceal his impressions.

His remonstrances, no matter how eloquent, would have made no change in
the opinions of Captain Warth regarding a traffic which brought him
in more than a hundred per cent, in spite of the French and English
cruisers, the damages, sometimes entire loss of cargoes, and many other
risks.

The crew admired Gaston when they learned that he had cut two men into
mince-meat when they were insolent to him; this was the account of
Gaston’s affair, as reported to the captain by old Menoul.

Gaston wisely determined to keep on friendly terms with the villains, as
long as he was in their power. To express disapproval of their conduct
would have incurred the enmity of the whole crew, without bettering his
own situation.

He therefore kept quiet, but swore mentally that he would desert on the
first opportunity.

This opportunity, like everything impatiently longed for, came not.

By the end of three months, Gaston had become so useful and popular that
Captain Warth found him indispensable.

Seeing him so intelligent and agreeable, he liked to have him at his own
table, and would spend hours at cards with him or consulting about
his business matters. The mate of the ship dying, Gaston was chosen to
replace him. In this capacity he made two successful voyages to Guinea,
bringing back a thousand blacks, whom he superintended during a trip of
fifteen hundred leagues, and finally landed them on the coast of Brazil.

When Gaston had been with Captain Warth about three years, the Tom Jones
stopped at Rio Janeiro for a month, to lay in supplies. He now decided
to leave the ship, although he had become somewhat attached to the
friendly captain, who was after all a worthy man, and never would have
engaged in the diabolical traffic of human beings, but for his little
angel daughter’s sake. He said that his child was so good and beautiful,
that she deserved a large fortune. Each time that he sold a black, he
would quiet any faint qualms of conscience by saying, “It is for little
Mary’s good.”

Gaston possessed twelve thousand francs, as his share of the profits,
when he landed at Brazil.

As a proof that the slave-trade was repugnant to his nature, he left the
slaver the moment he possessed a little capital with which to enter some
honest business.

But he was no longer the high-minded, pure-hearted Gaston, who had
so devotedly loved and perilled his life for the little fairy of La
Verberie.

It is useless to deny that evil examples are pernicious to morals.
The most upright characters are unconsciously influenced by bad
surroundings. As the exposure to rain, sun, and sea-air first darkened
and then hardened his skin, so did wicked associates first shock and
then destroy the refinement and purity of Gaston’s mind. His heart
had become as hard and coarse as his sailor hands. He still remembered
Valentine, and sighed for her presence; but she was no longer the sole
object of affection, the one woman in the world to him. Contact with sin
had lowered his standard of women.

The three years, after which he had pledged himself to return, had
passed; perhaps Valentine was expecting him. Before deciding on any
definite project, he wrote to an intimate friend at Beaucaire to learn
what had happened during his long absence. He expressed great anxiety
about his family and neighbors.

He also wrote to his father, asking why he had never answered the many
letters which he had sent to him by returning sailors, who would have
safely forwarded the replies.

At the end of a year, he received an answer from his friend.

The letter almost drove him mad.

It told him that his father was dead; that his brother had left France,
Valentine was lately married, and that he, Gaston, had been sentenced to
ten years’ imprisonment for murder.

Henceforth he was alone in the world; with no country, no family, no
home, and disgraced by a public sentence.

Valentine was married, and he had no object in life! He would hereafter
have faith in no one, since she, Valentine, had cast him off, forgotten
him. What could he expect of others, when she had broken her troth, had
lacked the courage to keep her promise and wait for him?--she, whom he
had so trusted.

In his despair, he almost regretted the Tom Jones. Yes, he sighed for
the wicked slaver crew, his life of excitement and peril. The dangers
and triumphs of those bold pirates whose only care was to heap up money
would have been preferable to his present wretchedness.

But Gaston was not a man to be long cast down.

“Money is the cause of it all!” he said with rage. “If the lack of money
can bring such misery, its possession must bestow intense happiness.
Henceforth I will devote all my energies to getting money.”

He set to work with a greedy activity, which increased each day. He
tried all the many speculations open to adventurers. Alternately he
traded in furs, worked in a mine, and cultivated lands.

Five times he went to bed rich, and waked up ruined; five times, with
the patience of the castor, whose hut is swept away by each returning
tide, he recommenced the foundation of his fortune.

Finally, after long weary years of toil and struggle, he was worth a
million in gold, besides immense tracts of land.

He had often said that he would never leave Brazil, that he wanted to
end his days in Rio. He had forgotten that love for his native land
never dies in the heart of a Frenchman. Now that he was rich, he wished
to die in France.

He made inquiries, and found that the law of limitations would permit
him to return without being disturbed by the authorities. He left his
property in charge of an agent, and embarked for France, taking a large
portion of his fortune with him.

Twenty-three years and four months had elapsed since he fled from home.

On a bright, crisp day in January, 1866, he once again stepped on
French soil. With a sad heart, he stood upon the quays at Bordeaux, and
compared the past with the present.

He had departed a young man, ambitious, hopeful, and beloved; he
returned gray-haired, disappointed, trusting no one.

Gold could not supply the place of affection. He had said that riches
would bring happiness: his wealth was immense, and he was miserable.

His health, too, began to suffer from this sudden change of climate.
Rheumatism confined him to his bed for several months. As soon as
he could sit up, the physicians sent him to the warm baths, where he
recovered his health, but not his spirits. He felt his lonely condition
more terribly in his own country than when in a foreign land.

He determined to divert his mind by engaging in some occupation which
would keep him too busy to think of himself and his disappointment.
Charmed with the beauty of the Pyrenees, and the lovely valley of Aspe,
he resolved to take up his abode there.

An iron-mill was for sale near Oloron, on the borders of the Gara; he
bought it with the intention of utilizing the immense quantity of wood,
which, for want of means of transportation, was being wasted in the
mountains.

He was soon settled comfortably in his new home, and enjoying a busy,
active life.

One evening, as he was ruminating over the past, his servant brought him
a card, and said the gentleman was waiting to see him.

He read the name on the card: _Louis de Clameran_.

Many years had passed since Gaston had experienced such violent
agitation. His blood rushed to his face, and he trembled like a leaf.

The old home affections which he thought dead now sprung up anew in his
heart. A thousand confused memories rushed through his mind. Like one
in a dream, he tottered toward the door, gasping, in a smothered, broken
voice:

“My brother! oh, my brother!”

Hurriedly passing by the frightened servant, he ran downstairs.

In the passage stood a man: it was Louis de Clameran.

Gaston threw his arms around his neck and held him in a close embrace
for some minutes, and then drew him into the room.

Seated close beside him, with his two hands tightly clasped in those of
Louis, Gaston gazed at his brother as a fond mother would gaze at her
son just returned from the battle-field.

There was scarcely any danger and excitement which the mate of the
redoubtable Captain Warth had not experienced; nothing had ever before
caused him to lose his calm presence of mind, to force him to betray
that he had a heart. The sight of this long unseen brother seemed to
have changed his nature; he was like a woman, weeping and laughing at
once.

“And is this really Louis?” he cried. “My dear brother! Why, I should
have recognized you among a thousand; the expression of your face is
just the same; your smile takes me back twenty-three years.”

Louis did indeed smile, just as he smiled on that fatal night when his
horse stumbled, and prevented Gaston’s escape.

He smiled now as if he was perfectly happy at meeting his brother.

And he was much more at ease than he had been a few moments before. He
had exerted all the courage he possessed to venture upon this meeting.
Nothing but pressing necessity would have induced him to face this
brother, who seemed to have risen from the dead to reproach him for his
crimes.

His teeth chattered and he trembled in every limb when he rang Gaston’s
bell, and handed the servant his card, saying:

“Take this to your master.”

The few moments before Gaston’s appearance seemed to be centuries. He
said to himself:

“Perhaps it is not he; if it is he, does he know? Does he suspect
anything? How will he receive me?”

He was so anxious, that when he saw Gaston running downstairs, he felt
like fleeing from the house without speaking to him.

Not knowing the nature of Gaston’s feelings, whether he was hastening
toward him in anger or brotherly love, he stood perfectly motionless.
But one glance at his brother’s face convinced him that he was the same
affectionate, credulous, trusting Gaston of old; and, now that he was
certain that his brother harbored no suspicions, he smilingly received
the demonstrations lavished upon him.

“After all,” continued Gaston, “I am not alone in the world; I shall
have someone to love, someone to care for me.”

Then, as if suddenly struck by a thought, he said:

“Are you married, Louis?”

“No.”

“That is a pity, a great pity. It would so add to my happiness to see
you the husband of a good, affectionate woman, the father of bright,
lovely children! It would be a comfort to have a happy family about me.
I should look upon them all as my own. To live alone, without a loving
wife to share one’s joys and sorrows, is not living at all: it is a sort
of living death. There is no joy equal to having the affection of a true
woman whose happiness is in your keeping. Oh the sadness of having only
one’s self to care for! But what am I saying? Louis, forgive me. I
have you now, and ought not that to be enough? I have a brother, a kind
friend who will be interested in me, and afford me company, instead of
the weariness of solitude.”

“Yes, Gaston, yes: I am your best friend.”

“Of course you are. Being my brother, you are naturally my true friend.
You are not married, you say. Then we will have to do the best we
can, and keep house for ourselves. We will live together like two old
bachelors, as we are, and be as happy as kings; we will lead a gay life,
and enjoy everything that can be enjoyed. I feel twenty years younger
already. The sight of your face renews my youth, and I feel as active
and strong as I did the night I swam across the swollen Rhone. And that
was long, long ago. The struggles, privations, and anxieties endured
since, have been enough to age any man. I feel old, older than my
years.”

“What an idea!” interrupted Louis: “why, you look younger than I do.”

“You are jesting.”

“I swear I think you look the younger.”

“Would you have recognized me?”

“Instantly. You are very little changed.”

And Louis was right. He himself had an old, worn-out, used-up
appearance; while Gaston, in spite of his gray hair and weather-beaten
face, was a robust man, in the full maturity of his prime.

It was a relief to turn from Louis’s restless eyes and crafty smile to
Gaston’s frank, honest face.

“But,” said Gaston, “how did you know that I was living? What kind
chance guided you to my house?”

Louis was prepared for this question. During his eighteen hours’ ride by
the railway, he had arranged all his answers, and had his story ready.

“We must thank Providence for this happy meeting,” he replied. “Three
days ago, a friend of mine returned from the baths, and mentioned that
he had heard that a Marquis of Clameran was near there, in the Pyrenees.
You can imagine my surprise. I instantly supposed that some impostor had
assumed our name. I took the next train, and finally found my way here.”

“Then you did not expect to see me?”

“My dear brother, how could I hope for that? I thought that you were
drowned twenty-three years ago.”

“Drowned! Mlle. de la Verberie certainly told you of my escape? She
promised that she would go herself, the next day, and tell my father of
my safety.”

Louis assumed a distressed look, as if he hesitated to tell a sad truth,
and said, in a regretful tone:

“Alas! she never told us.”

Gaston’s eyes flashed with indignation. He thought that perhaps
Valentine had been glad to get rid of him.

“She did not tell you?” he exclaimed. “Did she have the cruelty to let
you mourn my death? to let my old father die of a broken heart? Ah, she
must have been very fearful of what the world says. She sacrificed me,
then, for the sake of her reputation.”

“But why did you not write to us?” asked Louis.

“I did write as soon as I had an opportunity; and Lafourcade wrote back,
saying that my father was dead, and that you had left the country.”

“I left Clameran because I believed you to be dead.”

After a long silence, Gaston arose, and walked up and down the room as
if to shake off a feeling of sadness; then he said, cheerfully:

“Well, it is of no use to mourn over the past. All the memories in the
world, good or bad, are not worth one slender hope for the future; and
thank God, we have a bright future before us. Let us bury the past, and
enjoy life together.”

Louis was silent. His footing was not sure enough to risk any questions.

“But here I have been talking incessantly for an hour,” said Gaston,
“and I dare say that you have not dined.”

“No, I have not, I confess.”

“Why did you not say so before? I forgot that I had not dined myself.
I will not let you starve, the first day of your arrival. I will make
amends by giving you some splendid old Cape wine.”

He pulled the bell, and ordered the servant to hasten dinner, adding
that it must be an excellent one; and within an hour the two brothers
were seated at a sumptuous repast.

Gaston kept up an uninterrupted stream of questions. He wished to know
all that had happened during his absence.

“What about Clameran?” he abruptly asked.

Louis hesitated a moment. Should he tell the truth, or not?

“I have sold Clameran,” he finally said.

“The chateau too?”

“Yes.”

“You acted as you thought best,” said Gaston sadly; “but it seems to me
that, if I had been in your place, I should have kept the old homestead.
Our ancestors lived there for many generations, and our father lies
buried there.”

Then seeing Louis appear sad and distressed, he quickly added:

“However, it is just as well; it is in the heart that memory dwells, and
not in a pile of old stones. I myself had not the courage to return to
Provence. I could not trust myself to go to Clameran, where I would have
to look into the park of La Verberie. Alas, the only happy moments of my
life were spent there!”

Louis’s countenance immediately cleared. The certainty that Gaston had
not been to Provence relieved his mind of an immense weight.

The next day Louis telegraphed to Raoul:

“Wisdom and prudence. Follow my directions. All goes well. Be sanguine.”

All was going well; and yet Louis, in spite of his skilfully applied
questions, had obtained none of the information which he had come to
obtain.

Gaston was communicative on every subject except the one in which Louis
was interested. Was this silence premeditated, or simply unconscious?
Louis, like all villains, was ever ready to attribute to others the bad
motives by which he himself would be influenced.

Anything was better than this uncertainty; he determined to ask his
brother plainly what his intentions were in regard to money matters.

He thought the dinner-table a favorable opportunity, and began by
saying:

“Do you know, my dear Gaston, that thus far we have discussed every
topic except the most important one?”

“Why do you look so solemn, Louis? What is the grave subject of which
you speak?”

“Our father’s estate. Supposing you to be dead, I inherited, and have
disposed of it.”

“Is that what you call a serious matter?” said Gaston with an amused
smile.

“It certainly is very serious to me; as you have a right to half of the
estate, I must account to you for it. You have--”

“I have,” interrupted Gaston, “a right to ask you never to allude to the
subject again. It is yours by limitation.”

“I cannot accept it upon those terms.”

“But you must. My father only wished to have one of us inherit his
property; we will be carrying out his wishes by not dividing it.”

Seeing that Louis’s face still remained clouded, he went on:

“Ah, I see what annoys you, my dear Louis; you are rich, and think that
I am poor, and too proud to accept anything from you. Is it not so?”

Louis started at this question. How could he reply so as not to commit
himself?

“I am not rich,” he finally said.

“I am delighted to hear it,” cried Gaston. “I wish you were as poor as
Job, so that I might share what I have with you.”

Dinner over, Gaston rose and said:

“Come, I want to visit with you, my--that is, our property. You must see
everything about the place.”

Louis uneasily followed his brother. It seemed to him that Gaston
obstinately shunned anything like an explanation.

Could all this brotherly confidence be assumed to blind him as to his
real plans? Why did Gaston inquire into his brother’s past and future,
without revealing his own? Louis’s suspicions were aroused, and he
regretted his over-hasty seeking of Gaston.

But his calm, smiling face betrayed none of the anxious thoughts which
filled his mind.

He was called upon to praise everything. First he was taken over the
house and servants’ quarters, then to the stable, kennels, and the
vast, beautifully laid-out garden. Across a pretty meadow was the
iron-foundery in full operation. Gaston, with all the enthusiasm of
a new proprietor, explained everything, down to the smallest file and
hammer.

He detailed all his projects; how he intended substituting wood for
coal, and how, besides having plenty to work the forge, he could make
immense profits by felling the forest trees, which had hitherto been
considered impracticable. He would cut a hundred cords of wood that
year.

Louis approved of everything; but only answered in monosyllables, “Ah,
indeed! excellent idea; quite a success.”

His mind was tortured by a new pain; he was paying no attention to
Gaston’s remarks, but enviously comparing all this wealth and prosperity
with his own poverty.

He found Gaston rich, respected, and happy, enjoying the price of his
own labor and industry; whilst he--Never had he so cruelly felt the
misery of his own condition; and he had brought it on himself, which
only made it more aggravating.

After a lapse of twenty-three years, all the envy and hate he had felt
toward Gaston, when they were boys together, revived.

“What do you think of my purchase?” asked Gaston, when the inspection
was over.

“I think you possess, my dear brother, a most splendid piece of
property, and on the loveliest spot in the world. It is enough to excite
the envy of any poor Parisian.”

“Do you really think so?”

“Certainly.”

“Then, my dear Louis,” said Gaston joyfully, “this property is yours, as
well as mine. You like this lovely Bearn more than the dusty streets of
Paris? I am very glad that you prefer the comforts of living on your
own estate, to the glitter and show of a city life. Everything you can
possibly want is here, at your command. And, to employ our time, there
is the foundery. Does my plan suit you?”

Louis was silent. A year ago this proposal would have been eagerly
welcomed. How gladly he would have seized this offer of a comfortable,
luxurious home, after having been buffeted about the world so long! How
delightful it would have been to turn over a new leaf, and become an
honest man!

But he saw with disappointment and rage that he would now be compelled
to decline it.

He was no longer free. He could not leave Paris.

He had become entangled in one of those hazardous plots which are fatal
if neglected, and whose failure generally leads the projector to the
galleys.

Alone, he could easily remain where he was: but he was trammelled with
an accomplice.

“You do not answer me,” said Gaston with surprise; “are there any
obstacles to my plans?”

“None.”

“What is the matter, then?”

“The matter is, my dear brother, that the salary of an office which I
hold in Paris is all that I have to support me.”

“Is that your only objection? Yet you just now wanted to pay me back
half of the family inheritance! Louis, that is unkind; you are not
acting as a brother should.”

Louis hung his head. Gaston was unconsciously telling the truth.

“I should be a burden to you, Gaston.”

“A burden! Why, Louis, you must be mad! Did I not tell you I am very
rich? Do you suppose that you have seen all I possess? This house and
the iron-works do not constitute a fourth of my fortune. Do you think
that I would have risked my twenty years’ savings in an experiment of
this sort? The forge may be a failure; and then what would become of me,
if I had nothing else?

“I have invested money which yields me an income of eighty thousand
francs. Besides, my grants in Brazil have been sold, and my agent has
already deposited four hundred thousand francs to my credit as part
payment.”

Louis trembled with pleasure. He was, at last, to know the extent of the
danger hanging over him. Gaston had finally broached the subject which
had caused him so much anxiety, and he determined that it should now be
explained before their conversation ended.

“Who is your agent?” he asked with assumed indifference.

“My old partner at Rio. He deposited the money at my Paris banker’s.”

“Is this banker a friend of yours?”

“No; I never heard of him until my banker at Pau recommended him to me
as an honest, reliable man; he is immensely wealthy, and stands at the
head of the financiers in Paris. His name is Fauvel, and he lives on the
Rue de Provence.”

Although prepared for hearing almost anything, and determined to betray
no agitation, Louis turned deadly pale.

“Do you know this banker?” asked Gaston.

“Only by reputation.”

“Then we can make his acquaintance together; for I intend accompanying
you to Paris, when you return there to settle up your affairs before
establishing yourself here to superintend the forge.”

At this unexpected announcement of a step which would prove his utter
ruin, Louis was stupefied. In answer to his brother’s questioning look,
he gasped out.

“You are going to Paris?”

“Certainly I am. Why should I not go?”

“There is no reason why.”

“I hate Paris, although I have never been there. But I am called there
by interest, by sacred duties,” he hesitatingly said. “The truth is, I
understand that Mlle. de la Verberie lives in Paris, and I wish to see
her.”

“Ah!”

Gaston was silent and thoughtful for some moments, and then said,
nervously:

“I will tell you, Louis, why I wish to see her. I left our family jewels
in her charge, and I wish to recover them.”

“Do you intend, after a lapse of twenty-three years, to claim these
jewels?”

“Yes--or rather no. I only make the jewels an excuse for seeing her.
I must see her because--because--she is the only woman I ever really
loved!”

“But how will you find her?”

“Oh! that is easy enough. Anyone can tell me the name of her husband,
and then I will go to see her. Perhaps the shortest way to find out,
would be to write to Beaucaire. I will do so to-morrow.”

Louis made no reply.

Men of his character, when brought face to face with imminent danger,
always weigh their words, and say as little as possible, for fear of
committing themselves by some indiscreet remark.

Above all things, Louis was careful to avoid raising any objections
to his brother’s proposed trip to Paris. To oppose the wishes of a
determined man has the effect of making him adhere more closely to them.
Each argument is like striking a nail with a hammer. Knowing this, Louis
changed the conversation, and nothing more during the day was said of
Valentine or Paris.

At night, alone in his room, he brought his cunning mind to bear upon
the difficulties of his situation, and wondered by what means he could
extricate himself.

At first the case seemed hopeless, desperate. During twenty years, Louis
had been at war with society, trusted by none, living upon his wits,
and the credulity of foolish men enabling him to gain an income without
labor; and, though he generally attained his ends, it was not without
great danger and constant dread of detection.

He had been caught at the gaming-table with his hands full of duplicate
cards; he had been tracked all over Europe by the police, and obliged to
fly from city to city under an assumed name; he had sold to cowards his
skilful handling of the sword and pistol; he had been repeatedly thrown
into prison, and always made his escape. He had braved everything, and
feared nothing. He had often conceived and carried out the most criminal
plans, without the slightest hesitation or remorse. And now here he sat,
utterly bewildered, unable to think clearly; his usual impudence and
ready cunning seemed to have deserted him.

Thus driven to the wall, he saw no means of escape, and was almost
tempted to confess all, and throw himself upon his brother’s clemency.
Then he thought that it would be wiser to borrow a large sum from
Gaston, and fly the country.

Vainly did he think over the wicked experiences of the past: none of the
former successful stratagems could be resorted to in the present case.

Fatally, inevitably, he was about to be caught in a trap laid by
himself.

The future was fraught with danger, worse than danger--ruin and
disgrace.

He had to fear the wrath of M. Fauvel, his wife and niece. Gaston would
have speedy vengeance the moment he discovered the truth; and Raoul,
his accomplice, would certainly turn against him, and become his most
implacable enemy.

Was there no possible way of preventing a meeting between Valentine and
Gaston?

None that he could think of.

Their meeting would be his destruction.

Lost in reflection, he paid no attention to the flight of time. Daybreak
still found him sitting at the window with his face buried in his hands,
trying to come to some definite conclusion what he should say and do to
keep Gaston away from Paris.

“It is vain for me to think,” he muttered. “The more I rack my brain,
the more confused it becomes. There is nothing to be done but gain time,
and wait for an opportunity.”

The fall of the horse at Clameran was what Louis called “an
opportunity.”

He closed the window, and, throwing himself upon the bed, was soon in a
sound sleep; being accustomed to danger, it never kept him awake.

At the breakfast-table, his calm, smiling face bore no traces of a
wakeful, anxious night.

He was in a gayer, more talkative mood than usual, and said he would
like to ride over the country, and visit the neighboring towns. Before
leaving the table, he had planned several excursions which were to take
place during the week.

He hoped to keep Gaston so amused and occupied, that he would forget all
about going to Paris in search of Valentine.

He thought that with time, and skilfully put objections, he could
dissuade his brother from seeking out his former love. He relied upon
being able to convince him that this absolutely unnecessary interview
would be painful to both, embarrassing to him, and dangerous to her.

As to the jewels, if Gaston persisted in claiming them, Louis could
safely offer to go and get them for him, as he had only to redeem them
from the pawnbroker.

But his hopes and plans were soon scattered to the winds.

“You know,” said Gaston, “I have written.”

Louis knew well enough to what he alluded, but pretended to be very much
surprised, and said:

“Written? To whom? Where? For what?”

“To Beaucaire, to ask Lafourcade the name of Valentine’s husband.”

“You are still thinking of her?”

“She is never absent from my thoughts.”

“You have not given up your idea of going to see her?”

“Of course not.”

“Alas, Gaston! you forget that she whom you once loved is now the wife
of another, and possibly the mother of a large family. How do you know
that she will consent to see you? Why run the risk of destroying her
domestic happiness, and planting seeds of remorse in your own bosom?”

“I know I am a fool; but my folly is dear to me, and I would not cure it
if I could.”

The quiet determination of Gaston’s tone convinced Louis that all
remonstrances would be unavailing.

Yet he remained the same in his manner and behavior, apparently
engrossed in pleasure parties; but, in reality, his only thought was the
mail. He always managed to be at the door when the postman came, so that
he was the first to receive his brother’s letters.

When he and Gaston were out together at the time of the postman’s visit,
he would hurry into the house first, so as to look over the letters
which were always laid in a card-basket on the hall table.

His watchfulness was at last rewarded.

The following Sunday, among the letters handed to him by the postman,
was one bearing the postmark of Beaucaire.

He quickly slipped it into his pocket; and, although he was on the point
of mounting his horse to ride with Gaston, he said that he must run up
to his room to get something he had forgotten; this was to gratify his
impatient desire to read the letter.

He tore it open, and, seeing “Lafourcade” signed at the bottom of three
closely written pages, hastily devoured the contents.

After reading a detailed account of events entirely uninteresting to
him, Louis came to the following passage relating to Valentine:


“Mlle. de la Verberie’s husband is an eminent banker named Andre Fauvel.
I have not the honor of his acquaintance, but I intend going to see him
shortly. I am anxious to submit to him a project that I have conceived
for the benefit of this part of the country. If he approves of it, I
shall ask him to invest in it, as his name will be of great assistance
to the scheme. I suppose you have no objections to my referring him to
you, should he ask for my indorsers.”


Louis trembled like a man who had just made a narrow escape from death.
He well knew that he would have to fly the country if Gaston received
this letter.

But though the danger was warded off for the while, it might return and
destroy him at any moment.

Gaston would wait a week for an answer, then he would write again;
Lafourcade would instantly reply to express surprise that his first
letter had not been received; all of this correspondence would occupy
about twelve days. In those twelve days Louis would have to think over
some plan for preventing Lafourcade’s visit to Paris; since, the instant
he mentioned the name of Clameran to the banker, everything would be
discovered.

Louis’s meditations were interrupted by Gaston, who called from the
lower passage:

“What are you doing, Louis? I am waiting for you.”

“I am coming now,” he replied.

Hastily thrusting Lafourcade’s letter into his trunk, Louis ran down to
his brother.

He had made up his mind to borrow a large sum from Gaston, and go off to
America; and Raoul might get out of the scrape as best he could.

The only thing which now disturbed him was the sudden failure of the
most skilful combination he had ever conceived; but he was not a man to
fight against destiny, and determined to make the best of the emergency,
and hope for better fortune in his next scheme.

The next day about dusk, while walking along the pretty road leading
from the foundery to Oloron, he commenced a little story which was to
conclude by asking Gaston to lend him two hundred thousand francs.

As they slowly went along arm in arm, about half a mile from the
foundery they met a young laborer who bowed as he passed them.

Louis dropped his brother’s arm, and started back as if he had seen a
ghost.

“What is the matter?” asked Gaston, with astonishment.

“Nothing, except I struck my foot against a stone, and it is very
painful.”

Gaston might have known by the tremulous tones of Louis’s voice that
this was a lie. Louis de Clameran had reason to tremble; in this workman
he recognized Raoul de Lagors.

Instinctive fear paralyzed and overwhelmed him.

The story he had planned for the purpose of obtaining the two hundred
thousand francs was forgotten; his volubility was gone; and he silently
walked along by his brother’s side, like an automaton, totally incapable
of thinking or acting for himself.

He seemed to listen, he did listen; but the words fell upon his ear
unmeaningly; he could not understand what Gaston was saying, and
mechanically answered “yes” or “no,” like one in a dream.

Whilst necessity, absolute necessity, kept him here at Gaston’s side,
his thoughts were all with the young man who had just passed by.

What had brought Raoul to Oloron? What plot was he hatching? Why was he
disguised as a laborer? Why had he not answered the many letters which
Louis had written him from Oloron? He had ascribed this silence to
Raoul’s carelessness, but now he saw it was premeditated. Something
disastrous must have happened at Paris; and Raoul, afraid to commit
himself by writing, had come himself to bring the bad news. Had he come
to say that the game was up, and they must fly?

But, after all, perhaps he was mistaken in supposing this to be his
accomplice. It might be some honest workman bearing a strong resemblance
to Raoul.

If he could only run after this stranger, and speak to him! But no, he
must walk on up to the house with Gaston, quietly, as if nothing had
happened to arouse his anxiety. He felt as if he would go mad if his
brother did not move faster; the uncertainty was becoming intolerable.

His mind filled with these perplexing thoughts, Louis at last reached
the house; and Gaston, to his great relief, said that he was so tired
that he was going directly to bed.

At last he was free!

He lit a cigar, and, telling the servant not to sit up for him, went
out.

He knew that Raoul, if it was Raoul, would be prowling near the house,
waiting for him.

His suspicions were well founded.

He had barely proceeded thirty yards, when a man suddenly sprang from
behind a tree, and stood before him.

The night was clear, and Louis recognized Raoul.

“What is the matter?” he impatiently demanded; “what has happened?”

“Nothing.”

“What! Do you mean to say that nothing has gone wrong in Paris--that no
one is on our track?”

“Not the slightest danger of any sort. And moreover, but for your
inordinate greed of gain, everything would have succeeded admirably; all
was going on well when I left Paris.”

“Then why have you come here?” cried Louis fiercely. “Who gave you
permission to desert your post, when your absence might bring ruin upon
us? What brought you here?”

“That is my business,” said Raoul with cool impertinence.

Louis seized the young man’s wrists, and almost crushed them in his
vicelike grasp.

“Explain this strange conduct of yours,” he said, in a tone of
suppressed rage. “What do you mean by it?”

Without apparent effort Raoul released his hands from their
imprisonment, and jeeringly said:

“Hein! Gently, my friend! I don’t like being roughly treated; and, if
you don’t know how to behave yourself, I have the means of teaching
you.”

At the same time he drew a revolver from his pocket.

“You must and shall explain yourself,” insisted Louis: “if you
don’t----”

“Well, if I don’t? Now, you might just as well spare yourself the
trouble of trying to frighten me. I intend to answer your questions when
I choose; but it certainly won’t be here, in the middle of the road,
with the bright moonlight showing us off to advantage. How do you know
people are not watching us this very minute? Come this way.”

They strode through the fields, regardless of Gaston’s plants, which
were trampled under foot in order to take a short cut.

“Now,” began Raoul, when they were at a safe distance from the road,
“now, my dear uncle, I will tell you what brings me here. I have
received and carefully read your letters. I read them over again. You
wished to be prudent; and the consequence was, that your letters were
unintelligible. Only one thing did I understand clearly: we are in
danger.”

“Only the more reason for your watchfulness and obedience.”

“Very well put: only, before braving danger, my venerable and beloved
uncle, I want to know its extent. I am not a man to retreat in the hour
of peril, but I want to know exactly how much risk I am running.”

“I told you to keep quiet, and follow my directions.”

“But to do this would imply that I have perfect confidence in you, my
dear uncle,” said Raoul, sneeringly.

“And why should you not? What reasons for distrust have you after all
that I have done for you? Who went to London, and rescued you from a
state of privation and ignominy? I did. Who gave you a name and position
when you had neither? I did. And who is working now to maintain your
present life of ease, and insure you a splendid future? I am. And how do
you repay me?”

“Superb, magnificent, inimitable!” said Raoul, with mocking derision.
“But, while on the subject, why don’t you prove that you have sacrificed
yourself for my sake? You did not need me as a tool for carrying out
plans for your own benefit; did you? oh no, not at all! Dear, kind,
generous, disinterested uncle! You ought to have the Montyon prize;
I think I must recommend you as the most deserving person I have ever
met!”

Clameran was so angry at these jeering words that he feared to trust
himself to speak.

“Now, my good uncle,” continued Raoul more seriously, “we had better end
this child’s play, and come to a clear understanding. I follow you here,
because I thoroughly understand your character, and have just as much
confidence in you as you deserve, and not a particle more. If it were
for your advantage to ruin me, you would not hesitate one instant. If
danger threatened us, you would fly alone, and leave your dutiful nephew
to make his escape the best way he could. Oh! don’t look shocked, and
pretend to deny it; your conduct is perfectly natural, and in your place
I would act the same way. Only remember this, that I am not a man to
be trifled with. Now let us cease these unnecessary recriminations, and
come to the point: what is your present plan?”

Louis saw that his accomplice was too shrewd to be deceived, and that
the safest course was to trust all to him, and to pretend that he had
intended doing so all along.

Without any show of anger, he briefly and clearly related all that had
occurred at his brother’s.

He told the truth about everything except the amount of his brother’s
fortune, the importance of which he lessened as much as possible.

“Well,” said Raoul, when the report was ended, “we are in a nice fix.
And do you expect to get out of it?”

“Yes, if you don’t betray me.”

“I wish you to understand, marquis, that I have never betrayed anyone
yet; don’t judge me by yourself, I beg. What steps will you take to get
free of this entanglement?”

“I don’t know; but something will turn up. Oh, don’t be alarmed; I’ll
find some means of escape: so you can return home with your mind at
rest. You run no risk in Paris, and ‘tis the best place for you. I will
stay here to watch Gaston.”

Raoul reflected for some moments, and then said:

“Are you sure I am not in danger at Paris?”

“What are you afraid of? We have Mme. Fauvel so completely in our power
that she would not dare speak a word against you; even if she knew the
whole truth, what no one but you and I know, she would not open her
lips, but be only too glad to hush up matters so as to escape punishment
for her fault from her deceived husband and a censuring world.”

“I know we have a secure hold on her,” said Raoul. “I am not afraid of
her giving any trouble.”

“Who, then?”

“An enemy of your own making, my respected uncle; a most implacable
enemy--Madeleine.”

“Fiddlesticks!” replied Clameran, disdainfully.

“It is very well for you to treat her with contempt,” said Raoul,
gravely; “but I can tell you, you are much mistaken in your estimate of
her character. I have studied her lately, and see that she is devoted to
her aunt, and ready to make any sacrifice to insure her happiness. But
she has no idea of doing anything blindly, of throwing herself away
if she can avoid it. She has promised to marry you. Prosper is
broken-hearted at being discarded, it is true; but he has not given up
hope. You imagine her to be weak and yielding, easily frightened? It’s a
great mistake. She is self-reliant and fearless. More than that, she is
in love, my good uncle; and a woman will defend her lover as a tigress
defends her young. She will fight to the bitter end before marrying
anyone save Prosper.”

“She is worth five hundred thousand francs.”

“So she is; and at five per cent we would each have an income of twelve
thousand five hundred francs. But, for all that, you had better take my
advice, and give up Madeleine.”

“Never; I swear by Heaven!” exclaimed Clameran. “Rich or poor, she shall
be mine! I first wanted her money, but now I want her; I love her for
herself, Raoul!”

Raoul seemed to be amazed at this declaration of his uncle.

He raised his hands, and started back with astonishment.

“Is it possible,” he said, “that you are in love with Madeleine?--you!”

“Yes,” replied Louis, sullenly. “Is there anything so very extraordinary
in it?”

“Oh, no, certainly not! only this sentimental view of the matter
explains your strange behavior. Alas, you love Madeleine! Then, my
venerable uncle, we might as well surrender at once.”

“Why so?”

“Because you know the axiom, ‘When the heart is interested the head is
lost.’ Generals in love always lose their battles. The day is not far
off when your infatuation of Madeleine will make you sell us both for
a smile. And, mark my words, she is shrewd, and watching us as only an
enemy can watch.”

With a forced laugh Clameran interrupted his nephew.

“Just see how you fire up for no cause,” he said; “you must dislike the
charming Madeleine very much, if you abuse her in this way.”

“She will prove to be our ruin: that is all.”

“You might as well be frank, and say you are in love with her yourself.”

“I am only in love with her money,” replied Raoul, with an angry frown.

“Then what are you complaining of? I shall give you half her fortune.
You will have the money without being troubled with the wife; the profit
without the burden.”

“I am not over fifty years old,” said Raoul conceitedly. “I can
appreciate a pretty woman better than you.”

“Enough of that,” interrupted Louis angrily. “The day I relieved your
pressing wants, and brought you to Paris, you promised to follow my
directions, to help me carry out my plan; did you not?”

“Yes; but not the plot you are hatching now! You forget that my liberty,
perhaps my life, is at stake. You may hold the cards, but I must have
the right of advising you.”

It was midnight before the accomplices separated.

“I won’t stand idle,” said Louis. “I agree with you that something must
be done at once. But I can’t decide what it shall be on the spur of the
moment. Meet me here at this hour to-morrow night, and I will have some
plan ready for you.”

“Very good. I will be here.”

“And remember, don’t be imprudent!”

“My costume ought to convince you that I am not anxious to be recognized
by anyone. I left such an ingenious alibi, that I defy anybody to
prove that I have been absent from my house at Vesinet. I even took the
precaution to travel in a third-class car. Well, good-night. I am going
to the inn.”

Raoul went off after these words, apparently unconscious of having
aroused suspicion in the breast of his accomplice.

During his adventurous life, Clameran had transacted “business” with too
many scamps not to know the precise amount of confidence to place in a
man like Raoul.

The old adage, “Honor among thieves,” seldom holds good after the
“stroke.” There is always a quarrel over the division of the spoils.

This distrustful Clameran foresaw a thousand difficulties and
counter-plots to be guarded against in his dealings with Raoul.

“Why,” he pondered, “did the villain assume this disguise? Why this
alibi at Paris? Can he be laying a trap for me? It is true that I have
a hold upon him; but then I am completely at his mercy. Those accursed
letters which I have written to him, while here, are so many proofs
against me. Can he be thinking of cutting loose from me, and making off
with all the profits of our enterprise?”

Louis never once during the night closed his eyes; but by daybreak he
had fully made up his mind how to act, and with feverish impatience
waited for evening to come, to communicate his views with Raoul.

His anxiety made him so restless that the unobserving Gaston finally
noticed it, and asked him what the matter was; if he was sick, or
troubled about anything.

At last evening came, and, at the appointed hour, Louis went to the
field where they had met the night previous, and found Raoul lying on
the grass smoking a fragrant cigar, as if he had no other object in life
except to blow little clouds of smoke in the air, and count the stars in
the clear sky above him.

“Well?” he carelessly said, as Louis approached, “have you decided upon
anything?”

“Yes. I have two projects, either of which would probably accomplish our
object.”

“I am listening.”

Louis was silently thoughtful for a minute, as if arranging his thoughts
so as to present them as clearly and briefly as possible.

“My first plan,” he began, “depends upon your approval. What would you
say, if I proposed to you to renounce the affair altogether?”

“What!”

“Would you consent to disappear, leave France, and return to London, if
I paid you a good round sum?”

“What do you call a good round sum?”

“I will give you a hundred and fifty thousand francs.”

“My respected uncle,” said Raoul with a contemptuous shrug, “I am
distressed to see how little you know me! You try to deceive me, to
outwit me, which is ungenerous and foolish on your part; ungenerous,
because it fails to carry out our agreement; foolish, because as you
know well enough, my power equals yours.”

“I don’t understand you.”

“I am sorry for it. I understand myself, and that is sufficient. Oh!
I understand you, my dear uncle. I have watched you with careful eyes,
which are not to be deceived; I see through you clearly. If you offer me
one hundred and fifty thousand francs, it is because you intend to walk
off with half a million for yourself.”

“You are talking like a fool,” said Clameran with virtuous indignation.

“Not at all; I only judge the future by the past. Of all the large sums
extorted from Mme. Fauvel, often against my wishes, I never received a
tenth part.”

“But you know we have a reserve fund.”

“All very good; but you have the keeping of it, my good uncle. It is
very nice for you, but not so funny for me. If our little plot were
to be discovered to-morrow, you would walk off with the money-box, and
leave your devoted nephew to be sent to prison.”

“Ingrate!” muttered Louis, as if distressed at these undeserved
reproaches of his protege.

“You have hit on the very word I was trying to remember,” cried Raoul:
“‘ingrate’ is the name that just suits you. But we have not time for
this nonsense. I will end the matter by proving how you have been trying
to deceive me.”

“I would like to hear you do so if you can.”

“Very good. In the first place, you told me that your brother only
possessed a modest competency. Now, I learn that Gaston has an income
of at least sixty thousand francs. It is useless for you to deny it; and
how much is this property worth? A hundred thousand crowns. He had four
hundred thousand francs deposited in M. Fauvel’s bank. Total, seven
hundred thousand francs. And, besides all this, the broker in Oloron
has orders to buy up a large amount of stocks and railroad shares, which
will require large cash payments. I have not wasted my day, you see, and
have obtained all the information I came for.”

Raoul’s information was too concise and exact for Louis to deny it.

“You might have sense enough,” Raoul went on, “to know how to manage
your forces if you undertake to be a commander. We had a splendid game
in our hands; and you, who held the cards, have made a perfect muddle of
it.”

“I think--”

“That the game is lost? That is my opinion too, and all through you. You
have no one to blame but yourself.”

“I could not control events.”

“Yes, you could, if you had been shrewd. Fools sit down and wait for an
opportunity; sensible men make one. What did we agree upon in London?
We were to implore my good mother to assist us a little, and, if she
complied with our wishes, we were to be flattering and affectionate in
our devotion to her. And what was the result? At the risk of killing
the golden goose, you have made me torment the poor woman until she is
almost crazy.”

“It was prudent to hasten matters.”

“You think so, do you? Was it also to hasten matters that you took it
into your head to marry Madeleine? That made it necessary to let her
into the secret; and, ever since, she has advised and set her aunt
against us. I would not be surprised if she makes her confess everything
to M. Fauvel, or even inform against us at the police-office.”

“I love Madeleine!”

“You told me that before. And suppose you do love her. You led me into
this piece of business without having studied its various bearings,
without knowing what you were about. No one but an idiot, my beloved
uncle, would go and put his foot into a trap, and then say, ‘If I had
only known about it!’ You should have made it your business to know
everything. You came to me, and said, ‘Your father is dead,’ which was
a lie to start with; perhaps you call it a mistake. He is living; and,
after what we have done, I dare not appear before him. He would have
left me a million, and now I shall not get a sou. He will find his
Valentine, and then good-by.”

“Enough!” angrily interrupted Louis. “If I have made a mistake, I know
how to redeem it. I can save everything yet.”

“You can? How so?”

“That is my secret,” said Louis gloomily.

Louis and Raoul were silent for a minute. And this silence between them,
in this lonely spot, at dead of night, was so horribly significant that
both of them shuddered.

An abominable thought had flashed across their evil minds, and without a
word or look they understood each other.

Louis broke the ominous silence, by abruptly saying:

“Then you refuse to disappear if I pay you a hundred and fifty thousand
francs? Think it over before deciding: it is not too late yet.”

“I have fully thought it over. I know you will not attempt to deceive
me any more. Between certain ease, and the probability of an immense
fortune, I choose the latter at all risks. I will share your success or
your failure. We will swim or sink together.”

“And you will follow my instructions?”

“Blindly.”

Raoul must have been very certain of Louis’s intentions of resorting to
the most dangerous extremities, must have known exactly what he intended
to do; for he did not ask him a single question. Perhaps he dared not.
Perhaps he preferred doubt to shocking certainty, as if he could thus
escape the remorse attendant upon criminal complicity.

“In the first place,” said Louis, “you must at once return to Paris.”

“I will be there in forty-eight hours.”

“You must be very intimate at Mme. Fauvel’s, and keep me informed of
everything that takes place in the family.”

“I understand.”

Louis laid his hand upon Raoul’s shoulder, as if to impress upon his
mind what he was about to say.

“You have a sure means of being restored to your mother’s confidence and
affection, by blaming me for everything that has happened to distress
her. Abuse me constantly. The more odious you render me in her eyes and
those of Madeleine, the better you will serve me. Nothing would please
me more than to be denied admittance to the house when I return to
Paris. You must say that you have quarrelled with me, and that, if I
still come to see you, it is because you cannot prevent it, and you will
never voluntarily have any intercourse with me. That is the scheme; you
can develop it.”

Raoul listened to these strange instructions with astonishment.

“What!” he cried: “you adore Madeleine, and take this means of showing
it? An odd way of carrying on a courtship, I must confess. I will be
shot if I can comprehend.”

“There is no necessity for your comprehending.”

“All right,” said Raoul submissively; “if you say so.”

Then Louis reflected that no one could properly execute a commission
without having at least an idea of its nature.

“Did you ever hear,” he asked Raoul, “of the man who burnt down his
lady-love’s house so as to have the bliss of carrying her out in his
arms?”

“Yes: what of it?”

“At the proper time, I will charge you to set fire, morally, to Mme.
Fauvel’s house; and I will rush in, and save her and her niece. Now,
in the eyes of those women my conduct will appear more magnanimous and
noble in proportion to the contempt and abuse they have heaped upon me.
I gain nothing by patient devotion: I have everything to hope from a
sudden change of tactics. A well-managed stroke will transform a demon
into an angel.”

“Very well, a good idea!” said Raoul approvingly, when his uncle had
finished.

“Then you understand what is to be done?”

“Yes, but will you write to me?”

“Of course; and if anything should happen at Paris----”

“I will telegraph to you.”

“And never lose sight of my rival, the cashier.”

“Prosper? not much danger of our being troubled by him, poor boy! He is
just now my most devoted friend. Trouble has driven him into a path of
life which will soon prove his destruction. Every now and then I pity
him from the bottom of my soul.”

“Pity him as much as you like; but don’t interfere with his
dissipation.”

The two men shook hands, and separated apparently the best friends in
the world; in reality the bitterest enemies.

Raoul would not forgive Louis for having attempted to appropriate all
the booty, and leave him in the lurch, when it was he who had risked the
greatest dangers.

Louis, on his part, was alarmed at the attitude taken by Raoul. Thus far
he had found his nephew tractable, and even blindly obedient; and now
he had suddenly become rebellious and threatening. Instead of ordering
Raoul, he was forced to consult and bargain with him.

What could be more wounding to his vanity and self-conceit than the
reproaches, well founded though they were, to which he had been obliged
to listen, from a mere youth?

As he walked back to his brother’s house, thinking over what had just
occurred, Louis swore that sooner or later he would be revenged, and
that, as soon as he could get rid of Raoul he would do so, and would do
him some great injury.

But, for the present, he was so afraid lest the young villain should
betray him, or thwart his plans in some way, that he wrote to him the
next day, and every succeeding day, full particulars of everything that
happened. Seeing how important it was to restore his shaken confidence,
Louis entered into the most minute details of his plans, and asked
Raoul’s advice about every step he took.

The situation remained the same. The dark cloud remained threateningly
near, but grew no larger.

Gaston seemed to have forgotten that he had written to Beaucaire, and
never mentioned Valentine’s name once.

Like all men accustomed to a busy life, Gaston was miserable except
when occupied, and spent his whole time in the foundery, which seemed to
absorb him entirely.

When he began the experiment of felling the woods, his losses had been
heavy; but he determined to continue the work until it should be equally
beneficial to himself and the neighboring land-owners.

He engaged the services of an intelligent engineer, and thanks to
untiring energy, and the new improvements in machinery, his profits soon
more than equalled his expenses.

“Now that we are doing so well,” said Gaston joyously, “we shall
certainly make twenty-five thousand francs next year.”

Next year! Alas, poor Gaston!

Five days after Raoul’s departure, one Saturday afternoon, Gaston was
suddenly taken ill.

He had a sort of vertigo, and was so dizzy that he was forced to lie
down.

“I know what is the matter,” he said. “I have often been ill in this way
at Rio. A couple of hours’ sleep will cure me. I will go to bed, and you
can send someone to awaken me when dinner is ready, Louis; I shall be
all right by that time.”

But, when the servant came to announce dinner, he found Gaston much
worse. He had a violent headache, a choking sensation in his throat, and
dimness of vision. But his worst symptom was dysphonia; he would try
to articulate one word, and find himself using another. His jaw-bones
became so stiff that it was with the greatest difficulty that he opened
his mouth.

Louis came up to his brother’s room, and urged him to send for the
physician.

“No,” said Gaston, “I won’t have any doctor to make me ill with
all sorts of medicines; I know what is the matter with me, and my
indisposition will be cured by a simple remedy which I have always
used.”

At the same time he ordered Manuel, his old Spanish servant, who had
lived with him for ten years, to prepare him some lemonade.

The next day Gaston appeared to be much better. He ate his breakfast,
and was about to take a walk, when the pains of the previous day
suddenly returned, in a more violent form.

Without consulting his brother, Louis sent to Oloron for Dr. C----,
whose wonderful cures at Eaux Bonnes had won him a wide reputation.

The doctor declared that there was no danger, and merely prescribed a
dose of valerian, and a blister with some grains of morphine sprinkled
on it.

But in the middle of the night, all the symptoms suddenly changed for
the worse. The pain in the head was succeeded by a fearful oppression,
and the sick man suffered torture in trying to get his breath; daybreak
found him still tossing restlessly from pillow to pillow.

When Dr. C---- came early in the morning, he appeared very much
surprised at this change for the worse. He inquired if they had not
administered an overdose of morphine. Manuel said that he had put the
blister on his master, and the doctor’s directions had been accurately
followed.

The doctor, after having examined Gaston, and found his breathing heavy
and irregular, prescribed a heavy dose of sulphate of quinine; he then
retired, saying he would return the next day.

As soon as the doctor had gone, Gaston sent for a friend of his, a
lawyer, to come to him as soon as possible.

“For Heaven’s sake, what do you want with a lawyer?” inquired Louis.

“I want his advice, brother. It is useless to try and deceive ourselves;
I know I am extremely ill. Only timid fools are superstitious about
making their wills; if I defer it any longer, I may be suddenly taken
without having arranged my affairs. I would rather have the lawyer at
once, and then my mind will be at rest.”

Gaston did not think he was about to die, but, knowing the uncertainty
of life, determined to be prepared for the worst; he had too often
imperilled his life, and been face to face with death, to feel any fear
now.

He had made his will while ill at Bordeaux; but, now that he had
found Louis, he wished to leave him all his property, and sent for his
business man to advise as to the best means of disposing of his wealth
for his benefit.

The lawyer was a shrewd, wiry little man, very popular because he had
a faculty for always gaining suits which other attorneys had lost,
or declined to try, because of their groundlessness. Being perfectly
familiar with all the intricacies of the law, nothing delighted him more
than to succeed in eluding some stringent article of the code; and often
he sacrificed large fees for the sake of outwitting his opponent, and
controverting the justness of a decision.

Once aware of his client’s wishes and intentions, he had but one
idea: and that was, to carry them out as inexpensively as possible,
by skilfully evading the heavy costs to be paid by the inheritor of an
estate.

He explained to Gaston that he could, by an act of partnership,
associate Louis in his business enterprises, by signing an
acknowledgment that half of the money invested in these various
concerns, belonged to and had been advanced by his brother; so that, in
the event of Gaston’s death, Louis would only have to pay taxes on half
the fortune.

Gaston eagerly took advantage of this fiction; not that he thought
of the money saved by the transaction if he died, but this would be
a favorable opportunity for sharing his riches with Louis, without
wounding his delicate sensibility.

A deed of partnership between Gaston and Louis de Clameran, for the
working of a cast-iron mill, was drawn up; this deed acknowledged
Louis to have invested five hundred thousand francs as his share of the
capital; therefore half of the iron-works was his in his own right.

When Louis was called in to sign the paper, he violently opposed his
brother’s project.

“Why do you distress me by making these preparations for death, merely
because you are suffering from a slight indisposition? Do you think that
I would consent to accept your wealth during your lifetime? If you die,
I am your heir; if you live, I enjoy your property as if it were my
own. What more can you wish? Pray do not draw up any papers; let things
remain as they are, and turn all your attention to getting well.”

Vain remonstrances. Gaston was not a man to be persuaded from
accomplishing a purpose upon which he had fully set his heart. When,
after mature deliberation, he made a resolution, he always carried it
out in spite of all opposition.

After a long and heroic resistance, which betrayed great nobleness of
character and rare disinterestedness, Louis, urged by the physician,
finally yielded, and signed his name to the papers drawn up by the
lawyer.

It was done. Now he was legally Gaston’s partner, and possessor of half
his fortune. No court of law could deprive him of what had been deeded
with all the legal formalities, even if his brother should change his
mind and try to get back his property.

The strangest sensations now filled Louis’s breast.

He was in a state of delirious excitement often felt by persons suddenly
raised from poverty to affluence.

Whether Gaston lived or died, Louis was the lawful possessor of an
income of twenty-five thousand francs, without counting the eventual
profits of the iron-works.

At no time in his life had he hoped for or dreamed of such wealth. His
wildest wishes were surpassed. What more could he want?

Alas! he wanted the power of enjoying these riches; they had come too
late.

This fortune, fallen from the skies, should have filled his heart with
joy; whereas it only made him melancholy and angry.

This unlooked-for happiness seemed to have been sent by cruel fate as
a punishment for his past sins. What could be more terrible than seeing
this haven of rest open to him, and to be prevented from enjoying it
because of his own vile plottings?

Although his conscience told him that he deserved this misery, he blamed
Gaston entirely for his present torture. Yes, he held Gaston responsible
for the horrible situation in which he found himself.

His letters to Raoul for several days expressed all the fluctuations of
his mind, and revealed glimpses of coming evil.

“I have twenty-five thousand livres a year,” he wrote to him, a few
hours after signing the agreement of partnership; “and I possess in my
own right five hundred thousand francs. One-fourth of this sum would
have made me the happiest of men a year ago. Now it is of no use to me.
All the gold on earth could not remove one of the difficulties of our
situation. Yes, you were right. I have been imprudent; but I pay dear
for my precipitation. We are now going down hill so rapidly that nothing
can save us; we must fall to the very bottom. To attempt stopping half
way would be madness. Rich or poor, I have cause to tremble as long as
there is any risk of a meeting between Gaston and Valentine. How can
they be kept apart? Will my brother renounce his plan of discovering the
whereabouts of this woman whom he so loved?”

No; Gaston would never be turned from his search for his first love, as
he proved by calling for her in the most beseeching tones when he was
suffering his worst paroxysms of pain.

He grew no better. In spite of the most careful nursing his symptoms
changed, but showed no improvement.

Each attack was more violent than the preceding.

Toward the end of the week the pains left his head, and he felt well
enough to get up and partake of a slight nourishment.

But poor Gaston was a mere shadow of his former self. In one week he had
aged ten years. His strong constitution was broken. He, who ten days ago
was boasting of his vigorous health, was now weak and bent like an old
man. He could hardly drag himself along, and shivered in the warm sun as
if he were bloodless.

Leaning on Louis’s arm, he slowly walked down to look at the forge, and,
seating himself before a furnace at full blast, he declared that he felt
very much better, that this intense heat revived him.

His pains were all gone, and he could breathe without difficulty.

His spirits rose, and he turned to the workmen gathered around, and said
cheerfully:

“I was not blessed with a good constitution for nothing, my friends, and
I shall soon be well again.”

When the neighbors called to see him, and insisted that this illness
was entirely owing to change of climate, Gaston replied that he supposed
they were right, and that he would return to Rio as soon as he was well
enough to travel.

What hope this answer roused in Louis’s breast!

“Yes,” he eagerly said, “I will go with you; a trip to Brazil would be
charming! Let us start at once.”

But the next day Gaston had changed his mind.

He told Louis that he felt almost well, and was determined not to leave
France. He proposed going to Paris to consult the best physicians; and
then he would see Valentine.

That night he grew worse.

As his illness increased, he became more surprised and troubled at not
hearing from Beaucaire.

He wrote again in the most pressing terms, and sent the letter by a
courier who was to wait for the answer.

This letter was never received by Lafourcade.

At midnight, Gaston’s sufferings returned with renewed violence, and for
the first time Dr. C---- was uneasy.

A fatal termination seemed inevitable. Gaston’s pain left him in a
measure, but he was growing weaker every moment. His mind wandered,
and his feet were as cold as ice. On the fourteenth day of his illness,
after lying in a stupor for several hours, he revived sufficiently
to ask for a priest, saying that he would follow the example of his
ancestors, and die like a Christian.

The priest left him after half an hour’s interview, and all the workmen
were summoned to receive the farewell greeting of their master.

Gaston spoke a few kind words to them all, saying that he had provided
for them in his will.

After they had gone, he made Louis promise to carry on the iron-works,
embraced him for the last time, and sank back on his pillow in a dying
state.

As the bell tolled for noon he quietly breathed his last, murmuring,
softly, “In three years, Valentine; wait for me.”

Now Louis was in reality Marquis of Clameran, and besides he was a
millionaire.

Two weeks later, having made arrangements with the engineer in charge of
the iron-works to attend to everything during his absence, he took his
seat in the train for Paris.

He had sent the following significant telegram to Raoul the night
previous: “I will see you to-morrow.”




XIX

Faithful to the programme laid down by his accomplice, while Louis
watched at Oloron, Raoul remained in Paris with the purpose of
recovering the confidence and affection of Mme. Fauvel, and of lulling
any suspicions which might arise in her breast.

The task was difficult, but not impossible.

Mme. Fauvel had been distressed by Raoul’s wild extravagance, but had
never ceased to love him.

Whatever faults he had committed, whatever future follies he might
indulge in, he would always remain her best-loved child, her first-born,
the living image of her noble, handsome Gaston, the lover of her youth.

She adored her two sons, Lucien and Abel; but she could not overcome an
indulgent weakness for the unfortunate child, torn from her arms the
day of his birth, abandoned to the mercies of hired strangers, and for
twenty years deprived of home influences and a mother’s love.

She blamed herself for Raoul’s misconduct, and accepted the
responsibility of his sins, saying to herself, “It is my fault. But for
me, he would not have been exposed to the temptations of the world.”

Knowing these to be her sentiments, Raoul did not hesitate to take
advantage of them.

Never were more irresistible fascinations employed for the
accomplishment of a wicked object. Beneath an air of innocent
frankness, this precocious scoundrel concealed wonderful astuteness
and penetration. He could at will adorn himself with the confiding
artlessness of youth, so that angels might have yielded to the soft
look of his large dark eyes. There were few women living who could have
resisted the thrilling tones of his sympathetic voice.

During the month of Louis’s absence, Mme. Fauvel was in a state of
comparative happiness.

Never had this mother and wife--this pure, innocent woman, in spite of
her first and only fault--enjoyed such tranquillity. She felt as one
under the influence of enchantment, while revelling in the sunshine of
filial love, which almost bore the character of a lover’s passion;
for Raoul’s devotion was ardent and constant, his manner so tender and
winning, that anyone would have taken him for Mme. Fauvel’s suitor.

As she was still at her country-seat, and M. Fauvel went into the city
every morning at nine o’clock, and did not return till six, she had the
whole of her time to devote to Raoul. When she had spent the morning
with him at his house in Vesinet, she would often bring him home to dine
and spend the evening with her.

All his past faults were forgiven, or rather the whole blame of them was
laid upon Clameran; for, now that he was absent, had not Raoul once more
become her noble, generous, affectionate son, the pride and consolation
of her life?

Raoul enjoyed the life he was leading, and took such an interest in the
part that he was playing, that his acting was perfect. He possessed
the faculty which makes cheats successful, faith in his own impostures.
Sometimes he would stop to think whether he was telling the truth, or
acting a shameful comedy.

His success was wonderful. Even Madeleine, the prudent, distrustful
Madeleine, without being able to shake off her prejudice against the
young adventurer, confessed that perhaps she had been influenced by
appearances, and had judged unjustly.

Raoul not only never asked for money, but even refused it when offered;
saying that, now that his uncle was away, his expenses were but
trifling.

Affairs were in this happy state when Louis arrived from Oloron.

Although now immensely rich, he resolved to make no change in his style
of living, but returned to his apartments at the Hotel du Louvre.

His only outlay was the purchase of a handsome carriage; and this was
driven by Manuel, who consented to enter his service, although Gaston
had left him a handsome little fortune, more than sufficient to support
him comfortably.

Louis’s dream, the height of his ambition, was to be ranked among the
great manufacturers of France.

He was prouder of being called “iron-founder” than of his marquisate.

During his adventurous life, he had met with so many titled gamblers and
cut-throats, that he no longer believed in the prestige of nobility.
It was impossible to distinguish the counterfeit from the genuine. He
thought what was so easily imitated was not worth the having.

Dearly bought experience had taught him that our unromantic century
attaches no value to armorial bearings, unless their possessor is rich
enough to display them upon a splendid coach.

One can be a marquis without a marquisate, but it is impossible to be a
forge-master without owning iron-works.

Louis now thirsted for the homage of the world. All the badly digested
humiliations of the past weighed upon him.

He had suffered so much contempt and scorn from his fellow-men, that he
burned to avenge himself. After a disgraceful youth, he longed to live a
respected and honored old age.

His past career disturbed him little. He was sufficiently acquainted
with the world to know that the noise of his coach-wheels would silence
the jeers of those who knew his former life.

These thoughts fermented in Louis’s brain as he journeyed from Pau to
Paris. He troubled his mind not in the least about Raoul, determined to
use him as a tool so long as he needed his services, and then pay him a
large sum if he would go back to England.

All these plans and thoughts were afterward found noted down in the
diary which he had in his pocket at the time of the journey.

The first interview between the accomplices took place at the Hotel du
Louvre.

Raoul, having a practical turn of mind, said he thought that they both
ought to be contented with the result already obtained, and that it
would be folly to try and grasp anything more.

“What more do we want?” he asked his uncle. “We now possess over a
million; let us divide it and keep quiet. We had better be satisfied
with our good luck, and not tempt Providence.”

But this moderation did not suit Louis.

“I am rich,” he replied, “but I desire more than wealth. I am determined
to marry Madeleine: I swear she shall be my wife! In the first place,
I madly love her, and then, as the nephew of the most eminent banker in
Paris, I at once gain high position and public consideration.”

“I tell you, uncle, your courtship will involve you in great risks.”

“I don’t care if it does. I choose to run them. My intention is to share
my fortune with you; but I will not do so till the day after my wedding.
Madeleine’s fortune will then be yours.”

Raoul was silent. Clameran held the money, and was therefore master of
the situation.

“You don’t seem to anticipate any difficulty in carrying out your
wishes,” he said discontentedly; “how are you to account for your
suddenly acquired fortune? M. Fauvel knows that a Clameran lived at
Oloron, and had money in his bank. You tell him that you never heard of
this person bearing your name, and then, at the end of the month, you
come and say that you have inherited his fortune. People don’t inherit
fortunes from perfect strangers; so you had better trump up some
relationship.”

“You are an innocent youth, nephew; your ingenuousness is amusing.”

“Explain yourself.”

“Certainly. The banker, his wife, and Madeleine must be informed that
the Clameran of Oloron was a natural son of my father, consequently
my brother, born at Hamburg, and recognized during the emigration. Of
course, he wished to leave his fortune to his own family. This is the
story which you must tell Mme. Fauvel to-morrow.”

“That is a bold step to take.”

“How so?”

“Inquiries might be made.”

“Who would make them? The banker would not trouble himself to do so.
What difference is it to him whether I had a brother or not? My title as
heir is legally authenticated; and all he has to do is to pay the money
he holds, and there his business ends.”

“I am not afraid of his giving trouble.”

“Do you think that Mme. Fauvel and her niece will ask any questions? Why
should they? They have no grounds for suspicion. Besides, they cannot
take a step without compromising themselves. If they knew all our
secrets I would not have the least fear of their making revelations.
They have sense enough to know that they had best keep quiet.”

Not finding any other objections to make, Raoul said:

“Very well, then, I obey you; but I am not to call upon Mme. Fauvel for
any more money, am I?”

“And why not, pray?”

“Because, my uncle, you are rich now.”

“Suppose I am rich,” replied Louis, triumphantly; “what is that to you?
Have we not quarrelled about the means of making this money? and did you
not heap abuse upon me until I consider myself justified in refusing you
any assistance whatever? However, I will overlook the past. And, when I
explain my present plan, you will feel ashamed of your former doubts and
suspicion. You will say with me, ‘Success is certain.’”

Louis de Clameran’s scheme was very simple, and therefore unfortunately
presented the strongest chances of success.

“We will go back and look at our balance-sheet. As heretofore, my
brilliant nephew, you seem to have misunderstood my management of this
affair; I will now explain it to you.”

“I am listening.”

“In the first place, I presented myself to Mme. Fauvel, and said not,
‘Your money or your life,’ but ‘Your money or your reputation!’ It was
a rude blow to strike, but effective. As I expected, she was frightened,
and regarded me with the greatest aversion.”

“Aversion is a mild term, uncle.”

“I know that. Then I brought you upon the scene; and, without flattering
you in the least, I must say that your opening act was a perfect
success. I was concealed behind the curtain, and saw your first
interview; it was sublime! She saw you, and loved you: you spoke a few
words and won her heart.”

“And but for you?”

“Let me finish. This was the first act of our comedy. Let us pass to the
second. Your extravagant follies--your grandfather would have said,
your dissoluteness--soon changed our respective situations. Mme. Fauvel,
without ceasing to worship you--you resemble Gaston so closely--was
uneasy about you. She was so frightened that she was forced to come to
me for assistance.”

“Poor woman!”

“I acted my part very well, as you must confess. I was grave, cold,
indignant, and represented the distressed uncle to perfection. I spoke
of the old probity of the Clamerans, and bemoaned that the family honor
should be dragged in the dust by a degenerate descendant. For a
short time I triumphed at your expense; Mme. Fauvel forgot her former
prejudice against me, and soon showed that she esteemed and liked me.”

“That must have been a long time ago.”

Louis paid no attention to this ironical interruption.

“Now we come to the third scene,” he went on to say, “the time when Mme.
Fauvel, having Madeleine for an adviser, judged us at our true value.
Oh! you need not flatter yourself that she did not fear and despise us
both. If she did not hate you, Raoul, it was because a mother’s heart
always forgives a sinful child. A mother can despise and worship her son
at the same time.”

“She has proved it to me in so many touching ways, that!--yes, even I,
hardened as I am--was moved, and felt remorse.”

“Parbleu! I have felt some pangs myself. Where did I leave off? Oh, yes!
Mme. Fauvel was frightened, and Madeleine, bent on sacrificing herself,
had discarded Prosper, and consented to marry me, when the existence
of Gaston was suddenly revealed. And what has happened since? You have
succeeded in convincing Mme. Fauvel that you are pure, and that I am
blacker than hell. She is blinded by your noble qualities, and she and
Madeleine regard me as your evil genius, whose pernicious influence led
you astray.”

“You are right, my venerated uncle; that is precisely the position you
occupy.”

“Very good. Now we come to the fifth act, and our comedy needs entire
change of scenery. We must veer around.”

“Change our tactics?”

“You think it difficult, I suppose? Nothing easier. Listen attentively,
for the future depends upon your skilfulness.”

Raoul leaned back in his chair, with folded arms, as if prepared for
anything, and said:

“I am ready.”

“The first thing for you to do,” said Louis, “is to go to Mme. Fauvel
to-morrow, and tell her the story about my natural brother. She will not
believe you, but that makes no difference. The important thing is, for
you to appear convinced of the truth of what you tell her.”

“Consider me convinced.”

“Five days hence, I will call on M. Fauvel, and confirm the notification
sent him by my notary at Oloron, that the money deposited in the bank
now belongs to me. I will repeat, for his benefit, the story of the
natural brother, and ask him to keep the money until I call for it, as I
have no occasion for it at present. You, who are so distrustful, my good
nephew, may regard this deposit as a guarantee of my sincerity.”

“We will talk of that another time. Go on.”

“Then I will go to Mme. Fauvel, and say, ‘Being very poor, my dear
madame, necessity compelled me to claim your assistance in the support
of my brother’s son, who is also yours. This youth is worthless and
extravagant.’”

“Thanks, my good uncle.”

“‘He has poisoned your life when he should have added to your happiness;
he is a constant anxiety and sorrow to your maternal heart. I have come
to offer my regrets for your past trouble, and to assure you that you
will have no annoyance in the future. I am now rich, and henceforth take
the whole responsibility of Raoul upon myself. I will provide handsomely
for him.’”

“Is that what you call a scheme?”

“Parbleu, you will soon see whether it is. After listening to this
speech, Mme. Fauvel will feel inclined to throw herself in my arms, by
way of expressing her gratitude and joy. She will refrain, however,
on account of her niece. She will ask me to relinquish my claim on
Madeleine’s hand, now that I am rich. I will roundly tell her, No. I
will make this an opportunity for an edifying display of magnanimity and
disinterestedness. I will say, ‘Madame, you have accused me of cupidity.
I am now able to prove your injustice. I have been infatuated, as every
man must be, by the beauty, grace, and intelligence of Mlle. Madeleine;
and--I love her. If she were penniless, my devotion would only be the
more ardent. She has been promised to me, and I must insist upon this
one article of our agreement. This must be the price of my silence. And,
to prove that I am not influenced by her fortune, I give you my sacred
promise, that, the day after the wedding, I will send Raoul a stock
receipt of twenty-five thousand livres per annum.”

Louis expressed himself with such convincing candor, that Raoul, an
artist in knavery, was charmed and astonished.

“Beautifully done,” he cried, clapping his hands with glee. “That last
sentence will create a chasm between Mme. Fauvel and her niece. The
promise of a fortune for me will certainly bring my mother over to our
side.”

“I hope so,” said Louis with pretended modesty. “And I have strong
reasons for hoping so, as I shall be able to furnish the good lady with
excellent arguments for excusing herself in her own eyes. You know when
someone proposes some little--what shall we call it?--transaction to an
honest person, it must be accompanied by justifications sufficient to
quiet all qualms of conscience. I shall prove to Mme. Fauvel and her
niece that Prosper has shamefully deceived them. I shall prove to them
that he is cramped by debts, dissipated, and a reckless gambler, openly
associating with a woman of no character.”

“And very pretty, besides, by Jove! You must not neglect to expatiate
upon the beauty and fascinations of the adorable Gypsy; that will be
your strongest point.”

“Don’t be alarmed; I shall be more eloquent than a popular divine. Then
I will explain to Mme. Fauvel that if she really loves her niece, she
will persuade her to marry, not an insignificant cashier, but a man of
position, a great manufacturer, a marquis, and, more than this, one rich
enough to establish you in the world.”

Raoul was dazzled by this brilliant prospect.

“If you don’t decide her, you will make her waver,” he said.

“Oh! I don’t expect a sudden change. I only intend planting the germ in
her mind; thanks to you, it will develop, flourish, and bear fruit.”

“Thanks to me?”

“Allow me to finish. After making my speeches I shall disappear from the
scene, and your role will commence. Of course your mother will repeat
the conversation to you, and then we can judge of the effect produced.
But remember, you must scorn to receive any assistance from me. You must
swear that you will brave all privation, want, famine even, rather than
accept a cent from a base man whom you hate and despise; a man who--But
you know exactly what you are to say. I can rely upon you for good
acting.”

“No one can surpass me when I am interested in my part. In pathetic
roles I am always a success, when I have had time to prepare myself.”

“I know you are. But this disinterestedness need not prevent you from
resuming your dissipations. You must gamble, bet, and lose more money
than you ever did before. You must increase your demands, and say that
you must have money at all costs. You need not account to me for any
money you can extort from her. All you get is your own to spend as you
please.”

“You don’t say so! If you mean that--”

“You will hurry up matters, I’ll be bound.”

“I can promise you, no time shall be wasted.”

“Now listen to what you are to do, Raoul. Before the end of three
months, you must have exhausted the resources of these two women. You
must force from them every franc they can raise, so that they will be
wholly unable to procure money to supply your increasing demands. In
three months I must find them penniless, absolutely ruined, without even
a jewel left.”

Raoul was startled at the passionate, vindictive tone of Louis’s voice
as he uttered these last words.

“You must hate these women, if you are so determined to make them
miserable,” he said.

“I hate them?” cried Louis. “Can’t you see that I madly love Madeleine,
love her as only a man of my age can love? Is not her image ever in my
mind? Does not the very mention of her name fire my heart, and make me
tremble like a school-boy?”

“Your great devotion does not prevent you planning the destruction of
her present happiness.”

“Necessity compels me to do so. Nothing but the most cruel deceptions
and the bitterest suffering would ever induce her to become my wife, to
take me as the lesser of two evils. The day on which you have led Mme.
Fauvel and her niece to the extreme edge of the precipice, pointed out
its dark depths, and convinced them that they are irretrievably lost, I
shall appear, and rescue them. I will play my part with such grandeur,
such lofty magnanimity, that Madeleine will be touched, will forget her
past enmity, and regard me with favorable eyes. When she finds that it
is her sweet self, and not her money, that I want, she will soften, and
in time yield to my entreaties. No true woman can be indifferent to a
grand passion. I don’t pretend to say that she will love me at first;
but, if she will only consent to be mine, I ask for nothing more; time
will do much, even for a poor devil like myself.”

Raoul was shocked at this cold-blooded perversity of his uncle;
but Clameran showed his immense superiority in wickedness, and the
apprentice admired the master.

“You would certainly succeed, uncle,” he said, “were it not for the
cashier. Between you and Madeleine, Prosper will always stand; if not in
person, certainly in memory.”

Louis smiled scornfully, and, throwing away his cigar, which had died
out, said:

“I don’t mind Prosper, or attach any more importance to him than to that
cigar.”

“But she loves him.”

“So much the worse for him. Six months hence, she will despise him; he
is already morally ruined, and at the proper time I will make an end of
him socially. Do you know whither the road of dissipation leads, my good
nephew? Prosper supports Gypsy, who is extravagant; he gambles, keeps
fast horses, and gives suppers. Now, you gamble yourself, and know how
much money can be squandered in one night; the losses of baccarat
must be paid within twenty-four hours. He has lost heavily, must pay,
and--has charge of a money-safe.”

Raoul protested against this insinuation.

“It is useless to tell me that he is honest, that nothing would induce
him to touch money that does not belong to him. I know better. Parbleu!
I was honest myself until I learned to gamble. Any man with a grain of
sense would have married Madeleine long ago, and sent us flying bag and
baggage. You say she loves him! No one but a coward would be defrauded
of the woman he loved and who loved him. Ah, if I had once felt
Madeleine’s hand tremble in mine, if her rosy lips had once pressed a
kiss upon my brow, the whole world could not take her from me. Woe
to him who dared stand in my path! As it is, Prosper annoys me, and I
intend to suppress him. With your aid I will so cover him with disgrace
and infamy, that Madeleine will drive every thought of him from her
mind, and her love will turn to hate.”

Louis’s tone of rage and vengeance startled Raoul, and made him regard
the affair in a worse light than ever.

“You have given me a shameful, dastardly role to play,” he said after a
long pause.

“My honorable nephew has scruples, I suppose,” said Clameran sneeringly.

“Not exactly scruples; yet I confess--”

“That you want to retreat? Rather too late to sing that tune, my friend.
You wish to enjoy every luxury, have your pockets filled with gold, cut
a fine figure in high society, and remain virtuous. Are you fool enough
to suppose a poor man can be honest? ‘Tis a luxury pertaining to the
wealthy. Did you ever see people such as we draw money from the pure
fount of virtue? We must fish in muddy waters, and then wash ourselves
clean, and enjoy the result of our labor.”

“I have never been rich enough to be honest,” said Raoul humbly; “but
I must say it goes hard with me to torture two defenceless, frightened
women, and ruin the character of a poor devil who regards me as his best
friend. It is a low business!”

This resistance exasperated Louis to the last degree.

“You are the most absurd, ridiculous fool I ever met,” he cried. “An
opportunity occurs for us to make an immense fortune. All we have to
do is to stretch out our hands and take it; when you must needs prove
refractory, like a whimpering baby. Nobody but an ass would refuse to
drink when he is thirsty, because he sees a little mud at the bottom
of the bucket. I suppose you prefer theft on a small scale, stealing by
driblets. And where will your system lead you? To the poor-house or the
police-station. You prefer living from hand to mouth, supported by Mme.
Fauvel, having small sums doled out to you to pay your little gambling
debts.”

“I am neither ambitious nor cruel.”

“And suppose Mme. Fauvel dies to-morrow: what will become of you? Will
you go cringing up to the widower, and implore him to continue your
allowance?”

“Enough said,” cried Raoul, angrily interrupting his uncle. “I never
had any idea of retreating. I made these objections to show you what
infamous work you expect of me, and at the same time prove to you that
without my assistance you can do nothing.”

“I never pretended to the contrary.”

“Then, my noble uncle, we might as well settle what my share is to be.
Oh! it is not worth while for you to indulge in idle protestations. What
will you give me in case of success? and what if we fail?”

“I told you before. I will give you twenty-five thousand livres a year,
and all you can secure between now and my wedding-day.”

“This arrangement suits me very well; but where are your securities?”

This question was discussed a long time before it was satisfactorily
settled by the accomplices, who had every reason to distrust each other.

“What are you afraid of?” asked Clameran.

“Everything,” replied Raoul. “Where am I to obtain justice, if you
deceive me? From this pretty little poniard? No, thank you. I would be
made to pay as dear for your hide, as for that of an honest man.”

Finally, after long debate and much recrimination, the matter was
arranged, and they shook hands before separating.

Alas! Mme. Fauvel and her niece soon felt the evil effects of the
understanding between the villains.

Everything happened as Louis had arranged.

Once more, when Mme. Fauvel had begun to breathe freely, and to hope
that her troubles were over, Raoul’s conduct suddenly changed; he became
more extravagant and dissipated than ever.

Formerly, Mme. Fauvel would have said, “I wonder what he does with all
the money I give him?” Now she saw where it went.

Raoul was reckless in his wickedness; he was intimate with actresses,
openly lavishing money and jewelry upon them; he drove about with four
horses, and bet heavily on every race. Never had he been so exacting
and exorbitant in his demands for money; Mme. Fauvel had the greatest
difficulty in supplying his wants.

He no longer made excuses and apologies for spending so much; instead
of coaxingly entreating, he demanded money as a right, threatening to
betray Mme. Fauvel to her husband if she refused him.

At this rate, all the possessions of Mme. Fauvel and Madeleine soon
disappeared. In one month, all their money had been squandered. Then
they were compelled to resort to the most shameful expedients in the
household expenses. They economized in every possible way, making
purchases on credit, and making tradesmen wait; then they changed
figures in the bills, and even invented accounts of things never bought.

These imaginary costly whims increased so rapidly, that M. Fauvel one
day said, as he signed a large check, “Upon my word, ladies, you will
buy out all the stores, if you keep on this way. But nothing pleases me
better than to see you gratify every wish.”

Poor women! For months they had bought nothing, but had lived upon the
remains of their former splendor, having all their old dresses made
over, to keep up appearances in society.

More clear-sighted than her aunt, Madeleine saw plainly that the day
would soon come when everything would have to be explained.

Although she knew that the sacrifices of the present would avail
nothing in the future, that all this money was being thrown away without
securing her aunt’s peace of mind, yet she was silent. A high-minded
delicacy made her conceal her apprehensions beneath an assumed calmness.

The fact of her sacrificing herself made her refrain from uttering
anything like a complaint or censure. She seemed to forget herself
entirely in her efforts to comfort her aunt.

“As soon as Raoul sees we have nothing more to give,” she would say, “he
will come to his senses, and stop all this extravagance.”

The day came when Mme. Fauvel and Madeleine found it impossible to give
another franc.

The evening previous, Mme. Fauvel had a dinner-party, and with
difficulty scraped together enough money to defray the expenses.

Raoul appeared, and said that he was in the greatest need of money,
being forced to pay a debt of two thousand francs at once.

In vain they implored him to wait a few days, until they could with
propriety ask M. Fauvel for money. He declared that he must have it now,
and that he would not leave the house without it.

“But I have no way of getting it for you,” said Mme. Fauvel desperately;
“you have taken everything from me. I have nothing left but my diamonds:
do you want them? If they can be of use, take them.”

Hardened as the young villain was, he blushed at these words.

He felt pity for this unfortunate woman, who had always been so kind
and indulgent to him, who had so often lavished upon him her maternal
caresses. He felt for the noble girl who was the innocent victim of a
vile plot.

But he was bound by an oath; he knew that a powerful hand would save
these women at the brink of the precipice. More than this, he saw
an immense fortune at the end of his road of crime, and quieted his
conscience by saying that he would redeem his present cruelty by honest
kindness in the future. Once out of the clutches of Clameran, he would
be a better man, and try to return some of the kind affection shown him
by these poor women.

Stifling his better impulses, he said harshly to Mme. Fauvel, “Give me
the jewels; I will take them to the pawnbroker’s.” Mme. Fauvel handed
him a box containing a set of diamonds. It was a present from her
husband the day he became worth a million.

And so pressing was the want of these women who were surrounded by
princely luxury, with their ten servants, beautiful blooded horses, and
jewels which were the admiration of Paris, that they implored him to
bring them some of the money which he would procure on the diamonds, to
meet their daily wants.

He promised, and kept his word.

But they had revealed a new source, a mine to be worked; he took
advantage of it.

One by one, all Mme. Fauvel’s jewels followed the way of the diamonds;
and, when hers were all gone, those of Madeleine were given up.

A recent law-suit, which showed how a young and beautiful woman had
been kept in a state of terror and almost poverty, by a rascal who had
possession of her letters, a sad case which no honest man could read
without blushing for his sex, has revealed to what depths human infamy
can descend.

And such abominable crimes are not so rare as people suppose.

How many men are supported entirely by stolen secrets, from the coachman
who claims ten louis every month of the foolish girl whom he drove to
a rendezvous, to the elegant dandy in light kids, who discovered a
financial swindle, and makes the parties interested buy his silence,
cannot be known.

This is called the extortion of hush-money, the most cowardly and
infamous of crimes, which the law, unfortunately, can rarely overtake
and punish.

“Extortion of hush-money,” said an old prefect of police, “is a trade
which supports at least a thousand scamps in Paris alone. Sometimes
we know the black-mailer and his victim, and yet we can do nothing.
Moreover, if we were to catch the villain in the very act, and hand him
over to justice, the victim, in her fright at the chance of her secret
being discovered, would turn against us.”

It is true, extortion has become a business. Very often it is the
business of loafers, who spend plenty of money, when everyone knows they
have no visible means of support, and of whom people ask, “What do they
live upon?”

The poor victims do not know how easy it would be to rid themselves
of their tyrants. The police are fully capable of faithfully
keeping secrets confided to them. A visit to the Rue de Jerusalem, a
confidential communication with a head of the bureau, who is as silent
as a father confessor, and the affair is arranged, without noise,
without publicity, without anyone ever being the wiser. There are traps
for “master extortioners,” which work well in the hands of the police.

Mme. Fauvel had no defence against the scoundrels who were torturing
her, save prayers and tears; these availed her little.

Sometimes Mme. Fauvel betrayed such heart-broken suffering when Raoul
begged her for money which she had no means of obtaining, that he would
hurry away disgusted at his own brutal conduct, and say to Clameran:

“You must end this dirty business; I cannot stand it any longer. I
will blow any man’s brains out, or fight a crowd of cut-throats, if you
choose; but as to killing by agony and fright these two poor miserable
women, whom I am really fond of, I am not going to do it. You ask for
more than I can do. I am not quite the cowardly hound you take me for.”

Clameran paid no attention to these remonstrances: indeed, he was
prepared for them.

“It is not pleasant, I know,” he replied; “but necessity knows no law.
Have a little more perseverance and patience; we have almost got to the
end.”

The end was nearer than Clameran supposed. Toward the latter part
of November, Mme. Fauvel saw that it was impossible to postpone the
catastrophe any longer, and as a last effort determined to apply to the
marquis for assistance.

She had not seen him since his return from Oloron, except once, when he
came to announce his accession to wealth. At that time, persuaded that
he was the evil genius of Raoul, she had received him very coldly, and
did not invite him to repeat his visit.

She hesitated about speaking to her niece of the step she intended
taking, because she feared violent opposition.

To her great surprise Madeleine warmly approved of it.

Trouble had made her keen-sighted and suspicious. Reflecting on past
events, comparing and weighing every act and speech of Raoul, she was
now convinced that he was Clameran’s tool.

She thought that Raoul was too shrewd to be acting in this shameful way,
ruinously to his own interests, if there were not some secret motive
at the bottom of it all. She saw that this persecution was more feigned
than real.

So thoroughly was she convinced of this, that, had it only concerned
herself alone, she would have firmly resisted the oppression, certain
that the threatened exposure would never take place.

Recalling, with a shudder, certain looks of Clameran, she guessed the
truth, that the object of all this underhand work was to force her to
become his wife.

Determined on making the sacrifice, in spite of her repugnance toward
the man, she wished to have the deed done at once; anything was
preferable to this terrible anxiety, to the life of torture which Raoul
made her lead. She felt that her courage might fail if she waited and
suffered much longer.

“The sooner you see M. de Clameran the better for us, aunt,” she said,
after talking the project over.

The next day Mme. Fauvel called on the marquis at the Hotel du Louvre,
having sent him a note announcing her intended visit.

He received her with cold, studied politeness, like a man who had been
misunderstood and had been unjustly wounded.

After listening to her report of Raoul’s scandalous behavior, he became
very indignant, and swore that he would soon make him repent of his
heartlessness.

But when Mme. Fauvel told of the immense sums of money forced from her,
Clameran seemed confounded, as if he could not believe it.

“The worthless rascal!” he exclaimed, “the idea of his audacity! Why,
during the last four months, I have given him more than twenty thousand
francs, which I would not have done except to prevent him from applying
to you, as he constantly threatened to do.”

Seeing an expression of doubtful surprise upon Mme. Fauvel’s face, Louis
arose, and took from his desk some receipts signed by Raoul. The total
amount was twenty-three thousand five hundred francs.

Mme. Fauvel was shocked and amazed.

“He has obtained forty thousand francs from me,” she faintly said, “so
that altogether he has spent sixty thousand francs in four months.”

“I can’t imagine what he does with it,” said Clameran, “unless he spends
it on actresses.”

“Good heavens! what can these creatures do with all the money lavished
on them?”

“That is a question I cannot answer, madame.”

He appeared to pity Mme. Fauvel sincerely; he promised that he would
at once see Raoul, and reason with him about the shameful life he was
leading; perhaps he could be persuaded to reform. Finally, after many
protestations of friendship, he wound up by placing his fortune at her
disposal.

Although Mme. Fauvel refused his offer, she appreciated the kindness of
it, and on returning home said to Madeleine:

“Perhaps we have mistaken his character; he may be a good man after
all.”

Madeleine sadly shook her head. She had anticipated just what happened.
Clameran’s magnanimity and generosity confirmed her presentiments.

Raoul came to see his uncle, and found him radiant.

“Everything is going on swimmingly, my smart nephew,” said Clameran;
“your receipts acted like a charm. Ah, you are a partner worth having.
I congratulate you upon your success. Forty thousand francs in four
months!”

“Yes,” said Raoul carelessly. “I got about that much from pawnbrokers.”

“Pests! Then you must have a nice little sum laid by.”

“That is my business, uncle, and not yours. Remember our agreement.
I will tell you this much: Mme. Fauvel and Madeleine have turned
everything they could into money; they have nothing left, and I have had
enough of my role.”

“Your role is ended. I forbid you to hereafter ask for a single
centime.”

“What are you about to do? What has happened?”

“The mine is loaded, nephew, and I am awaiting an opportunity to set
fire to it.”

Louis de Clameran relied upon making his rival, Prosper Bertomy, furnish
him this ardently desired opportunity.

He loved Madeleine too passionately to feel aught save the bitterest
hate toward the man whom she had freely chosen, and who still possessed
her heart.

Clameran knew that he could marry her at once if he chose; but in what
way? By holding a sword of terror over her head, and forcing her to be
his. He became frenzied at the idea of possessing her person, while her
heart and soul would always be with Prosper.

Thus he swore that, before marrying, he would so cover Prosper with
shame and ignominy that no honest person would speak to him. He had
first thought of killing him, but, fearing that Madeleine would enshrine
and worship his memory, he determined to disgrace him.

He imagined that there would be no difficulty in ruining the unfortunate
young man. He soon found himself mistaken.

Though Prosper led a life of reckless dissipation, he preserved order
in his disorder. If in a state of miserable entanglement, and obliged to
resort to all sorts of make-shifts to escape his creditors, his caution
prevented the world from knowing it.

Vainly did Raoul, with his pockets full of gold, try to tempt him to
play high; every effort to hasten his ruin failed.

When he played he did not seem to care whether he lost or won; nothing
aroused him from his cold indifference.

His friend Nina Gypsy was extravagant, but her devotion to Prosper
restrained her from going beyond certain limits.

Raoul’s great intimacy with Prosper enabled him to fully understand the
state of his mind; that he was trying to drown his disappointment in
excitement, but had not given up all hope.

“You need not hope to beguile Prosper into committing any piece of
folly,” said Raoul to his uncle; “his head is as cool as a usurer’s. He
never goes beyond a certain degree of dissipation. What object he has in
view I know not. Perhaps, when he has spent his last napoleon, he will
blow his brains out; he certainly never will descend to any dishonorable
act. As to tampering with the money-safe intrusted to his keeping----”

“We must force him on,” replied Clameran, “lead him into extravagances,
make Gypsy call on him for costly finery, lend him plenty of money.”

Raoul shook his head, as if convinced that his efforts would be vain.

“You don’t know Prosper, uncle: we can’t galvanize a dead man. Madeleine
killed him the day she discarded him. He takes no interest in anything
on the face of the earth.”

“We can wait and see.”

They did wait; and, to the great surprise of Mme. Fauvel, Raoul once
more became an affectionate and dutiful son, as he had been during
Clameran’s absence. From reckless extravagance he changed to great
economy. Under pretext of saving money, he remained at Vesinet, although
it was very uncomfortable and disagreeable there in the winter. He
said he wished to expiate his sins in solitude. The truth was, that,
by remaining in the country, he insured his liberty, and escaped his
mother’s visits.

It was about this time that Mme. Fauvel, charmed with the improvement in
Raoul, asked her husband to give him some employment.

M. Fauvel was delighted to please his wife, and at once offered Raoul
the place of corresponding clerk with a salary of five hundred francs a
month.

The appointment pleased Raoul; but, in obedience to Clameran’s command,
he refused it, saying his vocation was not banking.

This refusal so provoked the banker, that he told Raoul, if he was so
idle and lazy, not to call on him for money again, or expect him to do
anything to assist him. Raoul seized this pretext for ostensibly ceasing
his visits.

When he wanted to see his mother, he would come in the afternoon, when
he knew that M. Fauvel would be from home; and he only came often enough
to keep informed of what was going on in the household.

This sudden lull after so many storms appeared ominous to Madeleine.
She was more certain that ever that the plot was now ripe, and would
suddenly burst upon them, without warning. She did not impart her
presentiment to her aunt, but prepared herself for the worst.

“What can they be doing?” Mme. Fauvel would say; “can they have ceased
to persecute us?”

“Yes: what can they be doing?” Madeleine would murmur.

Louis and Raoul gave no signs of life, because, like expert hunters,
they were silently hiding, and watching for a favorable opportunity of
pouncing upon their victims.

Never losing sight of Prosper for a day, Raoul had exhausted every
effort of his fertile mind to compromise his honor, to insnare him into
some inextricable entanglement. But, as he had foreseen, the cashier’s
indifference offered little hope of success.

Clameran began to grow impatient at this delay, and had fully determined
to bring matters to a crisis himself, when one morning, about three
o’clock, he was aroused by Raoul.

He knew that some event of great importance must have happened, to make
his nephew come to his house at this hour of the morning.

“What is the matter?” he anxiously inquired.

“Perhaps nothing; perhaps everything. I have just left Prosper.”

“Well?”

“I had him, Mme. Gypsy, and three other friends to dine with me. After
dinner, I made up a game of baccarat, but Prosper took no interest in
it, although he was quite tipsy.”

“You must be drunk yourself to come here waking me up in the middle
of the night, to hear this idle gabble,” said Louis angrily. “What the
devil do you mean by it?”

“Now, don’t be in a hurry; wait until you hear the rest.”

“Morbleu! speak, then!”

“After the game was over, we went to supper; Prosper became intoxicated,
and betrayed the secret name with which he closes the money-safe.”

At these words Clameran uttered a cry of triumph.

“What was the word?”

“The name of his friend.”

“Gypsy! Yes, that would be five letters.”

Louis was so excited that he jumped out of bed, slipped on his
dressing-gown, and began to stride up and down the chamber.

“Now we have got him!” he said with vindictive satisfaction. “There’s no
chance of escape for him now! Ah, the virtuous cashier won’t touch the
money confided to him: so we must touch it for him. The disgrace will be
just as great, no matter who opens the safe. We have the word; you know
where the key is kept.”

“Yes; when M. Fauvel goes out he always leaves the key in the drawer of
his secretary, in his chamber.”

“Very good. Go and get this key from Mme. Fauvel. If she does not give
it up willingly, use force: so that you get it, that is the point; then
open the safe, and take out every franc it contains. Ah, Master Bertomy,
you shall pay dear for being loved by the woman whom I love!”

For five minutes Clameran indulged in such a tirade of abuse against
Prosper, mingled with rhapsodies of love for Madeleine, that Raoul
thought him almost out of his mind.

“Before crying victory,” he said, “you had better consider the drawbacks
and difficulties. Prosper might change the word to-morrow.”

“Yes, he might; but it is not probable he will; he will forget what he
said while drunk; besides, we can hasten matters.”

“That is not all. M. Fauvel has given orders that no large sum shall be
kept in the safe over-night; before closing the bank everything is sent
to the Bank of France.”

“A large sum will be kept there the night I choose.”

“You think so?”

“I think this: I have a hundred thousand crowns deposited with M.
Fauvel: and if I desire the money to be paid over to me early some
morning, directly the bank is opened, of course the money will be kept
in the safe the previous night.”

“A splendid idea!” cried Raoul admiringly.

It was a good idea; and the plotters spent several hours in studying its
strong and weak points.

Raoul feared that he would never be able to overcome Mme. Fauvel’s
resistance. And, even if she yielded the key, would she not go directly
and confess everything to her husband? She was fond of Prosper, and
would hesitate a long time before sacrificing him.

But Louis felt no uneasiness on this score.

“One sacrifice necessitates another,” he said: “she has made too many
to draw back at the last one. She sacrificed her adopted daughter;
therefore she will sacrifice a young man, who is, after all, a
comparative stranger to her.”

“But madame will never believe any harm of Prosper; she will always have
faith in his honor; therefore--”

“You talk like an idiot, my verdant nephew!”

Before the conversation had ended, the plan seemed feasible. The
scoundrels made all their arrangements, and fixed the day for committing
the crime.

They selected the evening of the 7th of February, because Raoul knew
that M. Fauvel would be at a bank-director’s dinner, and Madeleine was
invited to a party on that evening.

Unless something unforeseen should occur, Raoul knew that he would find
Mme. Fauvel alone at half-past eight o’clock.

“I will ask M. Fauvel this very day,” said Clameran, “to have my money
on hand for Tuesday.”

“That is a very short notice, uncle,” objected Raoul. “You know there
are certain forms to be gone through, and he can claim a longer time
wherein to pay it over.”

“That is true, but our banker is proud of always being prepared to pay
any amount of money, no matter how large; and if I say I am pressed, and
would like to be accommodated on Tuesday, he will make a point of having
it ready for me. Now, you must ask Prosper, as a personal favor to you,
to have the money on hand at the opening of the bank.”

Raoul once more examined the situation, to discover if possible a grain
of sand which might be converted into a mountain at the last moment.

“Prosper and Gypsy are to be at Vesinet this evening,” he said, “but I
cannot ask them anything until I know the banker’s answer. As soon as
you arrange matters with him, send me word by Manuel.”

“I can’t send Manuel, for an excellent reason; he has left me; but I can
send another messenger.”

Louis spoke the truth; Manuel was gone. He had insisted on keeping
Gaston’s old servant in his service, because he thought it imprudent to
leave him at Oloron, where his gossiping might cause trouble.

He soon became annoyed by Manuel’s loyalty, who had shared the perils
and good fortunes of an excellent master for many years; and determined
to rid himself of this last link which constantly reminded him of
Gaston. The evening before, he had persuaded Manuel to return to
Arenys-de-mer, a little port of Catalonia, his native place; and Louis
was looking for another servant.

After breakfasting together, they separated.

Clameran was so elated by the prospect of success, that he lost sight of
the great crime intervening. Raoul was calm, but resolute. The shameful
deed he was about to commit would give him riches, and release him
from a hateful servitude. His one thought was liberty, as Louis’s was
Madeleine.

Everything seemed to progress finely. The banker did not ask for the
notice of time, but promised to pay the money at the specified hour.
Prosper said he would have it ready early in the morning.

The certainty of success made Louis almost wild with joy. He counted the
hours, and the minutes, which passed but too slowly.

“When this affair is ended,” he said to Raoul, “I will reform and be a
model of virtue. No one will dare hint that I have ever indulged in any
sins, great or small.”

But Raoul became more and more sad as the time approached. Reflection
gradually betrayed the blackness of the contemplated crime.

Raoul was bold and determined in the pursuit of his own gratifications
and wickedness; he could smile in the face of his best friend, while
cheating him of his last napoleon at cards; and he could sleep well
after stabbing his enemy in the heart; but he was young.

He was young in sin. Vice had not yet penetrated to his marrow-bones:
corruption had not yet crowded into his soul enough to uproot and
destroy every generous sentiment.

It had not been so very long since he had cherished a few holy beliefs.
The good intentions of his boyhood were not quite obliterated from his
sometimes reproachful memory.

Possessing the daring courage natural to youth, he despised the cowardly
part forced upon him; this dark plot, laid for the destruction of two
helpless women, filled him with horror and disgust. His heart revolted
at the idea of acting the part of Judas toward his mother to betray her
between two kisses.

Disgusted by the cool villainy of Louis, he longed for some unexpected
danger to spring up, some great peril to be braved, so as to excuse
himself in his own eyes, to give him the spirit to carry through
the scheme; for he would like to reap the benefits without doing the
revolting work.

But no; he well knew that he ran no risk, not even that of being
arrested and sent to the galleys. For he was certain that, if M. Fauvel
discovered everything, he would do his best to hush it up, to conceal
every fact connected with the disgraceful story which would implicate
his wife. Although he was careful not to breathe it to Clameran, he felt
a sincere affection for Mme. Fauvel, and was touched by the indulgent
fondness which she so unchangingly lavished upon him. He had been happy
at Vesinet, while his accomplice, or rather his master, was at Oloron.
He would have been glad to lead an honest life, and could not see the
sense of committing a crime when there was no necessity for it. He hated
Clameran for not consenting to let the matter drop, now that he was rich
enough to live in affluence the rest of his life, and who, for the sake
of gratifying a selfish passion, was abusing his power, and endangering
the safety and happiness of so many people. He longed for an opportunity
of thwarting his plots, if it could be done without also ruining
himself.

His resolution, which had been so firm in the beginning, was growing
weaker and weaker as the hours rolled on: as the crisis approached, his
horror of the deed increased.

Seeing this uncertain state of Raoul’s mind, Louis never left him, but
continued to paint for him a dazzling future, position, wealth, and
freedom. Possessing a large fortune, he would be his own master, gratify
his every wish, and make amends to his mother for his present undutiful
conduct. He urged him to take pride in acting his part in this little
comedy, which would soon be over without doing harm to anyone.

He prepared, and forced his accomplice to rehearse, the scene which was
to be enacted at Mme. Fauvel’s, with as much coolness and precision as
if it were to be performed at a public theatre. Louis said that no piece
could be well acted unless the actor was interested and imbued with the
spirit of his role.

But the more urgently Louis pressed upon him the advantages to be
derived from success, the oftener he sounded in his ears the magic
words, “five hundred thousand francs,” the more loudly did Raoul’s
conscience cry out against the sinful deed.

On Monday evening, about six o’clock, Raoul felt so depressed and
miserable, that he had almost made up his mind to refuse to move another
step, and to tell Louis that he must find another tool to carry out his
abominable plot.

“Are you afraid?” asked Clameran, who had anxiously watched these inward
struggles.

“Yes, I am afraid. I am not cursed with your ferocious nature and iron
will. I am the most miserable dog living!”

“Come, cheer up, my boy! You are not yourself to-day. Don’t fail me at
the last minute, when everything depends upon you. Just think that we
have almost finished; one more stroke of our oars, and we are in port.
You are only nervous: come to dinner, and a bottle of Burgundy will soon
set you right.”

They were walking along the boulevard. Clameran insisted upon their
entering a restaurant, and having dinner in a private room.

Vainly did he strive, however, to chase the gloom from Raoul’s pale
face; he sat listening, with a sullen frown, to his friend’s jests about
“swallowing the bitter pill gracefully.”

Urged by Louis, he drank two bottles of wine, in hopes that intoxication
would inspire him with courage to do the deed, which Clameran impressed
upon his mind must and should be done before many more hours had passed
over his head.

But the drunkenness he sought came not; the wine proved false; at the
bottom of the last bottle he found disgust and rage.

The clock struck eight.

“The time has come,” said Louis firmly.

Raoul turned livid; his teeth chattered, and his limbs trembled so that
he was unable to stand on his feet.

“Oh, I cannot do it!” he cried in an agony of terror and rage.

Clameran’s eyes flashed with angry excitement at the prospect of all his
plans being ruined at the last moment. But he dared not give way to his
anger, for fear of exasperating Raoul, whom he knew to be anxious for an
excuse to quarrel; so he quietly pulled the bell-rope. A boy appeared.

“A bottle of port,” he said, “and a bottle of rum.”

When the boy returned with the bottles, Louis filled a goblet with the
two liquors mixed, and handed it to Raoul.

“Drink this,” he said in a tone of command.

Raoul emptied the glass at one draught, and a faint color returned to
his ashy cheeks. He arose, and snatching up his hat, cried fiercely:

“Come along!”

But before he had walked half a square, the factitious energy inspired
by drink deserted him.

He clung to Clameran’s arm, and was almost dragged along in the
direction of the banker’s house, trembling like a criminal on his way to
the scaffold.

“If I can once get him in the house,” thought Louis, “and make him
begin, the excitement of his mother’s opposition will make him carry
it through successfully. The cowardly baby! I would like to wring his
neck!”

Although his breast was filled with these thoughts and fears, he was
careful to conceal them from Raoul, and said soothingly:

“Now, don’t forget our arrangement, and be careful how you enter the
house; everything depends upon your being unconcerned and cool, to avoid
arousing suspicion in the eyes of anyone you may meet. Have you a pistol
in your pocket?”

“Yes, yes! Let me alone!”

It was well that Clameran had accompanied Raoul; for, when he got in
sight of the door, his courage gave way, and he longed to retreat.

“A poor, helpless woman!” he groaned, “and an honest man who pressed my
hand in friendship yesterday, to be cowardly ruined, betrayed by me! Ah,
it is too base! I cannot!”

“Come, don’t be a coward! I thought you had more nerve. Why, you might
as well have remained virtuous and honest; you will never earn your salt
in this sort of business.”

Raoul overcame his weakness, and, silencing the clamors of his
conscience, rushed up the steps, and pulled the bell furiously.

“Is Mme. Fauvel at home?” he inquired of the servant who opened the
door.

“Madame is alone in the sitting-room adjoining her chamber,” was the
reply.

Raoul went upstairs.




XX

Clameran’s last injunction to Raoul was:

“Be very cautious when you enter the room; your appearance must tell
everything, so you can avoid preliminary explanations.”

The recommendation was useless.

The instant that Raoul went into the little salon, the sight of his
pale, haggard face and wild eyes caused Mme. Fauvel to spring up with
clasped hands, and cry out:

“Raoul! What has happened? Speak, my son!”

The sound of her tender, affectionate voice acted like an electric shock
upon the young bandit. He shook like a leaf. But at the same time his
mind seemed to change. Louis was not mistaken in his estimate of his
companion’s character. Raoul was on the stage, his part was to be
played; his assurance returned to him; his cheating, lying nature
assumed the ascendant, and stifled any better feeling in his heart.

“This misfortune is the last I shall ever suffer, mother!”

Mme. Fauvel rushed toward him, and, seizing his hand, gazed searchingly
into his eyes, as if to read his very soul.

“What is the matter? Raoul, my dear son, do tell me what troubles you.”

He gently pushed her from him.

“The matter is, my mother,” he said in a voice of heart-broken despair,
“that I am an unworthy, degenerate son! Unworthy of you, unworthy of my
noble father!”

She tried to comfort him by saying that his errors were all her fault,
and that he was, in spite of all, the pride of her heart.

“Alas!” he said, “I know and judge myself. No one can reproach me for
my infamous conduct more bitterly than does my own conscience. I am
not naturally wicked, but only a miserable fool. At times I am like an
insane man, and am not responsible for my actions. Ah, my dear mother,
I would not be what I am, if you had watched over my childhood. But
brought up among strangers, with no guide but my own evil passions,
nothing to restrain me, no one to advise me, no one to love me, owning
nothing, not even my stolen name, I am cursed with vanity and unbounded
ambition. Poor, with no one to assist me but you, I have the tastes and
vices of a millionnaire’s son.

“Alas for me! When I found you, the evil was done. Your affection, your
maternal love, the only true happiness of my life, could not save me. I,
who had suffered so much, endured so many privations, even the pangs of
hunger, became spoiled by this new life of luxury and pleasure which
you opened before me. I rushed headlong into extravagance, as a drunkard
long deprived of liquor seizes and drains to the dregs the first bottle
in his reach.”

Mme. Fauvel listened, silent and terrified, to these words of despair
and remorse, which Raoul uttered with vehemence.

She dared not interrupt him, but felt certain some dreadful piece of
news was coming.

Raoul continued in a sad, hopeless tone:

“Yes, I have been a weak fool. Happiness was within my reach, and I
had not the sense to stretch forth my hand and grab it. I rejected a
heavenly reality to eagerly pursue a vain phantom. I, who ought to have
spent my life at your feet, and daily striven to express my gratitude
for your lavish kindness, have made you unhappy, destroyed your peace of
mind, and, instead of being a blessing, I have been a curse ever since
the first fatal day you welcomed me to your kind heart. Ah, unfeeling
brute that I was, to squander upon creatures whom I despised, a fortune,
of which each gold piece must have cost you a tear! Too late, too late!
With you I might have been a good and happy man!”

He stopped, as if overcome by the conviction of his evil deeds, and
seemed about to burst into tears.

“It is never too late to repent, my son,” murmured Mme. Fauvel in
comforting tones.

“Ah, if I only could!” cried Raoul; “but no, it is too late! Besides,
can I tell how long my good resolutions will last? This is not the first
time that I have condemned myself pitilessly. Stinging remorse for each
new fault made me swear to lead a better life, to sin no more. What was
the result of these periodical repentances? At the first temptation I
forgot my remorse and good resolutions. I am weak and mean-spirited,
and you are not firm enough to govern my vacillating nature. While
my intentions are good, my actions are villainous. The disproportion
between my extravagant desires, and the means of gratifying them, is too
great for me to endure any longer. Who knows to what fearful lengths my
unfortunate disposition may lead me? However, I will take my fate in my
own hands!” he finally said with a reckless laugh.

“Oh, Raoul, my dear son,” cried Mme. Fauvel in an agony of terror,
“explain these dreadful words; am I not your mother? Tell me what
distresses you; I am ready to hear the worst.”

He appeared to hesitate, as if afraid to crush his mother’s heart by the
terrible blow he was about to inflict. Then in a voice of gloomy despair
he replied:

“I am ruined.”

“Ruined?”

“Yes, ruined; and I have nothing more to expect or hope for. I am
dishonored, and all through my own fault; no one is to be blamed but
myself.”

“Raoul!”

“It is the sad truth, my poor mother; but fear nothing: I shall not
trail in the dust the name which you bestowed upon me. I will at least
have the courage not to survive my dishonor. Come, mother, don’t pity
me, or distress yourself; I am one of those miserable beings fated to
find no peace save in the arms of death. I came into the world with
misfortune stamped upon my brow. Was not my birth a shame and disgrace
to you? Did not the memory of my existence haunt you day and night,
filling your soul with remorse? And now, when I am restored to you after
many years’ separation, do I not prove to be a bitter curse instead of a
blessing?”

“Ungrateful boy! Have I ever reproached you?”

“Never! Your poor Raoul will die with your beloved name on his lips;
his last words a prayer to Heaven to heap blessings upon your head, and
reward your long-suffering devotion.”

“Die? You die, my son!”

“It must be, my dear mother; honor compels it. I am condemned by judges
from whose decision no appeal can be taken--my conscience and my will.”

An hour ago, Mme. Fauvel would have sworn that Raoul had made her suffer
all the torments that a woman could endure; but now she felt that all
her former troubles were nothing compared with her present agony.

“My God! Raoul, what have you been doing?”

“Money was intrusted to me: I gambled and lost it.”

“Was it a large sum?”

“No; but more than I can replace. My poor mother, have I not taken
everything from you? Did you not give me your last jewel?”

“But M. de Clameran is rich. He placed his fortune at my disposal. I
will order the carriage, and go to him.”

“But M. de Clameran is absent, and will not return to Paris until next
week; and if I do not have the money this evening, I am lost. Alas! I
have thought deeply, and, although it is hard to die so young, still
fate wills it so.”

He pulled a pistol from his pocket, and, with a forced smile, said:

“This will settle everything.”

Mme. Fauvel was too excited and frightened to reflect upon the horror
of Raoul’s behavior, and that these wild threats were a last resort
for obtaining money. Forgetful of the past, careless of the future, her
every thought concentrated upon the present, she comprehended but
one fact: that her son was about to commit suicide, and that she was
powerless to prevent the fearful deed.

“Oh, wait a little while my son!” she cried. “Andre will soon return
home, and I will ask him to give me--How much did you lose?”

“Thirty thousand francs.”

“You shall have them to-morrow.”

“But I must have the money to-night.”

Mme. Fauvel wrung her hands in despair.

“Oh! why did you not come to me sooner, my son? Why did you not have
confidence enough in me to come at once for help? This evening! There is
no one in the house to open the money-safe; if it were not for that--if
you had only come before Andre went out--”

“The safe!” cried Raoul, with sudden joy, as if this magic word had
thrown a ray of light upon his dark despair; “do you know where the key
is kept?”

“Yes: it is in the next room.”

“Well!” he exclaimed, with a bold look that caused Mme. Fauvel to lower
her eyes, and keep silent.

“Give me the key, mother,” he said in a tone of entreaty.

“Oh, Raoul, Raoul!”

“It is my life I am asking of you.”

These words decided her; she snatched up a candle, rushed into her
chamber, opened the secretary, and took out M. Fauvel’s key.

But, when about to hand it to Raoul, she seemed to suddenly see the
enormity of what she was doing.

“Oh, Raoul! my son,” she murmured, “I cannot! Do not ask me to commit
such a dreadful deed!”

He said nothing, but sadly turned to leave the room; then coming back to
his mother said:

“Ah, well; it makes but little difference in the end! At least, you will
give me one last kiss, before we part forever, my darling mother!”

“What could you do with the key, Raoul?” interrupted Mme. Fauvel. “You
do not know the secret word of the buttons.”

“No; but I can try to open it without moving the buttons.”

“You know that money is never kept in the safe over-night.”

“Nevertheless, I can make the attempt. If I open the safe, and find
money in it, it will be a miracle, showing that Heaven has pitied my
misfortune, and provided relief.”

“And if you are not successful, will you promise me to wait until
to-morrow, to do nothing rash to-night?”

“I swear it, by my father’s memory.”

“Then take the key and follow me.”

Pale and trembling, Raoul and Mme. Fauvel passed through the banker’s
study, and down the narrow staircase leading to the offices and
cash-room below.

Raoul walked in front, holding the light, and the key of the safe.

Mme. Fauvel was convinced that it would be utterly impossible to open
the safe, as the key was useless without the secret word, and of course
Raoul had no way of discovering what that was.

Even granting that some chance had revealed the secret to him, he would
find but little in the safe, since everything was deposited in the Bank
of France. Everyone knew that no large sum was ever kept in the safe
after banking hours.

The only anxiety she felt was, how Raoul would bear the disappointment,
and how she could calm his despair.

She thought that she would gain time by letting Raoul try the key; and
then, when he could not open the safe, he would keep his promise, and
wait until the next day. There was surely no harm in letting him try the
lock, when he could not touch the money.

“When he sees there is no chance of success,” she thought, “he will
listen to my entreaties; and to-morrow--to-morrow----”

What she could do to-morrow she knew not, she did not even ask herself.
But in extreme situations the least delay inspires hope, as if a short
respite meant sure salvation.

The condemned man, at the last moment, begs for a reprieve of a day, an
hour, a few seconds. Raoul was about to kill himself: his mother prayed
to God to grant her one day, not even a day, one night; as if in this
space of time some unexpected relief would come to end her misery.

They reached Prosper’s office, and Raoul placed the light on a high
stool so that it lighted the whole room.

He then summoned up all his coolness, or rather that mechanical
precision of movement, almost independent of will, of which men
accustomed to peril avail themselves in time of need.

Rapidly, with the dexterity of experience, he slipped the buttons on the
five letters composing the name of G, y, p, s, y.

His features, during this short operation, expressed the most intense
anxiety. He was fearful that his nervous energy might give out; of not
being able to open the safe; of not finding the money there when
he opened it; of Prosper having changed the word; or perhaps having
neglected to leave the money in the safe.

Mme. Fauvel saw these visible apprehensions with alarm. She read in his
eyes that wild hope of a man who, passionately desiring an object,
ends by persuading himself that his own will suffices to overcome all
obstacles.

Having often been present when Prosper was preparing to leave his
office, Raoul had fifty times seen him move the buttons, and lock the
safe, just before leaving the bank. Indeed, having a practical turn
of mind, and an eye to the future, he had even tried to lock the safe
himself on several occasions, while waiting for Prosper.

He inserted the key softly, turned it around, pushed it farther in,
and turned it a second time; then thrust it in suddenly, and turned it
again. His heart beat so loudly that Mme. Fauvel could hear its throbs.

The word had not been changed; the safe opened.

Raoul and his mother simultaneously uttered a cry; she of terror, he of
triumph.

“Shut it again!” cried Mme. Fauvel, frightened at the incomprehensible
result of Raoul’s attempt: “Come away! Don’t touch anything, for
Heaven’s sake! Raoul!”

And, half frenzied, she clung to Raoul’s arm, and pulled him away so
abruptly, that the key was dragged from the lock, and, slipping along
the glossy varnish of the safe-door, made a deep scratch some inches
long.

But at a glance Raoul discovered, on the upper shelf of the safe, three
bundles of bank-notes. He snatched them up with his left hand, and
slipped them inside his vest.

Exhausted by the effort she had just made, Mme. Fauvel dropped Raoul’s
arm, and, almost fainting with emotion, clung to the back of a chair.

“Have mercy, Raoul!” she moaned. “I implore you to put back that money
and I solemnly swear that I will give you twice as much to-morrow. Oh,
my son, have pity upon your unhappy mother!”

He paid no attention to these words of entreaty, but carefully examined
the scratch on the safe. He was alarmed at this trace of the robbery,
which it was impossible for him to cover up.

“At least you will not take all,” said Mme. Fauvel; “just keep enough to
save yourself, and put back the rest.”

“What good would that do? The discovery will be made that the safe has
been opened; so I might as well take all as a part.”

“Oh, no! not at all. I can account to Andre; I will tell him I had a
pressing need for a certain sum, and opened the safe to get it.”

In the meantime Raoul had carefully closed the safe.

“Come, mother, let us go back to the sitting-room. A servant might go
there to look for you, and be astonished at our absence.”

Raoul’s cruel indifference and cold calculations at such a moment filled
Mme. Fauvel with indignation. She saw that she had no influence over her
son, that her prayers and tears had no effect upon his hard heart.

“Let them be astonished,” she cried: “let them come here and find us! I
will be relieved to put an end to this tissue of crime. Then Andre will
know all, and drive me from his house. Let come what will, I shall
not sacrifice another victim. Prosper will be accused of this theft
to-morrow. Clameran defrauded him of the woman he loved, and now you
would deprive him of his honor! I will have nothing to do with so base a
crime.”

She spoke so loud and angrily that Raoul was alarmed. He knew that the
errand-boy slept in a room close by, and might be in bed listening to
her, although it was early in the evening.

“Come upstairs!” he said, seizing Mme. Fauvel’s arm.

But she clung to a table and refused to move a step.

“I have been cowardly enough to sacrifice Madeleine,” she said, “but I
will not ruin Prosper.”

Raoul had an argument in reserve which he knew would make Mme. Fauvel
submit to his will.

“Now, really,” he said with a cynical laugh, “do you pretend that you do
not know Prosper and I arranged this little affair together, and that he
is to have half the booty?”

“Impossible! I never will believe such a thing of Prosper!”

“Why, how do you suppose I discovered the secret word? Who do you
suppose disobeyed orders, and left the money in the safe?”

“Prosper is honest.”

“Of course he is, and so am I too. The only thing is, that we both need
money.”

“You are telling a falsehood, Raoul!”

“Upon my soul, I am not. Madeleine rejected Prosper, and the poor fellow
has to console himself for her cruelty; and these sorts of consolations
are expensive, my good mother.”

He took up the candle, and gently but firmly led Mme. Fauvel toward the
staircase.

She mechanically suffered herself to be led along, more bewildered by
what she had just heard than she was at the opening of the safe-door.

“What!” she gasped, “can Prosper be a thief?”

She began to think herself the victim of a terrible nightmare, and that,
when she waked, her mind would be relieved of this intolerable torture.
She helplessly clung to Raoul’s arm as he helped her up the narrow
little staircase.

“You must put the key back in the secretary,” said Raoul, as soon as
they were in the chamber again.

But she did not seem to hear him; so he went and replaced the safe-key
in the place from which he had seen her take it.

He then led, or rather carried, Mme. Fauvel into the little
sitting-room, and placed her in an easy-chair.

The set, expressionless look of the wretched woman’s eyes, and her dazed
manner, frightened Raoul, who thought that she had lost her mind, that
her reason had finally given way beneath this last terrible shock.

“Come, cheer up, my dear mother,” he said in coaxing tones as he rubbed
her icy hands; “you have saved my life, and rendered an immense service
to Prosper. Don’t be alarmed; everything will come out right in the
end. Prosper will be accused, perhaps arrested; he expects that, and is
prepared for it; he will deny his culpability; and, as there is no proof
against him, he will be set at liberty immediately.”

But these falsehoods were wasted on Mme. Fauvel, who was incapable of
understanding anything said to her.

“Raoul,” she moaned in a broken-hearted tone, “Raoul, my son, you have
killed me.”

Her gentle voice, kind even in its despairing accents, touched the very
bottom of Raoul’s perverted heart, and once more his soul was wrung
by remorse; so that he felt inclined to put back the stolen money, and
comfort the despairing woman whose life and reason he was destroying.
The thought of Clameran restrained him.

Finding his efforts to restore Mme. Fauvel fruitless, that, in spite
of all his affectionate regrets and promises, she still sat silent,
motionless, and death-like; and fearing that M. Fauvel or Madeleine
might enter at any moment, and demand an explanation, he hastily pressed
a kiss upon his mother’s brow, and hurried from the house.

At the restaurant, in the room where they had dined, Clameran, tortured
by anxiety, awaited his accomplice.

He wondered if at the last moment, when he was not near to sustain him,
Raoul would prove a coward, and retreat; if any unforeseen trifle had
prevented his finding the key; if any visitors were there; and, if so,
would they depart before M. Fauvel’s return from the dinner-party?

He had worked himself into such a state of excitement, that, when Raoul
returned, he flew to him with ashy face and trembling all over, and
could scarcely gasp out:

“Well?”

“The deed is done, uncle, thanks to you; and I am now the most
miserable, abject villain on the face of the earth.”

He unbuttoned his vest, and, pulling out the four bundles of bank-notes,
angrily dashed them upon the table, saying, in a tone of scorn and
disgust:

“Now I hope you are satisfied. This is the price of the happiness,
honor, and perhaps the life of three people.”

Clameran paid no attention to these angry words. With feverish eagerness
he seized the notes, and rattled them in his hand as if to convince
himself of the reality of success.

“Now Madeleine is mine!” he cried excitedly.

Raoul looked at Clameran in silent disgust. This exhibition of joy was
a shocking contrast to the scene in which he had just been an actor. He
was humiliated at being the tool of such a heartless scoundrel as he now
knew Clameran to be.

Louis misinterpreted this silence, and said gayly:

“Did you have much difficulty?”

“I forbid you ever to allude to this evening’s work,” cried Raoul
fiercely. “Do you hear me? I wish to forget it.”

Clameran shrugged his shoulders at this outburst of anger, and said in a
bantering tone:

“Just as you please, my handsome nephew: I rather think you will want
to remember it though, when I offer you these three hundred and fifty
thousand francs. You will not, I am sure, refuse to accept them as a
slight souvenir. Take them: they are yours.”

This generosity seemed neither to surprise nor satisfy Raoul.

“According to our agreement,” he said sullenly, “I was to have more than
this.”

“Of course: this is only part of your share.”

“And when am I to have the rest, if you please?”

“The day I marry Madeleine, and not before, my boy. You are too valuable
an assistant to lose at present; and you know that, though I don’t
mistrust you, I am not altogether sure of your sincere affection for
me.”

Raoul reflected that to commit a crime, and not profit by it, would be
the height of absurdity. He had come with the intention of breaking off
all connection with Clameran; but he now determined that he would not
abandon his accomplice until he had been well paid for his services.

“Very well,” he said, “I accept this on account; but remember, I will
never do another piece of work like this to-night. You can do what you
please; I shall flatly refuse.”

Clameran burst into a loud laugh, and said:

“That is sensible: now that you are rich, you can afford to be honest.
Set your conscience at rest, for I promise you I will require nothing
more of you save a few trifling services. You can retire behind the
scenes now, while I appear upon the stage; my role begins.”




XXI

For more than an hour after Raoul’s departure, Mme. Fauvel remained in a
state of stupor bordering upon unconsciousness.

Gradually, however, she recovered her senses sufficiently to comprehend
the horrors of her present situation; and, with the faculty of thought,
that of suffering returned.

The dreadful scene in which she had taken part was still before her
affrighted vision; all the attending circumstances, unnoticed at the
time, now struck her forcibly.

She saw that she had been the dupe of a shameful conspiracy: that Raoul
had tortured her with cold-blooded cruelty, had taken advantage of her
tenderness, and had speculated upon her fright.

But had Prosper anything to do with the robbery? This Mme. Fauvel had
no way of finding out. Ah, Raoul knew how the blow would strike when he
accused Prosper. He knew that Mme. Fauvel would end by believing in the
cashier’s complicity.

The unhappy woman sat and thought over every possible way in which Raoul
could find out the secret word without Prosper’s knowledge. She rejected
with horror the idea that the cashier was the instigator of the crime;
but, in spite of herself, it constantly recurred. And finally she felt
convinced that what Raoul said must be true; for who but Prosper could
have betrayed the word? And who but Prosper could have left so large an
amount of money in the safe, which, by order of the banker, was to be
always left empty at night?

Knowing that Prosper was leading a life of extravagance and dissipation,
she thought it very likely that he had, from sheer desperation, resorted
to this bold step to pay his debts; her blind affection, moreover, made
her anxious to attribute the crime to anyone, rather than to her darling
son.

She had heard that Prosper was supporting one of those worthless
creatures whose extravagance impoverishes men, and whose evil influence
perverts their natures. When a young man is thus degraded, will he
stop at any sin or crime? Alas! Mme. Fauvel knew, from her own sad
experience, to what depths even one fault can lead. Although she
believed Prosper guilty, she did not blame him, but considered herself
responsible for his sins.

Had she not herself banished the poor young man from the fireside which
he had begun to regard as his own? Had she not destroyed his hopes of
happiness, by crushing his pure love for a noble girl, whom he looked
upon as his future wife, and thus driven him into a life of dissipation
and sin?

She was undecided whether to confide in Madeleine, or bury the secret in
her own breast.

Fatally inspired, she decided to keep silent.

When Madeleine returned home at eleven o’clock, Mme. Fauvel not only was
silent as to what had occurred, but even succeeded in so concealing all
traces of her agitation, that she escaped any questions from her niece.

Her calmness never left her when M. Fauvel and Lucien returned, although
she was in terror lest her husband should go down to the cash-room to
see that everything was safely locked up. It was not his habit to open
the money-safe at night, but he sometimes did.

As fate would have it, the banker, as soon as he entered the room, began
to speak of Prosper, saying how distressing it was that so interesting a
young man should be thus throwing himself away, and wondering what could
have happened to make him suddenly cease his visits at the house, and
resort to bad company.

If M. Fauvel had looked at the faces of his wife and niece while he
harshly blamed the cashier, he would have been puzzled at their strange
expressions.

All night long Mme. Fauvel suffered the most intolerable agony. She
counted each stroke of the town-clock, as the hours dragged on.

“In six hours,” she said to herself, “in five hours--in four hours--in
three hours--in one hour--all will be discovered; and then what will
happen? Heaven help me!”

At sunrise she heard the servants moving about the house. Then the
office-shutters opened; then, later, she heard the clerks going into the
bank.

She attempted to get up, but felt so ill and weak that she sank back
on her pillow; and lying there, trembling like a leaf, bathed in cold
perspiration, she awaited the discovery of the robbery.

She was leaning over the side of the bed, straining her ear to catch a
sound from the cash-room, when Madeleine, who had just left her, rushed
into the room.

The white face and wild eyes of the poor girl told Mme. Fauvel that the
crime was discovered.

“Do you know what has happened, aunt?” cried Madeleine, in a shrill,
horrified tone. “Prosper is accused of robbery, and the police have come
to take him to prison!”

A groan was Mme. Fauvel’s only answer.

“Raoul or the marquis is at the bottom of this,” continued Madeleine
excitedly.

“How can they be concerned in it, my child?”

“I can’t tell yet; but I only know that Prosper is innocent. I have just
seen him, spoken to him. He would never have looked me in the face had
he been guilty.”

Mme. Fauvel opened her lips to confess all: fear kept her silent.

“What can these wretches want?” said Madeleine: “what new sacrifice do
they demand? Dishonor Prosper! Good heavens! Why did they not kill him
at once? He would rather be dead than disgraced!”

Here the entrance of M. Fauvel interrupted Madeleine. The banker was so
angry that he could scarcely speak.

“The worthless scoundrel!” he cried; “to think of his daring to accuse
me! To insinuate that I robbed my own safe! And that Marquis de Clameran
must needs doubt my good faith in keeping my engagement to pay his
money!”

Then, without noticing the effect of his story upon the two women, he
proceeded to relate all that had occurred downstairs.

“I was afraid this extravagance would lead to something terrible,” he
said in conclusion; “you know I told you last night that Prosper was
growing worse in his conduct, and that he would get into trouble.”

Throughout the day Madeleine’s devotion to her aunt was severely tried.

The generous girl saw disgrace heaped upon the man she loved. She had
perfect faith in his innocence; she felt sure she knew who had laid the
trap to ruin him; and yet she could not say a word in his defence.

Fearing that Madeleine would suspect her of complicity in the theft, if
she remained in bed and betrayed so much agitation, Mme. Fauvel arose
and dressed for breakfast.

It was a dreary meal. No one tasted a morsel. The servants moved about
on their tiptoes, as silently as if a death had occurred in the family.

About two o’clock, a servant came to M. Fauvel’s study, and said that
the Marquis de Clameran desired to see him.

“What!” cried the banker; “does he dare----”

Then, after a moment’s reflection, he added:

“Ask him to walk up.”

The very name of Clameran had sufficed to arouse all the slumbering
wrath of M. Fauvel. The victim of a robbery, finding his safe empty at
the moment that he was called upon to make a heavy payment, he had been
constrained to conceal his anger and resentment; but now he determined
to have his revenge upon his insolent visitor.

But the marquis declined to come upstairs. The messenger returned with
the answer that the gentleman had a particular reason for seeing M.
Fauvel in the office below, where the clerks were.

“What does this fresh impertinence mean?” cried the banker, as he
angrily jumped up and hastened downstairs.

M. de Clameran was standing in the middle of the room adjoining the
cash-room; M. Fauvel walked up to him, and said bluntly:

“What do you want now, monsieur? You have been paid your money, and I
have your receipt.”

To the surprise of all the clerks, and the banker himself, the marquis
seemed not in the least offended at this rude greeting, but answered in
a deferential but not at all humble manner:

“You are hard upon me, monsieur; but I deserve it, and that is why I am
here. A gentleman always acknowledges when he is in the wrong: in this
instance I am the offender; and I flatter myself that my past will
permit me to say so without being accused of cowardice or lack of
self-respect. I insisted upon seeing you here instead of in your study,
because, having been rude to you in the presence of your clerks, I
wished them to hear me apologize for my behavior of this morning.”

Clameran’s speech was so different from his usual overbearing, haughty
conduct, that surprise almost stupefied the banker, and he could only
answer:

“I must say that I was hurt by your doubts, insinuations, suspicions of
my honor----”

“This morning,” continued the marquis, “I was irritated, and
thoughtlessly gave way to my temper. Although I am gray-headed, my
disposition is as excitable as that of a fiery young man of twenty
years; and I hope you will forget words uttered in a moment of
excitement, and now deeply regretted.”

M. Fauvel, being a kind-hearted though quick-tempered man, could
appreciate Clameran’s feelings; and, knowing that his own high
reputation for scrupulous honesty could not be affected by any hasty or
abusive language uttered by a creditor, at once calmed down before so
frank an apology; and, holding out his hand to Clameran, said:

“Let us forget what happened, monsieur.”

They conversed in a friendly manner for some minutes; and, after
Clameran had explained why he had such pressing need of the money at
that particular hour of the morning, turned to leave, saying that he
would do himself the honor of calling upon Mme. Fauvel during the day.

“That is, if a visit from me would not be considered intrusive,” he said
with a shade of hesitation. “Perhaps, after the trouble of this morning,
she does not wish to be disturbed.”

“Oh, no!” said the banker; “come, by all means; I think a visit from you
would cheer her mind. I shall be from home all day, trying to trace this
unfortunate affair.”

Mme. Fauvel was in the same room where Raoul had threatened to kill
himself the night previous; she looked very pale and ill as she lay on a
sofa. Madeleine was bathing her forehead.

When M. de Clameran was announced, they both started up as if a phantom
had appeared before them.

Although Louis had been gay and smiling when he parted from M. Fauvel
downstairs, he now wore a melancholy aspect, as he gravely bowed, and
refused to seat himself in the chair which Mme. Fauvel motioned him to
take.

“You will excuse me, ladies, for intruding at this time of your
affliction; but I have a duty to fulfil.”

The two women were silent; they seemed to be waiting for him to explain.
He added in an undertone:

“I know all.”

By an imploring gesture, Mme. Fauvel tried to stop him. She saw that he
was about to reveal her secret to Madeleine.

But Louis would not see this gesture; he turned his whole attention to
Madeleine, who haughtily said:

“Explain yourself, monsieur.”

“Only one hour ago,” he replied, “I discovered that Raoul last night
forced from his mother the key of the money-safe, and stole three
hundred and fifty thousand francs.”

Madeleine crimsoned with shame and indignation; she leaned over the
sofa, and seizing her aunt’s wrist shook it violently, and in a hollow
voice cried:

“It is false, is it not, aunt? speak!”

“Alas! alas!” groaned Mme. Fauvel. “What have I done?”

“You have allowed Prosper to be accused,” cried Madeleine; “you have
suffered him to be arrested, and disgraced for life.”

“Forgive me,” sighed Mme. Fauvel. “He was about to kill himself; I was
so frightened! Then you know--Prosper was to share the money: he gave
Raoul the secret word--”

“Good Heavens! Aunt, how could you believe such a falsehood as that?”

Clameran interrupted them.

“Unfortunately, what your aunt says of M. Bertomy is the truth,” he said
in a sad tone.

“Your proofs, monsieur; where are your proofs?”

“Raoul’s confession.”

“Raoul is false.”

“That is only too true: but how did he find out the word, if M. Bertomy
did not reveal it? And who left the money in the safe but M. Bertomy?”

These arguments had no effect upon Madeleine.

“And now tell me,” she said scornfully, “what became of the money?”

There was no mistaking the significance of these words: they meant:

“You are the instigator of the robbery, and of course you have taken
possession of the money.”

This harsh accusation from a girl whom he so passionately loved, when,
grasping bandit as he was, he gave up for her sake all the money gained
by his crime, so cruelly hurt Clameran that he turned livid. But his
mortification and anger did not prevent him from pursuing the part he
had prepared and studied.

“A day will come, mademoiselle,” he said, “when you will deeply regret
having treated me so cruelly. I understand your insinuation; you need
not attempt to deny it.”

“I have no idea of denying anything, monsieur.”

“Madeleine!” remonstrated Mme. Fauvel, who trembled at the rising anger
of the man who held her fate in his hands, “Madeleine, be careful!”

“Mademoiselle is pitiless,” said Clameran sadly; “she cruelly punishes
an honorable man whose only fault is having obeyed his brother’s
dying injunctions. And I am here now, because I believe in the joint
responsibility of all the members of a family.”

Here he slowly drew from his pocket several bundles of bank-notes, and
laid them on the mantel-piece.

“Raoul stole three hundred and fifty thousand francs,” he said: “I
return the same amount. It is more than half my fortune. Willingly would
I give the rest to insure this being the last crime committed by him.”

Too inexperienced to penetrate this bold, and yet simple plan of
Clameran’s, Madeleine was dumb with astonishment; all her calculations
were upset.

Mme. Fauvel, on the contrary, accepted this restitution as salvation
sent from heaven.

“Oh, thanks, monsieur, thanks!” she cried, gratefully clasping
Clameran’s hand in hers; “you are goodness itself!”

Louis’s eye lit up with pleasure. But he rejoiced too soon. A minute’s
reflection brought back all of Madeleine’s distrust. She thought this
magnanimity and generosity unnatural in a man whom she considered
incapable of a noble sentiment, and at once concluded that it must
conceal some snare beneath.

“What are we to do with the money?” she demanded.

“Restore it to M. Fauvel, mademoiselle.”

“We restore it, monsieur, and how? Restoring the money is denouncing
Raoul, and ruining my aunt. Take back your money, monsieur. We will not
touch it.”

Clameran was too shrewd to insist; he took up the money, and prepared to
leave.

“I comprehend your refusal, mademoiselle, and must find another way
of accomplishing my wish. But, before retiring, let me say that your
injustice pains me deeply. After the promise you made to me, I had
reason to hope for a kinder welcome.”

“I will keep my promise, monsieur; but not until you have furnished
security.”

“Security! And for what? Pray, explain yourself.”

“Something to protect my aunt against the molestations of Raoul after
my--marriage. What is to prevent his coming to extort money from his
mother after he has squandered my dowry? A man who spends a hundred
thousand francs in four months will soon run through my little fortune.
We are making a bargain; I give you my hand in exchange for the honor
and life of my aunt; and of course you must give me some guarantee to
secure the performance of your promise.”

“Oh! I will give you ample securities,” cried Clameran, “such as will
quiet all your suspicious doubts of my good faith. Alas! you will
not believe in my devotion; what shall I do to convince you of its
sincerity? Shall I try to save M. Bertomy?”

“Thanks for the offer, monsieur,” replied Madeleine disdainfully; “if
Prosper is guilty, let him be punished by the law; if he is innocent,
God will protect him.”

Here Madeleine stood up, to signify that the interview was over.

Clameran bowed, and left the room.

“What pride! What determination! The idea of her demanding securities
of me!” he said to himself as he slowly walked away. “But the proud girl
shall be humbled yet. She is so beautiful! and, if I did not so madly
love her, I would kill her on the spot!”

Never had Clameran been so irritated.

Madeleine’s quiet determination and forethought had unexpectedly thrown
him off his well-laid track; not anticipating any such self assertion on
her part, he was disconcerted, and at a loss how to proceed.

He knew that it would be useless to attempt deceiving a girl of
Madeleine’s character a second time; he saw that she had penetrated his
motives sufficiently to put her on the defensive, and prepare her for
any new surprise. Moreover, she would prevent Mme. Fauvel from being
frightened and forced into submission any longer.

With mortification and rage, Louis saw that after all his plotting, when
success was in his reach, when his hopes were almost crowned, he had
been foiled and scornfully set at defiance by a girl: the whole thing
would have to be gone over again.

Although Madeleine had resigned herself to sacrifice, it was still
evident that she had no idea of doing so blindly, and would not hazard
her aunt’s and her own happiness upon the uncertainty of a verbal
promise.

Clameran racked his brain to furnish guarantees; how could he convince
her that Raoul had no idea or desire of annoying Mme. Fauvel in the
future?

He could not tell Madeleine that her dowry was to be the bribe received
by Raoul for his future good behavior and past crimes.

The knowledge of all the circumstances of this shameful criminal
intrigue would have reassured her upon her aunt’s peace of mind; but
then it would never do to inform her of these details, certainly not
before the marriage.

What securities could he give? Not one could he think of.

But Clameran was not one of those slow-minded men who take weeks to
consider a difficulty. When he could not untie a knot, he would cut it.

Raoul was a stumbling-block to his wishes, and he swore to rid himself
of his troublesome accomplice as soon as possible.

Although it was not an easy matter to dispose of so cunning a knave,
Clameran felt no hesitation in undertaking to accomplish his purpose. He
was incited by one of those passions which age renders terrible.

The more certain he was of Madeleine’s contempt and dislike, the more
determined he was to marry her. His love seemed to be a sort of insane
desire to possess and call his own the one being whom he recognized as
his superior in every way.

But he had sense enough to see that he might ruin his prospects by undue
haste, and that the safest course would be to await the result of the
robbery and its effect upon Prosper.

He waited in anxious expectation of a summons from Mme. Fauvel. At last
he concluded that Madeleine was waiting for him to make the next move in
the direction of yielding.

He was right; Madeleine knew that after the last bold step the
accomplices would remain quiet for a while; she knew resistance could
have no worse results than would cowardly submission; and therefore
assumed the entire responsibility of managing the affair so as to keep
at bay both Raoul and Clameran.

She knew that Mme. Fauvel would be anxious to accept any terms of peace,
but she determined to use all her influence to prevent her doing this,
and to force upon her the necessity of preserving a dignified silence.

This accounted for the silence of the two women, who were quietly
waiting for their adversaries to renew hostilities.

They even succeeded in concealing their anxiety beneath assumed
indifference; never asking any questions about the robbery, or those in
any way connected with it.

M. Fauvel brought them an account of Prosper’s examination, the many
charges brought against him, his obstinate denial of having stolen the
money; and finally how, after great perplexity and close study of the
case by the judge of instruction, the cashier had been discharged for
want of sufficient proof against him.

Since Clameran’s offer to restore the notes, Mme. Fauvel had not doubted
Prosper’s guilt. She said nothing, but inwardly accused him of having
seduced her son from the path of virtue, and enticed him into crime--her
son whom she would never cease to love, no matter how great his faults.

Madeleine had perfect faith in Prosper’s innocence.

She was so confident of his being restored to liberty that she ventured
to ask her uncle, under pretext of some charitable object, to give
her ten thousand francs, which she sent to the unfortunate victim of
circumstantial evidence; who, from what she had heard of his poverty,
must be in need of assistance.

In the letter--cut from her prayer-book to avoid detection by
writing--accompanying the money, she advised Prosper to leave France,
because she knew that it would be impossible for a man of his proud
nature to remain on the scene of his disgrace; the greater his
innocence, the more intolerable his suffering.

Besides, Madeleine, at that time feeling that she would be obliged to
marry Clameran, was anxious to have the man she loved far, far away from
her.

On the day that this anonymous present was sent, in opposition to the
wishes of Mme. Fauvel, the two poor women were entangled fearfully in
pecuniary difficulties.

The tradesmen whose money had been squandered by Raoul refused to give
credit any longer, and insisted upon their bills being paid at once;
saying they could not understand how a man of M. Fauvel’s wealth and
position could keep them waiting for such insignificant sums.

The butcher, grocer, and wine-merchant had bills of one, two, and five
hundred francs only; but, not having even that small amount, Mme. Fauvel
had difficulty in prevailing upon them to receive a part on account, and
wait a little longer for the residue.

Some of the store-keepers threatened to ask the banker for their money,
if everything was not settled before the end of the week.

Alas! Mme. Fauvel’s indebtedness amounted to fifteen thousand francs.

Madeleine and her aunt had declined all invitations during the winter,
to avoid purchasing evening dresses; having always been remarkable for
their superb toilets, seldom appearing in the same ball-dress twice,
they dared not give rise to comment by wearing their old dresses, and
knowing that M. Fauvel would be the first to ask the cause of this
sudden change, as he liked to see them always the best-dressed women in
the room.

But at last they were obliged to appear in public. M. Fauvel’s most
intimate friends, the Messrs. Jandidier, were about to give a splendid
ball, and, as fate would have it, a fancy ball, which would require the
purchasing of costumes.

Where would the money come from?

They had been owing a large bill to their dressmaker for over a year.
Would she consent to furnish them dresses on credit? They were ashamed
to ask her.

Madeleine’s new maid, Palmyre Chocareille, extricated them from this
difficulty.

This girl, who seemed to have suffered all the minor ills of
life--which, after all, are the hardest to bear--seemed to have divined
her mistress’s anxiety.

At any rate, she voluntarily informed Madeleine that a friend of hers,
a first-class dressmaker, had just set up for herself, and would be glad
to furnish materials and make the dresses on credit, for the sake of
obtaining the patronage of Mme. Fauvel and her niece, which would at
once bring her plenty of fashionable customers.

But, after this dilemma was settled, a still greater one presented
itself.

Mme. Fauvel and her niece could not appear at a ball without jewelry;
and every jewel they owned had been taken by Raoul, and pawned.

After thinking the matter over, Madeleine decided to ask Raoul to take
some of the stolen money, and redeem the last set of jewels he had
forced from his mother. She informed her aunt of her intention, and
said, in a tone that admitted of no contradiction:

“Appoint an interview with Raoul: he will not dare to refuse you; and I
will go in your stead.”

The next day, the courageous girl took a cab, and, regardless of the
inclement weather, went to Vesinet.

She would have been filled with consternation had she known that M.
Verduret and Prosper were following close behind, and witnessed her
interview from the top of a ladder.

Her bold step was fruitless. Raoul swore that he had divided with
Prosper; that his own half of the money was spent, and that he had not a
napoleon wherewith to redeem anything.

He even refused to give up the pledges; and Madeleine had to resort
to threats of exposure, before she could induce him to surrender the
tickets of four or five trifling articles that were indispensable to
their toilet.

Clameran had ordered him to refuse positively to give up a single
ticket, because he hoped that in their distress they would call upon him
for relief.

The violent altercation witnessed by Clameran’s new valet, Joseph
Dubois, had been caused by the exaction of this promise.

The accomplices were at that time on very bad terms. Clameran was
seeking a safe means of getting rid of Raoul; and the young scamp,
having a presentiment of his uncle’s intentions, was determined to
outwit him.

Nothing but the certainty of impending danger could reconcile them. The
danger was revealed to them both at the Jandidier ball.

Who was the mysterious mountebank that indulged in such transparent
allusions to Mme. Fauvel’s private troubles, and then said, with
threatening significance to Louis: “I was the best friend of your
brother Gaston?”

Who he was, where he came from, they could not imagine; but they
clearly saw that he was a dangerous enemy, and forthwith attempted to
assassinate him upon his leaving the ball.

Having been followed and watched by their would-be victim, they became
alarmed--especially when he suddenly disappeared--and wisely decided
that the safest thing they then could do was to return quietly to their
hotel.

“We cannot be too guarded in our conduct,” whispered Clameran; “we must
discover who he is before taking any further steps in this matter.”

Once more, Raoul tried to induce him to give up his project of marrying
Madeleine.

“Never!” he exclaimed fiercely, “I will marry her or perish in the
attempt!”

He thought that, now they were warned, the danger of being caught was
lessened; when on his guard, few people could entrap so experienced and
skilful a rogue.

Little did Clameran know that a man who was a hundred-fold more skilful
than he was closely pursuing him.




XXII

THE CATASTROPHE

Such are the facts that, with an almost incredible talent for
investigation, had been collected and prepared by the stout man with the
jovial face who had taken Prosper under his protection, M. Verduret.

Reaching Paris at nine o’clock in the evening, not by the Lyons road
as he had said, but by the Orleans train, M. Verduret hurried up to the
Archangel, where he found the cashier impatiently expecting him.

“You are about to hear some rich developments,” he said to Prosper, “and
see how far back into the past one has to seek for the primary cause of
a crime. All things are linked together and dependent upon each other in
this world of ours. If Gaston de Clameran had not entered a little
cafe at Tarascon to play a game of billiards twenty years ago, your
money-safe would not have been robbed three weeks ago.

“Valentine de la Verberie is punished in 1866 for the murder committed
for her sake in 1840. Nothing is neglected or forgotten, when stern
Retribution asserts her sway. Listen.”

And he forthwith related all that he had discovered, referring, as he
went along, to a voluminous manuscript which he had prepared, with many
notes and authenticated proofs attached.

During the last week M. Verduret had not had twenty-four hours’ rest,
but he bore no traces of fatigue. His iron muscles braved any amount of
labor, and his elastic nature was too well tempered to give way beneath
such pressure.

While any other man would have sunk exhausted in a chair, he stood up
and described, with the enthusiasm and captivating animation peculiar
to him, the minutest details and intricacies of the plot that he had
devoted his whole energy to unravelling; personating every character he
brought upon the scene to take part in the strange drama, so that his
listener was bewildered and dazzled by his brilliant acting.

As Prosper listened to this narrative of events happening twenty years
back, the secret conversations as minutely related as if overheard the
moment they took place, it sounded more like a romance than a statement
of plain facts.

All these ingenious explanations might be logical, but what foundation
did they possess? Might they not be the dreams of an excited
imagination?

M. Verduret did not finish his report until four o’clock in the morning;
then he cried, with an accent of triumph:

“And now they are on their guard, and sharp, wary rascals too: but they
won’t escape me; I have cornered them beautifully. Before a week is
over, Prosper, you will be publicly exonerated, and will come out of
this scrape with flying colors. I have promised your father you shall.”

“Impossible!” said Prosper in a dazed way, “it cannot be!”

“What?”

“All this you have just told me.”

M. Verduret opened wide his eyes, as if he could not understand anyone
having the audacity to doubt the accuracy of _his_ report.

“Impossible, indeed!” he cried. “What! have you not sense enough to see
the plain truth written all over every fact, and attested by the best
authority? Your thick-headedness exasperates me to the last degree.”

“But how can such rascalities take place in Paris, in our very midst,
without----”

“Parbleu!” interrupted the fat man, “you are young, my friend! Are you
innocent enough to suppose that crimes, forty times worse than this,
don’t occur every day? You think the horrors of the police-court are
the only ones. Pooh! You only read in the _Gazette des Tribunaux_ of the
cruel melodramas of life, where the actors are as cowardly as the knife,
and as treacherous as the poison they use. It is at the family fireside,
often under shelter of the law itself, that the real tragedies of
life are acted; in modern crimes the traitors wear gloves, and cloak
themselves with public position; the victims die, smiling to the last,
without revealing the torture they have endured to the end. Why, what
I have just related to you is an everyday occurrence; and you profess
astonishment.”

“I can’t help wondering how you discovered all this tissue of crime.”

“Ah, that is the point!” said the fat man with a self-satisfied smile.
“When I undertake a task, I devote my whole attention to it. Now, make
a note of this: When a man of ordinary intelligence concentrates his
thoughts and energies upon the attainment of an object, he is certain to
obtain ultimate success. Besides that, I have my own method of working
up a case.”

“Still I don’t see what grounds you had to go upon.”

“To be sure, one needs some light to guide one in a dark affair like
this. But the fire in Clameran’s eye at the mention of Gaston’s name
ignited my lantern. From that moment I walked straight to the solution
of the mystery, as I would walk to a beacon-light on a dark night.”

The eager, questioning look of Prosper showed that he would like to know
the secret of his protector’s wonderful penetration, and at the same
time be more thoroughly convinced that what he had heard was all
true--that his innocence would be more clearly proved.

“Now confess,” cried M. Verduret, “you would give anything in the world
to find out how I discovered the truth?”

“I certainly would, for it is the darkest of mysteries, marvellous!”

M. Verduret enjoyed Prosper’s bewilderment. To be sure, he was neither
a good judge nor a distinguished amateur; but he was an astonished
admirer, and sincere admiration is always flattering, no matter whence
it comes.

“Well,” he replied, “I will explain my system. There is nothing
marvellous about it as you will soon see. We worked together to find the
solution of the problem, so you know my reasons for suspecting Clameran
as the prime mover in the robbery. As soon as I had acquired this
certainty, my task was easy. You want to know what I did? I placed
trustworthy people to watch the parties in whom I was most interested.
Joseph Dubois took charge of Clameran, and Nina Gypsy never lost sight
of Mme. Fauvel and her niece.”

“I cannot comprehend how Nina ever consented to this service.”

“That is my secret,” replied M. Verduret. “Having the assistance of good
eyes and quick ears on the spot, I went to Beaucaire to inquire into the
past, so as to link it with what I knew of the present. The next day I
was at Clameran; and the first step I took was to find the son of St.
Jean, the old valet. An honest man he was, too; open and simple as
nature herself; and he made a good bargain in selling me his madder.”

“Madder?” said Prosper with a puzzled look; “what did you----”

“Of course I wanted to buy his madder. Of course I did not appear to
him as I do to you now. I was a countryman wanting to buy madder; he
had madder for sale; so we began to bargain about the price. The debate
lasted almost all day, during which time we drank a dozen bottles of
wine. About supper-time, St. Jean was as drunk as a bunghole, and I had
purchased nine hundred francs’ worth of madder which your father will
sell to-morrow.”

Prosper’s astonished countenance made M. Verduret laugh heartily.

“I risked nine hundred francs,” he continued, “but thread by thread I
gathered the whole history of the Clamerans, Gaston’s love-affair, his
flight, and the stumbling of the horse ridden by Louis. I found also
that about a year ago Louis returned, sold the chateau to a man named
Fougeroux, whose wife, Mihonne, had a secret interview with Louis the
day of the purchase. I went to see Mihonne. Poor woman! her rascally
husband has pounded all the sense out of her; she is almost idiotic. I
told her I came from the Clameran family, and she at once related to me
everything she knew.”

The apparent simplicity of this mode of investigation confounded
Prosper. He wondered it had not occurred to him before.

“From that time,” continued M. Verduret, “the skein began to
disentangle; I held the principal thread. I now set about finding out
what had become of Gaston. Lafourcade, who is a friend of your father,
informed me that he had bought a foundery, and settled in Oloron, where
he soon after suddenly died. Thirty-six hours later I was at Oloron.”

“You are certainly indefatigable!” said Prosper.

“No, but I always strike while the iron is hot. At Oloron I met Manuel,
who had gone there to make a little visit before returning to Spain.
From him I obtained a complete history of Gaston’s life, and all the
particulars of his death. Manuel also told me of Louis’s visit; and the
inn-keeper described a young workman who was there at the same time,
whom I at once recognized as Raoul.”

“But how did you know of all the conversations between the villains?”
 said Prosper. “You seem to be aware of their secret thoughts.”

“You evidently think I have been drawing upon my imagination. You will
soon see to the contrary,” said Verduret good-humoredly. “While I was
at work down there, my aids did not sit with their hands tied together.
Mutually distrustful, Clameran and Raoul preserved all the letters
received from each other. Joseph Dubois copied them, or the important
portions of them, and forwarded them to me. Nina spent her time
listening at all doors under her supervision, and sent me a faithful
report. Finally, I have at the Fauvels another means of investigation
which I will reveal to you later.”

“I understand it all now,” murmured Prosper.

“And what have you been doing during my absence, my young friend?” asked
M. Verduret; “have you heard any news?”

At this question Prosper turned crimson. But he knew that it would never
do to keep silent about his imprudent step.

“Alas!” he stammered, “I read in a newspaper that Clameran was about to
marry Madeleine; and I acted like a fool.”

“What did you do?” inquired Verduret anxiously.

“I wrote an anonymous letter to M. Fauvel, informing him that his wife
was in love with Raoul--”

M. Verduret here brought his clinched fist down upon the little table
near by, with such violence that the thin plank was shivered. His
cheerful face in an instant clouded over.

“What folly!” he exclaimed, “how could you go and ruin everything?”

He arose from his seat, and strode up and down the room, oblivious of
the lodgers below, whose windows shook with every angry stamp of his
foot.

“What made you act so like a child, an idiot, a fool?” he said
indignantly to Prosper.

“Monsieur!”

“Here you are, drowning; an honest man springs into the water to save
you, and just as he approaches the shore you entangle his feet to
prevent him from swimming! What was my last order to you when I left
here?”

“To keep quiet, and not go out of the hotel.”

“Well.”

The consciousness of having done a foolish thing made Prosper appear
like a frightened school-boy, accused by his teacher of playing truant.

“It was night, monsieur,” he hesitatingly said, “and, having a violent
headache, I took a walk along the quay thinking there was no risk in
my entering a cafe; there I picked up a paper, and read the dreadful
announcement.”

“Did you not promise to trust everything to me?”

“You were absent, monsieur; and you yourself might have been surprised
by an unexpected--”

“Only fools are ever surprised into committing a piece of folly,” cried
M. Verduret impatiently. “To write an anonymous letter! Do you know to
what you expose me? Breaking a sacred promise made to one of the few
persons whom I highly esteem among my fellow-beings. I shall be looked
upon as a liar, a cheat--I who--”

He abruptly stopped, as if afraid to trust himself to speak further;
after calming down a little, he turned to Prosper, and said:

“The best thing we can do is to try and repair the harm you have done.
When and where did you post this idiotic letter?”

“Yesterday evening, at the Rue du Cardinal Lemoine. It hardly reached
the bottom of the box before I regretted having written it.”

“You had better have regretted it before dropping it in. What time was
it?”

“About ten o’clock.”

“Then your sweet little letter must have reached M. Fauvel with his
early mail; probably he was alone in his study when he read it.”

“I know he was: he never goes down to the bank until he has opened his
letters.”

“Can you recall the exact terms of your letter? Stop and think, for it
is very important that I should know.”

“Oh, it is unnecessary for me to reflect. I remember the letter as if I
had just written it.”

And almost verbatim he repeated what he had written.

After attentively listening, M. Verduret sat with a perplexed frown
upon his face, as if trying to discover some means of repairing the harm
done.

“That is an awkward letter,” he finally said, “to come from a person
who does not deal in such things. It leaves everything to be understood
without specifying anything; it is vague, jeering, insidious. Repeat it
to me.”

Prosper obeyed, and his second version did not vary from the first in a
single word.

“Nothing could be more alarming than that allusion to the cashier,” said
the fat man, repeating the words after Prosper. “The question, ‘Was it
also he who stole Mme. Fauvel’s diamonds?’ is simply fearful. What could
be more exasperating than the sarcastic advice, ‘In your place, I would
not have any public scandal, but would watch my wife?’ The effect of
your letter must have been terrible,” he added thoughtfully as he stood
with folded arms looking at poor Prosper. “M. Fauvel is quick-tempered,
is he not?”

“He has a violent temper, when aroused.”

“Then the mischief is not irreparable.”

“What! do you suppose--”

“I think that an impulsive man is afraid of himself, and seldom carries
out his first angry intentions. That is our chance of salvation. If,
upon the receipt of your bomb-shell, M. Fauvel, unable to restrain
himself, rushed into his wife’s room, and cried, ‘Where are your
diamonds?’ Mme. Fauvel will confess all; and then good-by to our hopes.”

“Why would this be disastrous?”

“Because, the moment Mme. Fauvel opens her lips to her husband, our
birds will take flight.”

Prosper had never thought of this eventuality.

“Then, again,” continued M. Verduret, “it would deeply distress another
person.”

“Anyone whom I know?”

“Yes, my friend, and very well too. I should certainly be chagrined to
the last degree, if these two rascals escape, without having obtained
complete satisfaction from them.”

“It seems to me that you know how to take care of yourself, and can do
anything you please.”

M. Verduret shrugged his shoulders, and said:

“Did you not perceive the gaps in my narrative?”

“I did not.”

“That is because you don’t know how to listen. In the first place, did
Louis de Clameran poison his brother, or not?”

“Yes; I am sure of it, from what you tell me.”

“There you are! You are much more certain, young man, than I am. Your
opinion is mine; but what proof have we? None. I skilfully questioned
Dr. C----. He has not the shadow of suspicion; and Dr. C---- is no
quack; he is a cultivated, observing man of high standing. What poisons
produce the effects described? I know of none; and yet I have studied up
on poisons from Pomerania digitalis to Sauvresy aconite.”

“The death took place so opportunely----”

“That anybody would be convinced of foul play. That is true; but chance
is sometimes a wonderful accomplice in crime. In the second place, I
know nothing of Raoul’s antecedents.”

“Is information on that point necessary?”

“Indispensable, my friend; but we will soon know something. I have sent
off one of my men--excuse me, I mean one of my friends--who is very
expert and adroit, M. Palot; and he writes that he is on the track. I am
interested in the history of this sentimental, sceptical young rascal. I
have an idea that he must have been a brave, honest sort of youth before
Clameran ruined him.”

Prosper was no longer listening.

M. Verduret’s words had inspired him with confidence. Already he saw
the guilty men arraigned before the bar of justice; and enjoyed, in
anticipation, this assize-court drama, where he would be publicly
exonerated and restored to position.

Then he would seek Madeleine; for now he understood her strange conduct
at the dressmaker’s, and knew that she had never ceased to love him.

This certainty of future happiness restored all the self-possession that
had deserted him the day he found the safe robbed. For the first time he
was astonished at the peculiarity of his situation.

Prosper had at first only been surprised at the protection of M.
Verduret and the extent of his investigations: now he asked himself,
what could have been his motives for acting thus?

What price did he expect for this sacrifice of time and labor?

His anxiety made him say nervously:

“It is unjust to us both, monsieur, for you to preserve your incognito
any longer. When you have saved the honor and life of a man, you should
at least let him know whom he is to thank for it.”

“Oh!” said M. Verduret smilingly, “you are not out of the woods yet. You
are not married either: so you must wait a little longer; patience and
faith.”

The clock struck six.

“Good heavens!” exclaimed M. Verduret. “Can it be six o’clock? I did
hope to have a good night’s rest, but I must keep on moving. This is no
time to be asleep.”

He went into the passage, and, leaning over the balusters, called, “Mme.
Alexandre! I say, Mme. Alexandre!”

The hostess of the Archangel, the portly wife of Fanferlot the Squirrel,
evidently had not been to bed. This fact struck Prosper.

She appeared, obsequious, smiling, and eager to please.

“What can I do for you, gentlemen?” she inquired.

“You can send your--Joseph Dubois and Palmyre to me as soon as possible.
Let me know when they arrive. I will rest a few minutes, and you can
awake me when they come.”

As soon as Mme. Alexandre left the room, the fat man unceremoniously
threw himself on the bed.

“You have no objections, I suppose?” he said to Prosper.

In five minutes he was fast asleep; and Prosper sat by the bed watching
him with a perplexed gaze, wondering who this strange man could be.

About nine o’clock someone tapped timidly at the door.

Slight as the noise was, it aroused M. Verduret, who sprang up, and
called out:

“Who is it?”

Prosper arose and opened the door.

Joseph Dubois, the valet of the Marquis of Clameran, entered.

This important assistant of M. Verduret was breathless from fast
running; and his little rat eyes were more restless than ever.

“Well, patron, I am glad to see you once more,” he cried. “Now you can
tell me what to do; I have been perfectly lost during your absence, and
have felt like a jumping monkey with a broken string.

“What! did you get frightened too?”

“Bless me! I think I had cause for alarm when I could not find you
anywhere. Yesterday afternoon I sent you three despatches, to the
addresses you gave me, Lyons, Beaucaire, and Oloron, but received no
answer. I was almost crazy with anxiety when your message reached me
just now.”

“Things are getting hot, then.”

“Hot! They are burning! The place is too warm to hold me any longer;
upon my soul, I can’t stand it!”

M. Verduret occupied himself in repairing his toilet, become disarranged
by lying down.

When he had finished, he threw himself in an easy-chair, and said to
Joseph Dubois, who remained respectfully standing, cap in hand, like a
soldier awaiting orders:

“Explain yourself, my boy, and quickly, if you please; no
circumlocution.”

“It is just this, patron. I don’t know what your plans are, or what line
you are taking now; but I can just tell you this: that you will have to
wind up the affair pretty quickly.”

“That is your opinion, Master Joseph?”

“Yes, patron, because if you wait any longer, good-by to our covey: you
will certainly find an empty cage, and the birds flown. You smile? Yes,
I know you are clever, and can accomplish anything; but they are cunning
blades, and as slippery as eels. They know that they are watched, too.”

“The devil they do!” cried M. Verduret. “Who has been committing
blunders?”

“Oh! nobody has done anything wrong,” replied Joseph. “You know, patron,
that they suspected something long ago. They gave you a proof of it, the
night of the fancy ball; that ugly cut on your arm was the beginning.
Ever since, they have had one eye open all the time. They had begun to
feel easier, when all of a sudden, yesterday, _ma foi_, they began to
smell a rat!”

“Was that the cause of your telegrams?”

“Of course. Now listen: yesterday morning when my master got up, about
ten o’clock, he took it into his head to arrange the papers in his desk;
which, by the way, has a disgusting lock which has given me a deal of
trouble. Meanwhile, I pretended to be fixing the fire, so as to remain
in the room to watch him. Patron, the man has an eye like a Yankee! At
the first glance he saw, or rather divined, that his papers had been
meddled with, he turned livid, and swore an oath; Lord, what an oath!”

“Never mind the oath; go on.”

“Well, how he discovered the little attentions I had devoted to
his letters, I can’t imagine. You know how careful I am. I had put
everything in perfect order; just as I found things I left them, when,
lo and behold! my noble marquis picks up each paper, one at a time,
turns it over, and smells it. I was just thinking I would offer him a
magnifying-glass, when all of a sudden he sprang up, and with one kick
sent his chair across the room, and flew at me with his eyes flashing
like two pistols. ‘Somebody has been at my papers,’ he shrieked; ‘this
letter has been photographed!’ B-r-r-r! I am not a coward, but I can
tell you that my heart stood perfectly still; I saw myself as dead
as Caesar, cut into mince-meat; and says I to myself, ‘Fanfer--excuse
me--Dubois, my friend, you are lost, dead;’ and I thought of Mme.
Alexandre.”

M. Verduret was buried in thought, and paid no attention to the worthy
Joseph’s analysis of his personal sensations.

“What happened next?” said Verduret after a few minutes.

“Why, he was just as frightened as I was, patron. The rascal did not
even dare to touch me. To be sure, I had taken the precaution to get out
of his reach; we talked with a large table between us. While wondering
what could have enabled him to discover the secret, I defended myself
with virtuous indignation. I said:

“‘It cannot be; M. le marquis is mistaken. Who would dare touch his
papers?’

“Bast! Instead of listening to me, he flourished an open letter, and
said:

“‘This letter has been photographed! here is proof of it!’ and he
pointed to a little yellow spot on the paper, shrieking out, ‘Look!
Smell! Smell it, you devil! It is--’ I forget the name he called it, but
some acid used by photographers.”

“I know, I know,” said M. Verduret; “go on; what next?”

“Then, patron, we had a scene; what a scene! He ended by seizing me by
the throat, and shaking me like a plum-tree, saying he would shake me
until I told him who I was, what I knew, and where I came from. As if I
knew, myself! I was obliged to account for every minute of my time
since I had been in his service. The devil was worse than a judge of
instruction, in his questions. Then he sent for the hotel porter,
who had charge of the front door, and questioned him closely, but in
English, so that I could not understand. After a while, he cooled down,
and when the boy was gone, presented me with twenty francs, saying, ‘I
am sorry I was so sharp with you; you are too stupid to have been guilty
of the offence.’”

“He said that, did he?”

“He used those very words to my face, patron.”

“And you think he meant what he said?”

“Certainly I do.”

The fat man smiled, and whistled a little tune expressive of contempt.

“If you think that,” he said, “Clameran was right in his estimate of
your brilliancy.”

It was easy to see that Joseph Dubois was anxious to hear his patron’s
grounds for considering him stupid, but dared not ask.

“I suppose I am stupid, if you think so,” said poor Fanferlot humbly.
“Well, after he had done blustering about the letters, M. le marquis
dressed, and went out. He did not want his carriage, but I saw him hire
a cab at the hotel door. I thought he had perhaps disappeared forever;
but I was mistaken. About five o’clock he returned as gay as a
bull-finch. During his absence, I had telegraphed to you.”

“What! did you not follow him?”

“I stayed on the spot in case of his return; but one of our friends kept
watch on him, and this friend gave me a report of my dandy’s movements.
First he went to a broker’s, then to the bank and discount office: so he
must be collecting his money to take a little trip.”

“Is that all he did?”

“That is all, patron. But I must tell you how the rascals tried to shut
up, ‘administratively,’ you understand, Mlle. Palmyre. Fortunately you
had anticipated something of the kind, and given orders to watch over
her safety. But for you, she would now be in prison.”

Joseph looked up to the ceiling by way of trying to remember something
more. Finding nothing there, he said:

“That is all. I rather think M. Patrigent will rub his hands with
delight when I carry him my report. He did not expect to see me any
more, and has no idea of the facts I have collected to swell the size of
his FILE 113.”

There was a long silence. Joseph was right in supposing that the crisis
had come. M. Verduret was arranging his plan of battle while waiting
for the report of Nina--now Palmyre, upon which depended his point of
attack.

But Joseph Dubois began to grow restless and uneasy.

“What must I do now, patron?” he asked.

“Return to the hotel; probably your master had noticed your absence; but
he will say nothing about it, so continue--”

Here M. Verduret was interrupted by an exclamation from Prosper, who was
standing near a window.

“What is the matter?” he inquired.

“There is Clameran!” cried Prosper, “over there.”

M. Verduret and Joseph ran to the window.

“Where is he?” said Joseph, “I don’t see him.”

“There, at the corner of the bridge, behind that orange-woman’s stall.”

Prosper was right. It was the noble Marquis of Clameran, who, hid behind
the stall, was watching for his servant to come out of the Archangel.

At first the quick-sighted Verduret had some doubts whether it was the
marquis, who, being skilled in these hazardous expeditions, managed to
conceal himself behind a pillar so as to elude detection.

But a moment came, when, elbowed by the pressing crowd, he was obliged
to come out on the pavement in full view of the window.

“Now don’t you see I was right!” cried the cashier.

“Well,” said the amazed Joseph, “I am amazed!”

M. Verduret seemed not in the least surprised, but quietly said:

“The game needs hunting. Well, Joseph, my boy, do you still think that
your noble master was duped by your acting injured innocence?”

“You assured me to the contrary, patron,” said Joseph in an humble tone;
“and your opinion is more convincing than all the proofs in the world.”

“This pretended outburst of rage was premeditated on the part of your
noble master. Knowing that he is being tracked, he naturally wishes to
discover who his adversaries are. You can imagine how uncomfortable he
must be at this uncertainty. Perhaps he thinks his pursuers are some of
his old accomplices, who, being starved, want a piece of his cake. He
will remain there until you come out: then he will come in to find out
who you are.”

“But, patron, I can go home without his seeing me.”

“Yes, I know. You will climb the little wall separating the Archangel
from the wine-merchant’s yard, and keep along the stationer’s area,
until you reach the Rue de la Huchette.”

Poor Joseph looked as if he had just received a bucket of ice-water upon
his head.

“Exactly the way I was going, patron,” he gasped out. “I heard that you
knew every plank and door of all the houses in Paris, and it certainly
must be so.”

The fat man made no reply to Joseph’s admiring remarks. He was thinking
how he could catch Clameran.

As to the cashier, he listened wonderingly, watching these strangers,
who seemed determined to reinstate him in public opinion, and punish his
enemies, while he himself stood by powerless and bewildered. What their
motives for befriending him could be, he vainly tried to discover.

“I will tell you what I can do,” said Joseph after deep thought.

“What is it?”

“I can innocently walk out of the front door, and loaf along the street
until I reach the Hotel du Louvre.”

“And then?”

“Dame! Clameran will come in and question Mme. Alexandre, whom you can
instruct beforehand; and she is smart enough to put any sharper off the
track.”

“Bad plan!” pronounced M. Verduret decidedly; “a scamp so compromised
as Clameran is not easily put off the track; now his eyes are opened, he
will be pretty hard to catch.”

Suddenly, in a brief tone of authority which admitted of no
contradiction, the fat man said:

“I have a way. Has Clameran, since he found that his papers had been
searched, seen Lagors?”

“No, patron.”

“Perhaps he has written to him?”

“I’ll bet you my head he has not. Having your orders to watch his
correspondence, I invented a little system which informs me every time
he touches a pen; during the last twenty-four hours the pens have not
been touched.”

“Clameran went out yesterday.”

“But the man who followed him says he wrote nothing on the way.”

“Then we have time yet!” cried Verduret. “Hurry! Hurry! I give you
fifteen minutes to make yourself a head; you know the sort; I will watch
the rascal until you come up.”

The delighted Joseph disappeared in a twinkling; while Prosper and M.
Verduret remained at the window observing Clameran, who, according to
the movements of the crowd, was sometimes lost to sight, and sometimes
just in front of the window, but was evidently determined not to quit
his post until he had obtained the information he sought.

“Why do you devote yourself exclusively to the marquis?” asked Prosper.

“Because, my friend,” replied M. Verduret, “because--that is my
business, and not yours.”

Joseph Dubois had been granted a quarter of an hour in which to
metamorphose himself; before ten minutes had elapsed he reappeared.

The dandified coachman with Bergami whiskers, red vest, and foppish
manners, was replaced by a sinister-looking individual, whose very
appearance was enough to scare any rogue.

His black cravat twisted around a paper collar, and ornamented by an
imitation diamond pin; his long-tailed black boots and heavy cane,
revealed the employee of the Rue de Jerusalem, as plainly as the
shoulder-straps mark a soldier.

Joseph Dubois had vanished forever; and from his livery, phoenix-like
and triumphant, arose the radiant Fanferlot, surnamed the Squirrel.

When Fanferlot entered the room, Prosper uttered a cry of surprise and
almost fright.

He recognized the man who had assisted the commissary of police to
examine the bank on the day of the robbery.

M. Verduret examined his aide with a satisfied look, and said:

“Not bad! There is enough of the police-court air about you to alarm
even an honest man. You understood me perfectly this time.”

Fanferlot was transported with delight at this compliment.

“What must I do now, patron?” he inquired.

“Nothing difficult for an adroit man: but remember, upon the precision
of our movements depends the success of my plan. Before arresting
Lagors, I wish to dispose of Clameran. Now that the rascals are
separated, the first thing to do is to prevent their coming together.”

“I understand,” said Fanferlot, snapping his little rat-like eyes; “I am
to create a diversion.”

“Exactly. Go out by the Rue de la Huchette, and hasten to St. Michel’s
bridge; loaf along the bank, and finally sit on the steps of the quay,
so that Clameran may know he is being watched. If he doesn’t see you, do
something to attract his attention.”

“Parbleu! I will throw a stone into the water,” said Fanferlot, rubbing
his hands with delight at his own brilliant idea.

“As soon as Clameran has seen you,” continued M. Verduret, “he will be
alarmed, and instantly decamp. Knowing there are reasons why the police
should be after him, he will hasten to escape you; then comes the time
for you to keep wide awake; he is a slippery eel, and cunning as a rat.”

“I know all that; I was not born yesterday.”

“So much the better. You can convince him of that. Well, knowing you
are at his heels, he will not dare to return to the Hotel du Louvre,
for fear of being called on by troublesome visitors. Now, it is very
important that he should not return to the hotel.”

“But suppose he does?” said Fanferlot.

M. Verduret thought for a minute, and then said:

“It is not probable that he will do so; but if he should, you must wait
until he comes out again, and continue to follow him. But he won’t enter
the hotel; very likely he will take the cars: but in that event don’t
lose sight of him, no matter if you have to follow him to Siberia. Have
you money with you?”

“I will get some from Mme. Alexandre.”

“Very good. Ah! one more word. If the rascal takes the cars, send
me word. If he beats about the bush until night, be on your guard,
especially in lonely places; the desperado is capable of any enormity.”

“If necessary, must I fire?”

“Don’t be rash; but, if he attacks you, of course defend yourself. Come,
‘tis time you were gone.”

Dubois-Fanferlot went out. Verduret and Prosper resumed their post of
observation.

“Why all this secrecy?” inquired Prosper. “Clameran is charged with ten
times worse crimes than I was ever accused of, and yet my disgrace was
made as public as possible.”

“Don’t you understand,” replied the fat man, “that I wish to separate
the cause of Raoul from that of the marquis? But, sh! look!”

Clameran had left his place near the orange-woman’s stand, and
approached the bridge, where he seemed to be trying to make out some
unexpected object.

“Ah!” said M. Verduret; “he has just discovered our man.”

Clameran’s uneasiness was quite apparent; he walked forward a few steps,
as if intending to cross the bridge; then, suddenly turning around,
rapidly walked in the direction of the Rue St. Jacques.

“He is caught!” cried M. Verduret with delight.

At that moment the door opened, and Mme. Nina Gypsy, _alias_ Palmyre
Chocareille, entered.

Poor Nina! Each day spent in the service of Madeleine seemed to have
aged her a year.

Tears had dimmed the brilliancy of her beautiful black eyes; her rosy
cheeks were pale and hollow, and her merry smile was quite gone.

Poor Gypsy, once so gay and spirited, now crushed beneath the burden of
her sorrows, was the picture of misery.

Prosper thought that, wild with joy at seeing him, and proud of having
so nobly devoted herself to his interest, Nina would throw her arms
around his neck, and say how much she loved him. To his surprise, Nina
scarcely spoke to him. Although his every thought had been devoted to
Madeleine since he discovered the reasons for her cruelty, he was hurt
by Nina’s cold manner.

The girl stood looking at M. Verduret with a mixture of fear and
devotion, like a poor dog that has been cruelly treated by its master.

He, however, was kind and gentle in his manner toward her.

“Well, my dear,” he said encouragingly, “what news do you bring me?”

“Something is going on at the house, monsieur, and I have been trying
to get here to tell you; at last, Mlle. Madeleine made an excuse for
sending me out.”

“You must thank Mlle. Madeleine for her confidence in me. I suppose she
carried out the plan we decided upon?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“She receives the Marquis of Clameran’s visits?”

“Since the marriage has been decided upon, he comes every day, and
mademoiselle receives him with kindness. He seems to be delighted.”

These answers filled Prosper with anger and alarm. The poor young man,
not comprehending the intricate moves of M. Verduret, felt as if he
were being tossed about from pillar to post, and made the tool and
laughing-stock of everybody.

“What!” he cried; “this worthless Marquis of Clameran, an assassin and
a thief, allowed to visit at M. Fauvel’s, and pay his addresses to
Madeleine? Where are the promises, monsieur, which you have made? Have
you merely been amusing yourself by raising my hopes, to dash them--”

“Enough!” interrupted M. Verduret harshly; “you are too green to
understand anything, my friend. If you are incapable of helping
yourself, at least have sense enough to refrain from importuning
those who are working for you. Do you not think you have already done
sufficient mischief?”

Having administered this rebuke, he turned to Gypsy, and said in softer
tones:

“Go on, my child: what have you discovered?”

“Nothing positive, monsieur; but enough to make me nervous, and fearful
of impending danger. I am not certain, but suspect from appearances,
that some dreadful catastrophe is about to happen. It may only be a
presentiment. I cannot get any information from Mme. Fauvel; she refuses
to answer any hints, and moves about like a ghost, never opening her
lips. She seems to be afraid of her niece, and to be trying to conceal
something from her.”

“What about M. Fauvel?”

“I was just about to tell you, monsieur. Some fearful misfortune has
happened to him, you may depend upon it. He wanders about as if he had
lost his mind. Something certainly occurred yesterday; his voice even
is changed. He is so harsh and irritable that mademoiselle and M. Lucien
were wondering what could be the matter with him. He seems to be on the
eve of giving way to a burst of anger; and there is a wild, strange look
about his eyes, especially when he looks at madame. Yesterday evening,
when M. de Clameran was announced, he jumped up, and hurried out of the
room, saying that he had some work to do in his study.”

A triumphant exclamation from M. Verduret interrupted Mme. Gypsy. He was
radiant.

“Hein!” he said to Prosper, forgetting his bad humor of a few minutes
before; “Hein! What did I tell you?”

“He has evidently----”

“Been afraid to give way to his first impulse; of course he has. He is
now seeking for proofs of your assertions. He must have them by this
time. Did the ladies go out yesterday?”

“Yes, a part of the day.”

“What became of M. Fauvel?”

“The ladies took me with them; we left M. Fauvel at home.”

“Not a doubt of it!” cried the fat man; “he looked for proofs, and found
them, too! Your letter told him exactly where to go. Ah, Prosper, that
unfortunate letter gives more trouble than everything else together.”

These words seemed to throw a sudden light on Mme. Gypsy’s mind.

“I understand it now!” she exclaimed. “M. Fauvel knows everything.”

“That is, he thinks he knows everything; and what he has been led to
fear, and thinks he has discovered, is worse than the true state of
affairs.”

“That accounts for the order which M. Cavaillon overheard him give to
his servant-man, Evariste.”

“What order?”

“He told Evariste to bring every letter that came to the house, no
matter to whom addressed, into his study, and hand them to him; saying
that, if this order was disobeyed, he should be instantly discharged.”

“At what time was this order given?” asked M. Verduret.

“Yesterday afternoon.”

“That is what I was afraid of,” cried M. Verduret. “He has clearly made
up his mind what course to pursue, and is keeping quiet so as to
make his vengeance more sure. The question is, Have we still time to
counteract his projects? Have we time to convince him that the anonymous
letter was incorrect in some of its assertions?”

He tried to hit upon some plan for repairing the damage done by
Prosper’s foolish letter.

“Thank you for your information, my dear child,” he said after a long
silence. “I will decide at once what steps to take, for it will never
do to sit quietly and let things go on in this way. Return home without
delay, and be careful of everything you say and do; for M. Fauvel
suspects you of being in the plot. Send me word of anything that
happens, no matter how insignificant it may be.”

Nina, thus dismissed, did not move, but said timidly:

“What about Caldas, monsieur?”

This was the third time during the last fortnight that Prosper had heard
this name, Caldas.

The first time it had been whispered in his ear by a
respectable-looking, middle-aged man, who offered his protection one
day, when passing through the police-office passage.

The second time, the judge of instruction had mentioned it in connection
with Gypsy’s history.

Prosper thought over all the men he had ever been connected with, but
could recall none named Caldas.

The impassable M. Verduret started and trembled at the mention of this
name, but, quickly recovering himself, said:

“I promised to find him for you, and I will keep my promise. Now you
must go; good-morning.”

It was twelve o’clock, and M. Verduret suddenly remembered that he
was hungry. He called Mme. Alexandre, and the beaming hostess of the
Archangel soon placed a tempting breakfast before Prosper and his
friend.

But the savory broiled oysters and flaky biscuit failed to smooth the
perplexed brow of M. Verduret.

To the eager questions and complimentary remarks of Mme. Alexandre, he
answered:

“Chut, chut! let me alone; keep quiet.”

For the first time since he had known the fat man, Prosper saw him
betray anxiety and hesitation.

He remained silent as long as he could, and then uneasily said:

“I am afraid I have embarrassed you very much, monsieur.”

“Yes, you have dreadfully embarrassed me,” replied M. Verduret. “What on
earth to do now, I don’t know! Shall I hasten matters, or keep quiet and
wait for the next move? And I am bound by a sacred promise. Come, we had
better go and advise with the judge of instruction. He can assist me.
Come with me; let us hurry.”




XXIII

As M. Verduret had anticipated, Prosper’s letter had a terrible effect
upon M. Fauvel.

It was toward nine o’clock in the morning, and M. Fauvel had just
entered his study when his mail was brought in.

After opening a dozen business letters, his eyes fell on the fatal
missive sent by Prosper.

Something about the writing struck him as peculiar.

It was evidently a disguised hand, and although, owing to the fact of
his being a millionnaire, he was in the habit of receiving anonymous
communications, sometimes abusive, but generally begging him for money,
this particular letter filled him with an indefinite presentiment of
evil. A cold chill ran through his heart, and he dreaded to open it.

With absolute certainty that he was about to learn of a new calamity,
he broke the seal, and opening the coarse cafe paper, was shocked by the
following words:


“DEAR SIR--You have handed your cashier over to the law, and you acted
properly, convinced as you were of his dishonesty.

“But if it was he who took three hundred and fifty thousand francs from
your safe, was it he also who took Mme. Fauvel’s diamonds?”


This was a terrible blow to a man whose life hitherto had been an
unbroken chain of prosperity, who could recall the past without one
bitter regret, without remembering any sorrow deep enough to bring forth
a tear.

What! His wife deceive him! And among all men, to choose one vile enough
to rob her of her jewels, and force her to be his accomplice in the ruin
of an innocent young man!

For did not the letter before him assert this to be a fact, and tell him
how to convince himself of its truth?

M. Fauvel was as bewildered as if he had been knocked on the head with a
club. It was impossible for his scattered ideas to take in the enormity
of what these dreadful words intimated. He seemed to be mentally and
physically paralyzed, as he sat there staring blankly at the letter.

But this stupefaction suddenly changed to indignant rage.

“What a fool I am!” he cried, “to listen to such base lies, such
malicious charges against the purest woman whom God ever sent to bless a
man!”

And he angrily crumpled up the letter, and threw it into the empty
fireplace, saying:

“I will forget having read it. I will not soil my mind by letting it
dwell upon such turpitude!”

He said this, and he thought it; but, for all that, he could not open
the rest of his letters. The anonymous missive stood before his eyes in
letters of fire, and drove every other thought from his mind.

That penetrating, clinging, all-corroding worm, suspicion, had taken
possession of his soul; and as he leaned over his desk, with his
face buried in his hands, thinking over many things which had lately
occurred, insignificant at the time, but fearfully ominous now, this
unwillingly admitted germ of suspicion grew and expanded until it became
certainty.

But, resolved that he would not think of his wife in connection with so
vile a deed, he imagined a thousand wild excuses for the mischief-maker
who took this mode of annoying him; of course there was no truth in his
assertions, but from curiosity he would like to know who had written it.
And yet suppose----

“Merciful God! can it be true?” he wildly cried, as the idea of his
wife’s guilt would obstinately return to his troubled mind.

Thinking that the writing might throw some light on the mystery, he
started up and tremblingly picked the fatal letter out of the ashes.
Carefully smoothing it out, he laid it on his desk, and studied the
heavy strokes, light strokes, and capitals of every word.

“It must be from some of my clerks,” he finally said, “someone who is
angry with me for refusing to raise his salary; or perhaps it is the one
that I dismissed the other day.”

Clinging to this idea, he thought over all the young men in his
bank; but not one could he believe capable of resorting to so base a
vengeance.

Then he wondered where the letter had been posted, thinking this might
throw some light upon the mystery. He looked at the envelope, and read
the post-mark:

“Rue du Cardinal Lemoine.”

This fact told him nothing.

Once more he read the letter, spelling over each word, and trying to put
a different construction on the horrible phrases that stared him in the
face.

It is generally agreed that an anonymous letter should be treated with
silent contempt, and cast aside as the malicious lies of a coward who
dares not say to a man’s face what he secretly commits to paper, and
forces upon him.

This is all very well in theory, but is difficult to practise when
the anonymous letter comes. You throw it in the fire, it burns; but,
although the paper is destroyed by the flames, doubt remains. Suspicion
arises from its ashes, like a subtle poison penetrates the inmost
recesses of the mind, weakens its holiest beliefs, and destroys its
faith.

The trail of the serpent is left.

The wife suspected, no matter how unjustly, is no longer the wife in
whom her husband trusted as he would trust himself: the pure being who
was above suspicion no longer exists. Suspicion, no matter whence the
source, has irrevocably tarnished the brightness of his idol.

Unable to struggle any longer against these conflicting doubts, M.
Fauvel determined to resolve them by showing the letter to his wife; but
a torturing thought, more terrible than any he had yet suffered, made
him sink back in his chair in despair.

“Suppose it be true!” he muttered to himself; “suppose I have been
miserably duped! By confiding in my wife, I shall put her on her guard,
and lose all chance of discovering the truth.”

Thus were realized all Verduret’s presumptions.

He had said, “If M. Fauvel does not yield to his first impulse, if he
stops to reflect, we have time to repair the harm done.”

After long and painful meditation, the banker finally decided to wait,
and watch his wife.

It was a hard struggle for a man of his frank, upright nature, to play
the part of a domestic spy, and jealous husband.

Accustomed to give way to sudden bursts of anger, but quickly mastering
them, he would find it difficult to be compelled to preserve his
self-restraint, no matter how dreadful the discoveries might be. When
he collected the proofs of guilt one by one, he must impose silence upon
his resentment, until fully assured of possessing certain evidence.

There was one simple means of ascertaining whether the diamonds had been
pawned.

If the letter lied in this instance, he would treat it with the scorn it
deserved. If, on the other hand, it should prove to be true!

At this moment, the servant announced breakfast; and M. Fauvel looked
in the glass before leaving his study, to see if his face betrayed
the emotion he felt. He was shocked at the haggard features which it
reflected.

“Have I no nerve?” he said to himself: “oh! I must and shall control my
feelings until I find out the truth.”

At table he talked incessantly, so as to escape any questions from his
wife, who, he saw, was uneasy at the sight of his pale face.

But, all the time he was talking, he was casting over in his mind
expedients of getting his wife out of the house long enough for him to
search her bureau.

At last he asked Mme. Fauvel if she were going out before dinner.

“Yes,” said she: “the weather is dreadful, but Madeleine and I must do
some shopping.”

“At what time shall you go?”

“Immediately after breakfast.”

He drew a long breath as if relieved of a great weight.

In a short time he would know the truth.

His uncertainty was so torturing to the unhappy man that he preferred
the most dreadful reality to his present agony.

Breakfast over, he lighted a cigar, but did not remain in the
dining-room to smoke it, as was his habit. He went into his study to try
and compose his nerves.

He took the precaution to send Lucien on a message so as to be alone in
the house.

After the lapse of half an hour, he heard the carriage roll away with
his wife and niece.

Hurrying into Mme. Fauvel’s room, he opened the drawer of the
chiffonnier, where she kept her jewels.

The last dozen or more leather and velvet boxes, containing superb sets
of jewelry which he had presented to her, were gone!

Twelve boxes remained. He nervously opened them.

They were all empty!

The anonymous letter had told the truth.

“Oh, it cannot be!” he gasped in broken tones. “Oh, no, no!”

He wildly pulled open every drawer in the vain hope of finding them
packed away. Perhaps she kept them elsewhere.

He tried to hope that she had sent them to be reset; but no, they were
all superbly set in the latest fashion; and, moreover, she never would
have sent them all at once. He looked again.

Nothing! not one jewel could he find.

He remembered that he had asked his wife at the Jandidier ball why she
did not wear her diamonds; and she had replied with a smile:

“Oh! what is the use? Everybody knows them so well; and, besides, they
don’t suit my costume.”

Yes, she had made the answer without blushing, without showing the
slightest sign of agitation or shame.

What hardened impudence! What base hypocrisy concealed beneath an
innocent, confiding manner!

And she had been thus deceiving him for twenty years! But suddenly a
gleam of hope penetrated his confused mind--slight, barely possible;
still a straw to cling to:

“Perhaps Valentine has put her diamonds in Madeleine’s room.”

Without stopping to consider the indelicacy of what he was about to do,
he hurried into the young girl’s room, and pulled open one drawer after
another. What did he find?

Not Mme. Fauvel’s diamonds; but Madeleine’s seven or eight boxes also
empty.

Great heavens! Was this gentle girl, whom he had treated as a daughter,
an accomplice in this deed of shame? Had she contributed her jewelry to
add to the disgrace of the roof that sheltered her?

This last blow was almost too much for the miserable man. He sank almost
lifeless into a chair, and wringing his hands, groaned over the wreck of
his happiness. Was this the happy future to which he had looked forward?
Was the fabric of his honor, well-being, and domestic bliss, to be
dashed to the earth and forever lost in a day? Were his twenty years’
labor and high-standing to end thus in shame and sorrow?

Apparently nothing was changed in his existence; he was not materially
injured; he could not reach forth his hand, and heal or revenge the
smarting wound; the objects around him were unchanged; everything went
on in the outside world just as it had gone on during the last twenty
years; and yet what a horrible change had taken place in his own heart!
While the world envied his prosperity and happiness, here he sat, more
heartsore and wearied of life than the worst criminal that ever stood
before the inquisition.

What! Valentine, the pure young girl whom he had loved and married in
spite of her poverty, in spite of her cold offering of calm affection in
return for his passionate devotion; Valentine, the tender, loving wife,
who, before a year of married life had rolled by, so often assured
him that her affection had grown into a deep, confiding love, that her
devotion had grown stronger every day, and that her only prayer was that
God would take them both together, since life would be a burden without
her noble husband to shield and cherish her--could she have been acting
a lie for twenty years?

She, the darling wife, the mother of his sons!

His sons? Good God! Were they his sons?

If she could deceive him now when she was silver-haired, had she not
deceived him when she was young?

Not only did he suffer in the present, but the uncertainty of the past
tortured his soul.

He was like a man who is told that the exquisite wine he has drank
contains poison.

Confidence is never half-way: it is, or it is not. His confidence was
gone. His faith was dead.

The wretched banker had rested his every hope and happiness on the
love of his wife. Believing that she had proved faithless, that she had
played him false, and was unworthy of trust, he admitted no
possibility of peaceful joy, and felt tempted to seek consolation from
self-destruction. What had he to live for now, save to mourn over the
ashes of the past?

But this dejection did not last long. Indignant anger, and thirst for
vengeance, made him start up and swear that he would lose no time in
vain regrets.

M. Fauvel well knew that the fact of the diamonds being stolen was not
sufficient ground upon which to bring an accusation against any of the
accomplices.

He must possess overwhelming proofs before taking any active steps.
Success depended upon present secrecy.

He began by calling his valet, and ordering him to bring to him every
letter that should come to the house.

He then wrote to a notary at St. Remy, for minute and authentic
information about the Lagors family, and especially about Raoul.

Finally, following the advice of the anonymous letter, he went to the
Prefecture of Police, hoping to obtain a biography of Clameran.

But the police, fortunately for many people, are as discreetly silent as
the grave. They guard their secrets as a miser his treasure.

Nothing but an order from the chief judge could open those formidable
green boxes, and reveal their secrets.

M. Fauvel was politely asked what motives urged him to inquire into the
past life of a French citizen; and, as he declined to state his reasons,
the chief of police told him he had better apply to the Procureur for
the desired information.

This advice he could not follow. He had sworn that the secret of his
wrongs should be confined to the three persons interested. He chose to
avenge his own injuries, to be alone the judge and executioner.

He returned home more angry than ever; there he found the despatch
answering the one which he had sent to St. Remy. It was as follows:


“The Lagors are very poor, and there has never been any member of the
family named Raoul. Mme. Lagors had no son, only two daughters.”


This information dashed his last hope.

The banker thought, when he discovered his wife’s infamy, that she
had sinned as deeply as a woman could sin; but he now saw that she had
practised a system more shocking than the crime itself.

“Wretched creature!” he cried with anguish; “in order to see her lover
constantly, she dared introduce him to me under the name of a nephew who
never existed. She had the shameless courage to bring him beneath her
husband’s roof, and seat him at my fireside, between my sons; and I,
confiding fool that I was, welcomed the villain, and lent him money.”

Nothing could equal the pain of wounded pride and mortification which he
suffered at the thought that Raoul and Mme. Fauvel had amused themselves
with his good-natured credulity and obtuseness.

Nothing but death could wipe out an injury of this nature. But the very
bitterness of his resentment enabled him to restrain himself until the
time for punishment came. With grim satisfaction he promised himself
that his acting would be as successful as theirs.

That day he succeeded in concealing his agitation, and kept up a flow of
talk at dinner; but at about nine o’clock, when Clameran called on the
ladies, he rushed from the house, for fear that he would be unable to
control his indignation at the sight of this destroyer of his happiness;
and did not return home until late in the night.

The next day he reaped the fruit of his prudence.

Among the letters which his valet brought him at noon, was one bearing
the post-mark of Vesinet.

He carefully opened the envelope, and read:


“DEAR AUNT--It is imperatively necessary for me to see you to-day; so do
not fail to come to Vesinet.

“I will explain why I give you this trouble, instead of calling at your
house.

“RAOUL.”


“I have them now!” cried M. Fauvel trembling with satisfaction at the
near prospect of vengeance.

Eager to lose no time, he opened a drawer, took out a revolver, and
examined the hammer to see if it worked easily.

He imagined himself alone, but a vigilant eye was watching his
movements. Gypsy, immediately upon her return from the Archangel,
stationed herself at the key-hole of the study-door, and saw all that
occurred.

M. Fauvel laid the pistol on the mantel-piece, and nervously resealed
the letter, which he then took to the box where the letters were usually
left, not wishing anyone to know that Raoul’s letter had passed through
his hands.

He was only absent two minutes, but, inspired by the imminence of the
danger, Gypsy darted into the study, and rapidly extracted the balls
from the revolver.

“Thank Heaven!” she murmured: “this peril is averted, and M. Verduret
will now perhaps have time to prevent a murder. I must send Cavaillon to
tell him.”

She hurried into the bank, and sent the clerk with a message, telling
him to leave it with Mme. Alexandre, if M. Verduret had left the hotel.

An hour later, Mme. Fauvel ordered her carriage, and went out.

M. Fauvel jumped into a hackney-coach, and followed her.

“God grant that M. Verduret may reach there in time!” cried Nina to
herself, “otherwise Mme. Fauvel and Raoul are lost.”




XXIV

The moment that the Marquis of Clameran perceived that Raoul de Lagors
was the only obstacle between him and Madeleine, he swore that the
obstacle should soon be removed.

That very day he took steps for the accomplishment of his purpose. As
Raoul was walking out to Vesinet about midnight, he was stopped at a
lonely spot, by three men, who asked him what o’clock it was; while
looking at his watch, the ruffians fell upon him suddenly, and but for
Raoul’s wonderful strength and agility, would have left him dead on the
spot.

As it was, he soon, by his skilfully plied blows (for he had become a
proficient in fencing and boxing in England), made his enemies take to
their heels.

He quietly continued his walk home, fully determined to be hereafter
well armed when he went out at night.

He never for an instant suspected his accomplice of having instigated
the assault.

But two days afterward, while sitting in a cafe, a burly, vulgar-looking
man, a stranger to him, interrupted him several times while talking,
and, after making several rough speeches as if trying to provoke a
quarrel, finally threw a card in his face, saying its owner was ready to
grant him satisfaction when and where he pleased.

Raoul rushed toward the man to chastise him on the spot; but his friends
held him back, telling him that it would be much more gentlemanly to run
a sword through his vulgar hide, than have a scuffle in a public place.

“Very well, then: you will hear from me to-morrow,” he said scornfully
to his assailant. “Wait at your hotel until I send two friends to
arrange the matter with you.”

As soon as the stranger had left, Raoul recovered from his excitement,
and began to wonder what could have been the motive for this evidently
premeditated insult.

Picking up the card of the bully, he read:


W. H. B. JACOBSON. Formerly Garibaldian volunteer, Ex-officer of the
army of the South. (Italy, America.)

30, Rue Leonie.


Raoul had seen enough of the world to know that these heroes who cover
their visiting-cards with titles have very little glory elsewhere than
in their own conceit.

Still the insult had been offered in the presence of others; and, no
matter who the offender was, it must be noticed. Early the next morning
Raoul sent two of his friends to make arrangements for a duel. He gave
them M. Jacobson’s address, and told them to report at the Hotel du
Louvre, where he would wait for them.

Having dismissed his friends, Raoul went to find out something about M.
Jacobson; and, being an expert at the business of unravelling plots and
snares, he determined to discover who was at the bottom of this duel
into which he had been decoyed.

The information obtained was not very promising.

M. Jacobson, who lived in a very suspicious-looking little hotel whose
inmates were chiefly women of light character, was described to him as
an eccentric gentleman, whose mode of life was a problem difficult to
solve. No one knew his means of support.

He reigned despotically in the hotel, went out a great deal, never came
in until midnight, and seemed to have no capital to live upon, save his
military titles, and a talent for carrying out whatever was undertaken
for his own benefit.

“That being his character,” thought Raoul, “I cannot see what object he
can have in picking a quarrel with me. What good will it do him to run a
sword through my body? Not the slightest; and, moreover, his pugnacious
conduct is apt to draw the attention of the police, who, from what I
hear, are the last people this warrior would like to have after him.
Therefore he must have some reason for pursuing me; and I must find out
what it is.”

The result of his meditations was, that Raoul, upon his return to the
Hotel du Louvre, did not mention a word of his adventure to Clameran,
whom he found already up.

At half-past eight his seconds arrived.

M. Jacobson had selected the sword, and would fight that very hour, in
the woods of Vincennes.

“Well, come along,” cried Raoul gayly. “I accept the gentleman’s
conditions.”

They found the Garibaldian waiting; and after an interchange of a few
thrusts Raoul was slightly wounded in the right shoulder.

The “Ex-superior officer of the South” wished to continue the combat;
but Raoul’s seconds--brave young men--declared that honor was satisfied,
and that they had no intention of subjecting their friend’s life to
unnecessary hazards.

The ex-officer was forced to admit that this was but fair, and
unwillingly retired from the field. Raoul went home delighted at having
escaped with nothing more serious than a little loss of blood, and
resolved to keep clear of all so-called Garibaldians in the future.

In fact, a night’s reflection had convinced him that Clameran was the
instigator of the two attempts to kill him. Mme. Fauvel having told
him what conditions Madeleine placed on her consent to marriage, Raoul
instantly saw how necessary his removal would be, now that he was an
impediment in the way of Clameran’s success. He recalled a thousand
little remarks and events of the last few days, and, on skilfully
questioning the marquis, had his suspicions changed into certainty.

This conviction that the man whom he had so materially assisted in his
criminal plans was so basely ungrateful as to turn against him, and hire
assassins to murder him in cold blood, inspired in Raoul a resolution to
take speedy vengeance upon his treacherous accomplice, and at the same
time insure his own safety.

This treason seemed monstrous to Raoul. He was as yet not sufficiently
experienced in ruffianism to know that one villain always sacrifices
another to advance his own projects; he was credulous enough to believe
in the adage, “there’s honor among thieves.”

His rage was naturally mingled with fright, well knowing that his life
hung by a thread, when it was threatened by a daring scoundrel like
Clameran.

He had twice miraculously escaped; a third attempt would more than
likely prove fatal.

Knowing his accomplice’s nature, Raoul saw himself surrounded by snares;
he saw death before him in every form; he was equally afraid of going
out, and of remaining at home. He only ventured with the most suspicious
caution into the most public places; he feared poison more than the
assassin’s knife, and imagined that every dish placed before him tasted
of strychnine.

As this life of torture was intolerable, he determined to anticipate a
struggle which he felt must terminate in the death of either Clameran or
himself; and, if he were doomed to die, to be first revenged. If he went
down, Clameran should go too; better kill the devil than be killed by
him.

In his days of poverty, Raoul had often risked his life to obtain a few
guineas, and would not have hesitated to make short work of a person
like Clameran.

But with money prudence had come. He wished to enjoy his four hundred
thousand francs without being compromised by committing a murder which
might be discovered; he therefore began to devise some other means
of getting rid of his dreaded accomplice. Meanwhile, he devoted his
thoughts to some discreet way of thwarting Clameran’s marriage with
Madeleine. He was sure that he would thus strike him to the heart, and
this was at least a satisfaction.

Raoul was persuaded that, by openly siding with Madeleine and her aims,
he could save them from Clameran’s clutches. Having fully resolved upon
this course, he wrote a note to Mme. Fauvel asking for an interview.

The poor woman hastened to Vesinet convinced that some new misfortune
was in store for her.

Her alarm was groundless. She found Raoul more tender and affectionate
than he had ever been. He saw the necessity of reassuring her, and
winning his old place in her forgiving heart, before making his
disclosures.

He succeeded. The poor lady had a smiling and happy air as she sat in an
arm-chair, with Raoul kneeling beside her.

“I have distressed you too long, my dear mother,” he said in his softest
tones, “but I repent sincerely: now listen to my--”

He had not time to say more; the door was violently thrown open, and
Raoul, springing to his feet, was confronted by M. Fauvel.

The banker had a revolver in his hand, and was deadly pale.

It was evident that he was making superhuman efforts to remain calm,
like a judge whose duty it is to justly punish crime.

“Ah,” he said with a horrible laugh, “you look surprised. You did not
expect me? You thought that my imbecile credulity insured your safety.”

Raoul had the courage to place himself before Mme. Fauvel, and to stand
prepared to receive the expected bullet.

“I assure you, uncle,” he began.

“Enough!” interrupted the banker with an angry gesture, “let me hear no
more infamous falsehoods! End this acting, of which I am no longer the
dupe.”

“I swear to you--”

“Spare yourself the trouble of denying anything. I know all. I know who
pawned my wife’s diamonds. I know who committed the robbery for which an
innocent man was arrested and imprisoned.”

Mme. Fauvel, white with terror, fell upon her knees.

At last it had come--the dreadful day had come. Vainly had she added
falsehood to falsehood; vainly had she sacrificed herself and others:
all was discovered.

She saw that all was lost, and wringing her hands she tearfully moaned:

“Pardon, Andre! I beg you, forgive me!”

At these heart-broken tones, the banker shook like a leaf. This voice
brought before him the twenty years of happiness which he had owed
to this woman, who had always been the mistress of his heart, whose
slightest wish had been his law, and who, by a smile or a frown, could
make him the happiest or the most miserable of men. Alas! those days
were over now.

Could this wretched woman crouching at his feet be his beloved
Valentine, the pure, innocent girl whom he had found secluded in the
chateau of La Verberie, who had never loved any other than himself?
Could this be the cherished wife whom he had worshipped for so many
years?

The memory of his lost happiness was too much for the stricken man. He
forgot the present in the past, and was almost melted to forgiveness.

“Unhappy woman,” he murmured, “unhappy woman! What have I done that you
should thus betray me? Ah, my only fault was loving you too deeply,
and letting you see it. One wearies of everything in this world, even
happiness. Did pure domestic joys pall upon you, and weary you, driving
you to seek the excitement of a sinful passion? Were you so tired of the
atmosphere of respect and affection which surrounded you, that you must
needs risk your honor and mine by braving public opinion? Oh, into
what an abyss you have fallen, Valentine! and, oh, my God! if you were
wearied by my constant devotion, had the thought of your children no
power to restrain your evil passions; could you not remain untarnished
for their sake?”

M. Fauvel spoke slowly, with painful effort, as if each word choked him.

Raoul, who listened with attention, saw that if the banker knew some
things, he certainly did not know all.

He saw that erroneous information had misled the unhappy man, and that
he was still a victim of false appearances.

He determined to convince him of the mistake under which he was
laboring, and said:

“Monsieur, I hope you will listen.”

But the sound of Raoul’s voice was sufficient to break the charm.

“Silence!” cried the banker with an angry oath, “silence!”

For some moments nothing was heard but the sobs of Mme. Fauvel.

“I came here,” continued the banker, “with the intention of killing you
both. But I cannot kill a woman, and I will not kill an unarmed man.”

Raoul once more tried to speak.

“Let me finish!” interrupted M. Fauvel. “Your life is in my hands; the
law excuses the vengeance of an injured husband; but I refuse to take
advantage of it. I see on your mantel a revolver similar to mine; take
it, and defend yourself.”

“Never!”

“Defend yourself!” cried the banker raising his arm, “if you do not--”

Feeling the barrel of M. Fauvel’s revolver touch his breast, Raoul in
self-defence seized his own pistol, and prepared to fire.

“Stand in that corner of the room, and I will stand in this,” continued
the banker; “and when the clock strikes, which will be in a few seconds,
we will both fire.”

They took the places designated, and stood perfectly still.

But the horror of the scene was too much for Mme. Fauvel to witness any
longer without interposing. She understood but one thing: her son and
her husband were about to kill each other before her very eyes. Fright
and horror gave her strength to start up and rush between the two men.

“For God’s sake, have mercy, Andre!” she cried, wringing her hands with
anguish, “let me tell you everything; don’t kill--”

This burst of maternal love, M. Fauvel thought the pleadings of a
criminal woman defending her lover.

He roughly seized his wife by the arm, and thrust her aside, saying with
indignant scorn:

“Get out of the way!”

But she would not be repulsed; rushing up to Raoul, she threw her arms
around him, and said to her husband:

“Kill me, and me alone; for I am the guilty one.”

At these words M. Fauvel glared at the guilty pair, and, deliberately
taking aim, fired.

Neither Raoul nor Mme. Fauvel moved. The banker fired a second time;
then a third.

He cocked the pistol for a fourth shot, when a man rushed into the room,
snatched the pistol from the banker’s hand, and, throwing him on the
sofa, ran toward Mme. Fauvel.

This man was M. Verduret, who had been warned by Cavaillon, but did not
know that Mme. Gypsy had extracted the balls from M. Fauvel’s revolver.

“Thank Heaven!” he cried, “she is unhurt.”

“How dare you interfere?” cried the banker, who by this time had
joined the group. “I have the right to avenge my honor when it has been
degraded; the villain shall die!”

M. Verduret seized the banker’s wrists in a vice-like grasp, and
whispered in his ear:

“Thank God you are saved from committing a terrible crime; the anonymous
letter deceived you.”

In violent situations like this, all the untoward, strange attending
circumstances appear perfectly natural to the participators, whose
passions have already carried them beyond the limits of social
propriety.

Thus M. Fauvel never once thought of asking this stranger who he was and
where he came from.

He heard and understood but one fact: the anonymous letter had lied.

“But my wife confesses she is guilty,” he stammered.

“So she is,” replied M. Verduret, “but not of the crime you imagine. Do
you know who that man is, that you attempted to kill?”

“Her lover!”

“No: her son!”

The words of this stranger, showing his intimate knowledge of the
private affairs of all present, seemed to confound and frighten Raoul
more than M. Fauvel’s threats had done. Yet he had sufficient presence
of mind to say:

“It is the truth!”

The banker looked wildly from Raoul to M. Verduret; then, fastening his
haggard eyes on his wife, exclaimed:

“It is false! you are all conspiring to deceive me! Proofs!”

“You shall have proofs,” replied M. Verduret, “but first listen.”

And rapidly, with his wonderful talent for exposition, he related the
principal points of the plot he had discovered.

The true state of the case was terribly distressing to M. Fauvel, but
nothing compared with what he had suspected.

His throbbing, yearning heart told him that he still loved his wife. Why
should he punish a fault committed so many years ago, and atoned for by
twenty years of devotion and suffering?

For some moments after M. Verduret had finished his explanation, M.
Fauvel remained silent.

So many strange events had happened, rapidly following each other in
succession, and culminating in the shocking scene which had just taken
place, that M. Fauvel seemed to be too bewildered to think clearly.

If his heart counselled pardon and forgetfulness, wounded pride and
self-respect demanded vengeance.

If Raoul, the baleful witness, the living proof of a far-off sin, were
not in existence, M. Fauvel would not have hesitated. Gaston de Clameran
was dead; he would have held out his arms to his wife, and said:

“Come to my heart! your sacrifices for my honor shall be your
absolution; let the sad past be forgotten.”

But the sight of Raoul froze the words upon his lips.

“So this is your son,” he said to his wife--“this man, who has plundered
you and robbed me!”

Mme. Fauvel was unable to utter a word in reply to these reproachful
words.

“Oh!” said M. Verduret, “madame will tell you that this young man is the
son of Gaston de Clameran; she has never doubted it. But the truth is--”

“What!”

“That, in order to swindle her, he has perpetrated a gross imposture.”

During the last few minutes Raoul had been quietly creeping toward the
door, hoping to escape while no one was thinking of him.

But M. Verduret, who anticipated his intentions, was watching him out of
the corner of one eye, and stopped him just as he was about leaving the
room.

“Not so fast, my pretty youth,” he said, dragging him into the middle of
the room; “it is not polite to leave us so unceremoniously. Let us
have a little conversation before parting; a little explanation will be
edifying!”

The jeering words and mocking manner of M. Verduret made Raoul turn
deadly pale, and start back as if confronted by a phantom.

“The clown!” he gasped.

“The same, friend,” said the fat man. “Ah, now that you recognize me,
I confess that the clown and myself are one and the same. Yes, I am the
mountebank of the Jandidier ball; here is proof of it.”

And turning up his sleeve he showed a deep cut on his arm.

“I think that this recent wound will convince you of my identity,” he
continued. “I imagine you know the villain that gave me this little
decoration, that night I was walking along the Rue Bourdaloue. That
being the case, you know, I have a slight claim upon you, and shall
expect you to relate to us your little story.”

But Raoul was so terrified that he could not utter a word.

“Your modesty keeps you silent,” said M. Verduret. “Bravo! modesty
becomes talent, and for one of your age you certainly have displayed a
talent for knavery.”

M. Fauvel listened without understanding a word of what was said.

“Into what dark depths of shame have we fallen!” he groaned.

“Reassure yourself, monsieur,” replied M. Verduret with great respect.
“After what I have been constrained to tell you, what remains to be said
is a mere trifle. I will finish the story.

“On leaving Mihonne, who had given him a full account of the misfortunes
of Mlle. Valentine de la Verberie, Clameran hastened to London.

“He had no difficulty in finding the farmer’s wife to whom the old
countess had intrusted Gaston’s son.

“But here an unexpected disappointment greeted him.

“He learned that the child, whose name was registered on the parish
books as Raoul-Valentin Wilson, had died of the croup when eighteen
months old.”

“Did anyone state such a fact as that?” interrupted Raoul: “it is
false.”

“It was not only stated, but proved, my pretty youth,” replied M.
Verduret. “You don’t suppose I am a man to trust to verbal testimony; do
you?”

He drew from his pocket several officially stamped documents, with red
seals attached, and laid them on the table.

“These are declarations of the nurse, her husband, and four witnesses.
Here is an extract from the register of births; this is a certificate
of registry of his death; and all these are authenticated at the French
Embassy. Now are you satisfied, young man?”

“What next?” inquired M. Fauvel.

“The next step was this,” replied M. Verduret. “Clameran, finding
that the child was dead, supposed that he could, in spite of this
disappointment, obtain money from Mme. Fauvel; he was mistaken. His
first attempt failed. Having an inventive turn of mind, he determined
that the child should come to life. Among his large circle of rascally
acquaintances, he selected a young fellow to impersonate Raoul-Valentin
Wilson; and the chosen one stands before you.”

Mme. Fauvel was in a pitiable state. And yet she began to feel a ray of
hope; her acute anxiety had so long tortured her, that the truth was a
relief; she would thank Heaven if this wicked man was proved to be no
son of hers.

“Can this be possible?” she murmured, “can it be?”

“Impossible!” cried the banker: “an infamous plot like this could not be
executed in our midst!”

“All this is false!” said Raoul boldly. “It is a lie!”

M. Verduret turned to Raoul, and, bowing with ironical respect, said:

“Monsieur desires proofs, does he? Monsieur shall certainly have
convincing ones. I have just left a friend of mine, M. Palot, who
brought me valuable information from London. Now, my young gentleman,
I will tell you the little story he told me, and then you can give your
opinion of it.

“In 1847 Lord Murray, a wealthy and generous nobleman, had a jockey
named Spencer, of whom he was very fond. At the Epsom races, this jockey
was thrown from his horse, and killed. Lord Murray grieved over the
loss of his favorite, and, having no children of his own, declared his
intention of adopting Spencer’s son, who was then but four years old.

“Thus James Spencer was brought up in affluence, as heir to the immense
wealth of the noble lord. He was a handsome, intelligent boy, and gave
satisfaction to his protector until he was sixteen years of age; when he
became intimate with a worthless set of people, and turned out badly.

“Lord Murray, who was very indulgent, pardoned many grave faults; but
one fine morning he discovered that his adopted son had been imitating
his signature upon some checks. He indignantly dismissed him from the
house, and told him never to show his face again.

“James Spencer had been living in London about four years, managing to
support himself by gambling and swindling, when he met Clameran, who
offered him twenty-five thousand francs to play a part in a little
comedy which he had arranged to suit the actors.”

“You are a detective!” interrupted Raoul.

The fat man smiled grimly.

“At present,” he replied, “I am merely a friend of Prosper Bertomy. It
depends entirely upon your behavior which character I appear in while
settling up this little affair.”

“What do you expect me to do?”

“Restore the three hundred and fifty thousand francs which you have
stolen.”

The young rascal hesitated a moment, and then said:

“The money is in this room.”

“Very good. This frankness is creditable, and will benefit you. I know
that the money is in this room, and also exactly where it is to be
found. Be kind enough to look behind that cupboard, and you will find
the three hundred and fifty thousand francs.”

Raoul saw that his game was lost. He tremblingly went to the cupboard,
and pulled out several bundles of bank-notes, and an enormous package of
pawn-broker’s tickets.

“Very well done,” said M. Verduret, as he carefully examined the money
and papers: “this is the most sensible step you ever took.”

Raoul relied on this moment, when everybody’s attention would be
absorbed by the money, to make his escape. He slid toward the door,
gently opened it, slipped out, and locked it on the outside; the key
being still in the lock.

“He has escaped!” cried M. Fauvel.

“Naturally,” replied M. Verduret, without even looking up: “I thought he
would have sense enough to do that.”

“But is he to go unpunished?”

“My dear sir, would you have this affair become a public scandal? Do you
wish your wife’s name to be brought into a case of this nature before
the police-court?”

“Oh, monsieur!”

“Then the best thing you can do, is to let the rascal go scot free. Here
are receipts for all the articles which he has pawned, so that we should
consider ourselves fortunate. He has kept fifty thousand francs, but
that is all the better for you. This sum will enable him to leave
France, and we shall never see him again.”

Like everyone else, M. Fauvel yielded to the ascendancy of M. Verduret.

Gradually he had awakened to the true state of affairs; prospective
happiness no longer seemed impossible, and he felt that he was indebted
to the man before him for more than life. But for M. Verduret, where
would have been his honor and domestic peace?

With earnest gratitude he seized M. Verduret’s hand as if to carry it to
his lips, and said, in broken tones:

“Oh, monsieur! how can I ever find words to express how deeply I
appreciate your kindness? How can I ever repay the great service you
have rendered me?”

M. Verduret reflected a moment, and then said:

“If you feel under any significant obligations to me, monsieur, you have
it in your power to return them. I have a favor to ask of you.”

“A favor? you ask of me? Speak, monsieur, you have but to name it. My
fortune and life are at your disposal.”

“I will not hesitate, then, to explain myself. I am Prosper’s friend,
and deeply interested in his future. You can exonerate him from this
infamous charge of robbery; you can restore him to his honorable
position. You can do more than this, monsieur. He loves Mlle.
Madeleine.”

“Madeleine shall be his wife, monsieur,” interrupted the banker: “I give
you my word of honor. And I will so publicly exonerate him, that not
a shadow of suspicion will rest upon his name. I will place him in
a position which will prevent slander from reproaching him with the
painful remembrance of my fatal error.”

The fat man quietly took up his hat and cane, as if he had been paying
an ordinary morning call, and turned to leave the room, after saying,
“Good-morning.” But, seeing the weeping woman raise her clasped hands
appealingly toward him, he said hesitatingly:

“Monsieur, excuse my intruding any advice; but Mme. Fauvel--”

“Andre!” murmured the wretched wife, “Andre!”

The banker hesitated a moment; then, following the impulse of his heart,
ran to his wife, and, clasping her in his arms, said tenderly:

“No, I will not be foolish enough to struggle against my deep-rooted
love. I do not pardon, Valentine: I forget; I forget all!”

M. Verduret had nothing more to do at Vesinet.

Without taking leave of the banker, he quietly left the room, and,
jumping into his cab, ordered the driver to return to Paris, and drive
to the Hotel du Louvre as rapidly as possible.

His mind was filled with anxiety about Clameran. He knew that Raoul
would give him no more trouble; the young rogue was probably taking his
passage for some foreign land at that very moment. But Clameran should
not escape unpunished; and how this punishment could be brought about
without compromising Mme. Fauvel, was the problem to be solved.

M. Verduret thought over the various cases similar to this, but not one
of his former expedients could be applied to the present circumstances.
He could not deliver the villain over to justice without involving Mme.
Fauvel.

After long thought, he decided that an accusation of poisoning must come
from Oloron. He would go there and work upon “public opinion,” so that,
to satisfy the townspeople, the authorities would order a post-mortem
examination of Gaston. But this mode of proceeding required time; and
Clameran would certainly escape before another day passed over his head.
He was too experienced a knave to remain on slippery ground, now that
his eyes were open to the danger which menaced him. It was almost dark
when the carriage stopped in front of the Hotel du Louvre; M. Verduret
noticed a crowd of people collected together in groups, eagerly
discussing some exciting event which seemed to have just taken
place. Although the policeman attempted to disperse the crowd by
authoritatively ordering them to “Move on! Move on!” they would merely
separate in one spot to join a more clamorous group a few yards off.

“What has happened?” demanded M. Verduret of a lounger near by.

“The strangest thing you ever heard of,” replied the man; “yes, I saw
him with my own eyes. He first appeared at that seventh-story window; he
was only half-dressed. Some men tried to seize him; but, bast! with the
agility of a squirrel, he jumped out upon the roof, shrieking, ‘Murder!
murder!’ The recklessness of his conduct led me to suppose--”

The gossip stopped short in his narrative, very much surprised and
vexed; his questioner had vanished.

“If it should be Clameran!” thought M. Verduret; “if terror has deranged
that brain, so capable of working out great crimes! Fate must have
interposed----”

While thus talking to himself, he elbowed his way through the crowded
court-yard of the hotel.

At the foot of the staircase he found M. Fanferlot and three
peculiar-looking individuals standing together, as if waiting for
someone.

“Well,” cried M. Verduret, “what is the matter?”

With laudable emulation, the four men rushed forward to report to their
superior officer.

“Patron,” they all began at once.

“Silence!” said the fat man with an oath; “one at a time. Quick! what is
the matter?”

“The matter is this, patron,” said Fanferlot dejectedly. “I am doomed
to ill luck. You see how it is; this is the only chance I ever had of
working out a beautiful case, and, paf! my criminal must go and fizzle!
A regular case of bankruptcy!”

“Then it is Clameran who--”

“Of course it is. When the rascal saw me this morning, he scampered off
like a hare. You should have seen him run; I thought he would never stop
this side of Ivry: but not at all. On reaching the Boulevard des Ecoles,
a sudden idea seemed to strike him, and he made a bee-line for his
hotel; I suppose, to get his pile of money. Directly he gets here, what
does he see? these three friends of mine. The sight of these gentlemen
had the effect of a sunstroke upon him; he went raving mad on the spot.
The idea of serving me such a low trick at the very moment I was sure of
success!”

“Where is he now?”

“At the prefecture, I suppose. Some policemen handcuffed him, and drove
off with him in a cab.”

“Come with me.”

M. Verduret and Fanferlot found Clameran in one of the private cells
reserved for dangerous prisoners.

He had on a strait-jacket, and was struggling violently against three
men, who were striving to hold him, while a physician tried to force him
to swallow a potion.

“Help!” he shrieked; “help, for God’s sake! Do you not see my brother
coming after me? Look! he wants to poison me!”

M. Verduret took the physician aside, and questioned him about the
maniac.

“The wretched man is in a hopeless state,” replied the doctor; “this
species of insanity is incurable. He thinks someone is trying to poison
him, and nothing will persuade him to eat or drink anything; and, as
it is impossible to force anything down his throat, he will die of
starvation, after having suffered all the tortures of poison.”

M. Verduret, with a shudder, turned to leave the prefecture, saying to
Fanferlot:

“Mme. Fauvel is saved, and by the interposition of God, who has himself
punished Clameran!”

“That don’t help me in the least,” grumbled Fanferlot. “The idea of all
my trouble and labor ending in this flat, quiet way! I seem to be born
for ill-luck!”

“Don’t take your blighted hopes of glory so much to heart,” replied
M. Verduret. “It is a melancholy fact for you that _File No. 113_ will
never leave the record-office; but you must bear your disappointment
gracefully and heroically. I will console you by sending you as bearer
of despatches to a friend of mine, and what you have lost in fame will
be gained in gold.”




XXV

Four days had passed since the events just narrated, when one morning
M. Lecoq--the official Lecoq, who resembled the dignified head of
a bureau--was walking up and down his private office, at each turn
nervously looking at the clock, which slowly ticked on the mantel, as
if it had no intention of striking any sooner than usual, to gratify the
man so anxiously watching its placid face.

At last, however, the clock did strike; and just then the faithful
Janouille opened the door, and ushered in Mme. Nina and Prosper Bertomy.

“Ah,” said M. Lecoq, “you are punctual; lovers are generally so.”

“We are not lovers, monsieur,” replied Mme. Gypsy. “M. Verduret gave
us express orders to meet here in your office this morning, and we have
obeyed.”

“Very good,” said the celebrated detective: “then be kind enough to wait
a few minutes; I will tell him you are here.”

During the quarter of an hour that Nina and Prosper remained alone
together, they did not exchange a word. Finally a door opened, and M.
Verduret appeared.

Nina and Prosper eagerly started toward him; but he checked them by one
of those peculiar looks which no one ever dared resist.

“You have come,” he said severely, “to hear the secret of my conduct.
I have promised, and will keep my word, however painful it may be to
my feelings. Listen, then. My best friend is a loyal, honest man,
named Caldas. Eighteen months ago this friend was the happiest of men.
Infatuated by a woman, he lived for her alone, and, fool that he was,
imagined that she felt the same love for him.”

“She did!” cried Gypsy, “yes, she always loved him.”

“She showed her love in a peculiar way. She loved him so much, that
one fine day she left him, and ran off with another man. In his first
moments of despair, Caldas wished to kill himself. Then he reflected
that it would be wiser to live, and avenge himself.”

“And then,” faltered Prosper.

“Then Caldas avenged himself in his own way. He made the woman who
deserted him recognize his immense superiority over his rival. Weak,
timid, and helpless, the rival was disgraced, and falling over the verge
of a precipice, when the powerful hand of Caldas reached forth and saved
him. You understand all now, do you not? The woman is Nina; the rival is
yourself; and Caldas is--”

With a quick, dexterous movement, he threw off his wig and whiskers, and
stood before them the real, intelligent, proud Lecoq.

“Caldas!” cried Nina.

“No, not Caldas, not Verduret any longer: but Lecoq, the detective!”

M. Lecoq broke the stupefied silence of his listeners by saying to
Prosper:

“It is not to me alone that you owe your salvation. A noble girl
confided to me the difficult task of clearing your reputation. I
promised her that M. Fauvel should never know the shameful secrets
concerning his domestic happiness. Your letter thwarted all my plans,
and made it impossible for me to keep my promise. I have nothing more to
say.”

He turned to leave the room, but Nina barred his exit.

“Caldas,” she murmured, “I implore you to have pity on me! I am _so_
miserable! Ah, if you only knew! Be forgiving to one who has always
loved you, Caldas! Listen.”

Prosper departed from M. Lecoq’s office alone.

On the 15th of last month, was celebrated, at the church of Notre Dame
de Lorette, the marriage of M. Prosper Bertomy and Mlle. Madeleine
Fauvel.

The banking-house is still on the Rue de Provence; but as M. Fauvel has
decided to retire from business, and live in the country, the name of
the firm has been changed, and is now--

“Prosper Bertomy & Co.”


MONSIEUR LECOQ

by Emile Gaboriau




I

At about eleven o’clock in the evening of the 20th of February, 186--,
which chanced to be Shrove Sunday, a party of detectives left the police
station near the old Barriere d’Italie to the direct south of Paris.
Their mission was to explore the district extending on the one hand
between the highroad to Fontainebleau and the Seine, and on the other
between the outer boulevards and the fortifications.

This quarter of the city had at that time anything but an enviable
reputation. To venture there at night was considered so dangerous
that the soldiers from the outlying forts who came in to Paris with
permission to go to the theatre, were ordered to halt at the barriere,
and not to pass through the perilous district excepting in parties of
three or four.

After midnight, these gloomy, narrow streets became the haunt of
numerous homeless vagabonds, and escaped criminals and malefactors,
moreover, made the quarter their rendezvous. If the day had been a lucky
one, they made merry over their spoils, and when sleep overtook them,
hid in doorways or among the rubbish in deserted houses. Every effort
had been made to dislodge these dangerous guests, but the most energetic
measures had failed to prove successful. Watched, hunted, and in
imminent danger of arrest though they were, they always returned with
idiotic obstinacy, obeying, as one might suppose, some mysterious law
of attraction. Hence, the district was for the police an immense trap,
constantly baited, and to which the game came of their own accord to be
caught.

The result of a tour of inspection of this locality was so certain, that
the officer in charge of the police post called to the squad as they
departed: “I will prepare lodgings for our guests. Good luck to you and
much pleasure!”

This last wish was pure irony, for the weather was the most disagreeable
that could be imagined. A very heavy snow storm had prevailed for
several days. It was now beginning to thaw, and on all the frequented
thoroughfares the slush was ankle-deep. It was still cold, however; a
damp chill filled the air, and penetrated to the very marrow of one’s
bones. Besides, there was a dense fog, so dense that one could not see
one’s hands before one’s face.

“What a beastly job!” growled one of the agents.

“Yes,” replied the inspector who commanded the squad; “if you had an
income of thirty thousand francs, I don’t suppose you’d be here.” The
laugh that greeted this common-place joke was not so much flattery as
homage to a recognized and established superiority.

The inspector was, in fact, one of the most esteemed members of the
force, a man who had proved his worth. His powers of penetration were
not, perhaps, very great; but he thoroughly understood his profession,
its resources, its labyrinths, and its artifices. Long practise had
given him imperturbable coolness, a great confidence in himself, and a
sort of coarse diplomacy that supplied the place of shrewdness. To his
failings and his virtues he added incontestable courage, and he
would lay his hand upon the collar of the most dangerous criminal as
tranquilly as a devotee dips his fingers in a basin of holy water.

He was a man about forty-six years of age, strongly built, with rugged
features, a heavy mustache, and rather small, gray eyes, hidden by bushy
eyebrows. His name was Gevrol, but he was universally known as “the
General.” This sobriquet was pleasing to his vanity, which was not
slight, as his subordinates well knew; and, doubtless, he felt that he
ought to receive from them the same consideration as was due to a person
of that exalted rank.

“If you begin to complain already,” he added, gruffly, “what will you do
by and by?”

In fact, it was too soon to complain. The little party were then passing
along the Rue de Choisy. The people on the footways were orderly; and
the lights of the wine-shops illuminated the street. All these places
were open. There is no fog or thaw that is potent enough to dismay
lovers of pleasure. And a boisterous crowd of maskers filled each
tavern, and public ballroom. Through the open windows came alternately
the sounds of loud voices and bursts of noisy music. Occasionally, a
drunken man staggered along the pavement, or a masked figure crept by in
the shadow cast by the houses.

Before certain establishments Gevrol commanded a halt. He gave a
peculiar whistle, and almost immediately a man came out. This was
another member of the force. His report was listened to, and then the
squad passed on.

“To the left, boys!” ordered Gevrol; “we will take the Rue d’Ivry, and
then cut through the shortest way to the Rue de Chevaleret.”

From this point the expedition became really disagreeable. The way led
through an unfinished, unnamed street, full of puddles and deep holes,
and obstructed with all sorts of rubbish. There were no longer any
lights or crowded wine-shops. No footsteps, no voices were heard;
solitude, gloom, and an almost perfect silence prevailed; and one might
have supposed oneself a hundred leagues from Paris, had it not been for
the deep and continuous murmur that always arises from a large city,
resembling the hollow roar of a torrent in some cavern depth.

All the men had turned up their trousers and were advancing slowly,
picking their way as carefully as an Indian when he is stealing upon his
prey. They had just passed the Rue du Chateau-des-Rentiers when suddenly
a wild shriek rent the air. At this place, and at this hour, such a cry
was so frightfully significant, that all the men paused as if by common
impulse.

“Did you hear that, General?” asked one of the detectives, in a low
voice.

“Yes, there is murder going on not far from here--but where? Silence!
let us listen.”

They all stood motionless, holding their breath, and anxiously
listening. Soon a second cry, or rather a wild howl, resounded.

“Ah!” exclaimed the inspector, “it is at the Poivriere.”

This peculiar appellation “Poivriere” or “pepper-box” was derived from
the term “peppered” which in French slang is applied to a man who
has left his good sense at the bottom of his glass. Hence, also, the
sobriquet of “pepper thieves” given to the rascals whose specialty it is
to plunder helpless, inoffensive drunkards.

“What!” added Gevrol to his companions, “don’t you know Mother Chupin’s
drinking-shop there on the right. Run.”

And, setting the example, he dashed off in the direction indicated. His
men followed, and in less than a minute they reached a hovel of sinister
aspect, standing alone, in a tract of waste ground. It was indeed from
this den that the cries had proceeded. They were now repeated, and were
immediately followed by two pistol shots. The house was hermetically
closed, but through the cracks in the window-shutters, gleamed a reddish
light like that of a fire. One of the police agents darted to one of
these windows, and raising himself up by clinging to the shutters with
his hands, endeavored to peer through the cracks, and to see what was
passing within.

Gevrol himself ran to the door. “Open!” he commanded, striking it
heavily. No response came. But they could hear plainly enough the sound
of a terrible struggle--of fierce imprecations, hollow groans, and
occasionally the sobs of a woman.

“Horrible!” cried the police agent, who was peering through the
shutters; “it is horrible!”

This exclamation decided Gevrol. “Open, in the name of the law!” he
cried a third time.

And no one responding, with a blow of the shoulder that was as violent
as a blow from a battering-ram, he dashed open the door. Then the
horror-stricken accent of the man who had been peering through the
shutters was explained. The room presented such a spectacle that all
the agents, and even Gevrol himself, remained for a moment rooted to the
threshold, shuddering with unspeakable horror.

Everything denoted that the house had been the scene of a terrible
struggle, of one of those savage conflicts which only too often stain
the barriere drinking dens with blood. The lights had been extinguished
at the beginning of the strife, but a blazing fire of pine logs
illuminated even the furthest corners of the room. Tables, glasses,
decanters, household utensils, and stools had been overturned, thrown
in every direction, trodden upon, shivered into fragments. Near
the fireplace two men lay stretched upon the floor. They were lying
motionless upon their backs, with their arms crossed. A third was
extended in the middle of the room. A woman crouched upon the lower
steps of a staircase leading to the floor above. She had thrown her
apron over her head, and was uttering inarticulate moans. Finally,
facing the police, and with his back turned to an open door leading into
an adjoining room, stood a young man, in front of whom a heavy oaken
table formed, as it were, a rampart.

He was of medium stature, and wore a full beard. His clothes, not unlike
those of a railway porter, were torn to fragments, and soiled with dust
and wine and blood. This certainly was the murderer. The expression on
his face was terrible. A mad fury blazed in his eyes, and a convulsive
sneer distorted his features. On his neck and cheek were two wounds
which bled profusely. In his right hand, covered with a handkerchief, he
held a pistol, which he aimed at the intruders.

“Surrender!” cried Gevrol.

The man’s lips moved, but in spite of a visible effort he could not
articulate a syllable.

“Don’t do any mischief,” continued the inspector, “we are in force, you
can not escape; so lay down your arms.”

“I am innocent,” exclaimed the man, in a hoarse, strained voice.

“Naturally, but we do not see it.”

“I have been attacked; ask that old woman. I defended myself; I have
killed--I had a right to do so; it was in self-defense!”

The gesture with which he enforced these words was so menacing that one
of the agents drew Gevrol violently aside, saying, as he did so; “Take
care, General, take care! The revolver has five barrels, and we have
heard but two shots.”

But the inspector was inaccessible to fear; he freed himself from the
grasp of his subordinate and again stepped forward, speaking in a still
calmer tone. “No foolishness, my lad; if your case is a good one, which
is possible, after all, don’t spoil it.”

A frightful indecision betrayed itself on the young man’s features. He
held Gevrol’s life at the end of his finger, was he about to press the
trigger? No, he suddenly threw his weapon to the floor, exclaiming:
“Come and take me!” And turning as he spoke he darted into the adjoining
room, hoping doubtless to escape by some means of egress which he knew
of.

Gevrol had expected this movement. He sprang after him with outstretched
arms, but the table retarded his pursuit. “Ah!” he exclaimed, “the
wretch escapes us!”

But the fate of the fugitive was already decided. While Gevrol parleyed,
one of the agents--he who had peered through the shutters--had gone to
the rear of the house and effected an entrance through the back door. As
the murderer darted out, this man sprang upon him, seized him, and with
surprising strength and agility dragged him back. The murderer tried to
resist; but in vain. He had lost his strength: he tottered and fell upon
the table that had momentarily protected him, murmuring loud enough for
every one to hear: “Lost! It is the Prussians who are coming!”

This simple and decisive maneuvre on the part of the subordinate had won
the victory, and at first it greatly delighted the inspector. “Good, my
boy,” said he, “very good! Ah! you have a talent for your business, and
you will do well if ever an opportunity--”

But he checked himself; all his followers so evidently shared his
enthusiasm that a feeling of jealousy overcame him. He felt his prestige
diminishing, and hastened to add: “The idea had occurred to me; but I
could not give the order without warning the scoundrel himself.”

This remark was superfluous. All the police agents had now gathered
around the murderer. They began by binding his feet and hands, and then
fastened him securely to a chair. He offered no resistance. His wild
excitement had given place to that gloomy prostration that follows all
unnatural efforts, either of mind or body. Evidently he had abandoned
himself to his fate.

When Gevrol saw that the men had finished their task, he called on them
to attend to the other inmates of the den, and in addition ordered the
lamps to be lit for the fire was going out. The inspector began his
examination with the two men lying near the fireplace. He laid his hand
on their hearts, but no pulsations were to be detected. He then held
the face of his watch close to their lips, but the glass remained quite
clear. “Useless,” he murmured, after several trials, “useless; they are
dead! They will never see morning again. Leave them in the same position
until the arrival of the public prosecutor, and let us look at the other
one.”

The third man still breathed. He was a young fellow, wearing the uniform
of a common soldier of the line. He was unarmed, and his large bluish
gray cloak was partly open, revealing his bare chest. The agents
lifted him very carefully--for he groaned piteously at the slightest
movement--and placed him in an upright position, with his back leaning
against the wall. He soon opened his eyes, and in a faint voice asked
for something to drink. They brought him a glass of water, which he
drank with evident satisfaction. He then drew a long breath, and seemed
to regain some little strength.

“Where are you wounded?” asked Gevrol.

“In the head, there,” he responded, trying to raise one of his arms.
“Oh! how I suffer.”

The police agent, who had cut off the murderer’s retreat now approached,
and with a dexterity that an old surgeon might have envied, made an
examination of the gaping wound which the young man had received in the
back of the neck. “It is nothing,” declared the police agent, but as
he spoke there was no mistaking the movement of his lower lip. It was
evident that he considered the wound very dangerous, probably mortal.

“It will be nothing,” affirmed Gevrol in his turn; “wounds in the head,
when they do not kill at once, are cured in a month.”

The wounded man smiled sadly. “I have received my death blow,” he
murmured.

“Nonsense!”

“Oh! it is useless to say anything; I feel it, but I do not complain. I
have only received my just deserts.”

All the police agents turned toward the murderer on hearing these words,
presuming that he would take advantage of this opportunity to repeat his
protestations of innocence. But their expectations were disappointed; he
did not speak, although he must certainly have heard the words.

“It was that brigand, Lacheneur, who enticed me here,” continued the
wounded man, in a voice that was growing fainter.

“Lacheneur?”

“Yes, Jean Lacheneur, a former actor, who knew me when I was rich--for I
had a fortune, but I spent it all; I wished to amuse myself. He, knowing
I was without a single sou in the world, came and promised me money
enough to begin life over again. Fool that I was to believe him, for he
brought me to die here like a dog! Oh! I will have my revenge on him!”
 At this thought the wounded man clenched his hands threateningly. “I
will have my revenge,” he resumed. “I know much more than he believes. I
will reveal everything.”

But he had presumed too much upon his strength. Anger had given him a
moment’s energy, but at the cost of his life which was ebbing away. When
he again tried to speak, he could not. Twice did he open his lips, but
only a choking cry of impotent rage escaped them. This was his last
manifestation of intelligence. A bloody foam gathered upon his lips, his
eyes rolled back in their sockets, his body stiffened, and he fell face
downward in a terrible convulsion.

“It is over,” murmured Gevrol.

“Not yet,” replied the young police agent, who had shown himself so
proficient; “but he can not live more than two minutes. Poor devil! he
will say nothing.”

The inspector of police had risen from the floor as if he had just
witnessed the commonest incident in the world, and was carefully dusting
the knees of his trousers. “Oh, well,” he responded, “we shall know
all we need to know. This fellow is a soldier, and the number of his
regiment will be given on the buttons of his cloak.”

A slight smile curved the lips of the subordinate. “I think you are
mistaken, General,” said he.

“How--”

“Yes, I understand. Seeing him attired in a military coat, you
supposed--But no; this poor wretch was no soldier. Do you wish for an
immediate proof? Is his hair the regulation cut? Where did you ever see
soldiers with their hair falling over their shoulders?”

This objection silenced the General for a moment; but he replied
bruskly: “Do you think that I keep my eyes in my pocket? What you have
remarked did not escape my notice; only I said to myself, here is a
young man who has profited by leave of absence to visit the wig maker.”

“At least--”

But Gevrol would permit no more interruptions. “Enough talk,” he
declared. “We will now hear what has happened. Mother Chupin, the old
hussy, is not dead!”

As he spoke, he advanced toward the old woman, who was still crouching
upon the stairs. She had not moved nor ventured so much as a look since
the entrance of the police, but her moans had not been discontinued.
With a sudden movement, Gevrol tore off the apron which she had thrown
over her head, and there she stood, such as years, vice, poverty, and
drink had made her; wrinkled, shriveled, toothless, and haggard, her
skin as yellow and as dry as parchment and drawn tightly over her bones.

“Come, stand up!” ordered the inspector. “Your lamentations don’t affect
me. You ought to be sent to prison for putting such vile drugs into your
liquors, thus breeding madness in the brains of your customers.”

The old woman’s little red eyes traveled slowly round the room, and then
in tearful tones she exclaimed: “What a misfortune! what will become of
me? Everything is broken--I am ruined!” She only seemed impressed by the
loss of her table utensils.

“Now tell us how this trouble began,” said Gevrol.

“Alas! I know nothing about it. I was upstairs mending my son’s clothes,
when I heard a dispute.”

“And after that?”

“Of course I came down, and I saw those three men that are lying
there picking a quarrel with the young man you have arrested; the poor
innocent! For he is innocent, as truly as I am an honest woman. If my
son Polyte had been here he would have separated them; but I, a poor
widow, what could I do! I cried ‘Police!’ with all my might.”

After giving this testimony she resumed her seat, thinking she had said
enough. But Gevrol rudely ordered her to stand up again. “Oh! we have
not done,” said he. “I wish for other particulars.”

“What particulars, dear Monsieur Gevrol, since I saw nothing?”

Anger crimsoned the inspector’s ears. “What would you say, old woman, if
I arrested you?”

“It would be a great piece of injustice.”

“Nevertheless, it is what will happen if you persist in remaining
silent. I have an idea that a fortnight in Saint Lazare would untie your
tongue.”

These words produced the effect of an electric shock on the Widow
Chupin. She suddenly ceased her hypocritical lamentations, rose, placed
her hands defiantly on her hips, and poured forth a torrent of invective
upon Gevrol and his agents, accusing them of persecuting her family ever
since they had previously arrested her son, a good-for-nothing fellow.
Finally, she swore that she was not afraid of prison, and would be only
too glad to end her days in jail beyond the reach of want.

At first the General tried to impose silence upon the terrible
termagant: but he soon discovered that he was powerless; besides, all
his subordinates were laughing. Accordingly he turned his back upon her,
and, advancing toward the murderer, he said: “You, at least, will not
refuse an explanation.”

The man hesitated for a moment. “I have already said all that I have to
say,” he replied, at last. “I have told you that I am innocent; and this
woman and a man on the point of death who was struck down by my hand,
have both confirmed my declaration. What more do you desire? When the
judge questions me, I will, perhaps, reply; until then do not expect
another word from me.”

It was easy to see that the fellow’s resolution was irrevocable; and
that he was not to be daunted by any inspector of police. Criminals
frequently preserve an absolute silence, from the very moment they are
captured. These men are experienced and shrewd, and lawyers and judges
pass many sleepless nights on their account. They have learned that
a system of defense can not be improvised at once; that it is, on the
contrary, a work of patience and meditation; and knowing what a terrible
effect an apparently insignificant response drawn from them at the
moment of detection may produce on a court of justice, they remain
obstinately silent. So as to see whether the present culprit was an old
hand or not, Gevrol was about to insist on a full explanation when some
one announced that the soldier had just breathed his last.

“As that is so, my boys,” the inspector remarked, “two of you will
remain here, and I will leave with the others. I shall go and arouse
the commissary of police, and inform him of the affair; he will take
the matter in hand: and we can then do whatever he commands. My
responsibility will be over, in any case. So untie our prisoner’s
legs and bind Mother Chupin’s hands, and we will drop them both at the
station-house as we pass.”

The men hastened to obey, with the exception of the youngest among them,
the same who had won the General’s passing praise. He approached his
chief, and motioning that he desired to speak with him, drew him outside
the door. When they were a few steps from the house, Gevrol asked him
what he wanted.

“I wish to know, General, what you think of this affair.”

“I think, my boy, that four scoundrels encountered each other in this
vile den. They began to quarrel; and from words they came to blows.
One of them had a revolver, and he killed the others. It is as clear as
daylight. According to his antecedents, and according to the antecedents
of the victims, the assassin will be judged. Perhaps society owes him
some thanks.”

“And you think that any investigation--any further search is
unnecessary.”

“Entirely unnecessary.”

The younger man appeared to deliberate for a moment. “It seems to me,
General,” he at length replied, “that this affair is not perfectly
clear. Have you noticed the murderer, remarked his demeanor, and
observed his look? Have you been surprised as I have been--?”

“By what?”

“Ah, well! it seems to me--I may, of course, be mistaken--but I fancy
that appearances are deceitful, and--Yes, I suspect something.”

“Bah!--explain yourself, please.”

“How can you explain the dog’s faculty of scent?”

Gevrol shrugged his shoulders. “In short,” he replied, “you scent a
melodrama here--a rendezvous of gentlemen in disguise, here at the
Poivriere, at Mother Chupin’s house. Well, hunt after the mystery, my
boy; search all you like, you have my permission.”

“What! you will allow me?”

“I not only allow you, I order you to do it. You are going to remain
here with any one of your comrades you may select. And if you find
anything that I have not seen, I will allow you to buy me a pair of
spectacles.”




II

The young police agent to whom Gevrol abandoned what he thought an
unnecessary investigation was a debutant in his profession. His name
was Lecoq. He was some twenty-five or twenty-six years of age, almost
beardless, very pale, with red lips, and an abundance of wavy black
hair. He was rather short but well proportioned; and each of his
movements betrayed unusual energy. There was nothing remarkable about
his appearance, if we except his eyes, which sparkled brilliantly or
grew extremely dull, according to his mood; and his nose, the large full
nostrils of which had a surprising mobility.

The son of a respectable, well-to-do Norman family, Lecoq had received
a good and solid education. He was prosecuting his law studies in Paris,
when in the same week, blow following blow, he learned that his father
had died, financially ruined, and that his mother had survived him only
a few hours. He was left alone in the world, destitute of resources,
obliged to earn his living. But how? He had an opportunity of learning
his true value, and found that it amounted to nothing; for the
university, on bestowing its diploma of bachelor, does not give an
annuity with it. Hence of what use is a college education to a poor
orphan boy? He envied the lot of those who, with a trade at the ends of
their fingers, could boldly enter the office of any manufacturer, and
say: “I would like to work.” Such men were working and eating. Lecoq
sought bread by all the methods employed by people who are in reduced
circumstances! Fruitless labor! There are a hundred thousand people in
Paris who have seen better days. No matter! He gave proofs of undaunted
energy. He gave lessons, and copied documents for a lawyer. He made
his appearance in a new character almost every day, and left no means
untried to earn an honest livelihood. At last he obtained employment
from a well-known astronomer, the Baron Moser, and spent his days in
solving bewildering and intricate problems, at the rate of a hundred
francs a month.

But a season of discouragement came. After five years of constant toil,
he found himself at the same point from which he had started. He was
nearly crazed with rage and disappointment when he recapitulated his
blighted hopes, his fruitless efforts, and the insults he had endured.
The past had been sad, the present was intolerable, the future
threatened to be terrible. Condemned to constant privations, he tried to
escape from the horrors of his real life by taking refuge in dreams.

Alone in his garret, after a day of unremitting toil, assailed by the
thousand longings of youth, Lecoq endeavored to devise some means of
suddenly making himself rich. All reasonable methods being beyond his
reach, it was not long before he was engaged in devising the worst
expedients. In short, this naturally moral and honest young man spent
much of his time in perpetrating--in fancy--the most abominable crimes.
Sometimes he himself was frightened by the work of his imagination: for
an hour of recklessness might suffice to make him pass from the idea
to the fact, from theory to practise. This is the case with all
monomaniacs; an hour comes in which the strange conceptions that have
filled their brains can be no longer held in check.

One day he could not refrain from exposing to his patron a little plan
he had conceived, which would enable him to obtain five or six hundred
francs from London. Two letters and a telegram were all that was
necessary, and the game was won. It was impossible to fail, and there
was no danger of arousing suspicion.

The astronomer, amazed at the simplicity of the plan, could but admire
it. On reflection, however, he concluded that it would not be prudent
for him to retain so ingenious a secretary in his service. This was
why, on the following day, he gave him a month’s pay in advance, and
dismissed him, saying: “When one has your disposition, and is poor, one
may either become a famous thief or a great detective. Choose.”

Lecoq retired in confusion; but the astronomer’s words bore fruit in his
mind. “Why should I not follow good advice?” he asked himself. Police
service did not inspire him with repugnance--far from it. He had often
admired that mysterious power whose hand is everywhere, and which,
although unseen and unheard, still manages to hear and see everything.
He was delighted with the prospect of being the instrument of such a
power. He considered that the profession of detective would enable him
to employ the talents with which he had been endowed in a useful and
honorable fashion; besides opening out a life of thrilling adventure
with fame as its goal.

In short, this profession had a wonderful charm for him. So much so,
that on the following week, thanks to a letter from Baron Moser, he was
admitted into the service. A cruel disenchantment awaited him. He had
seen the results, but not the means. His surprise was like that of a
simple-minded frequenter of the theatre, when he is admitted for the
first time behind the scenes, and is able to pry into the decorations
and tinsel that are so dazzling at a distance.

However, the opportunity for which he had so ardently longed, for which
he had been waiting during many weary months, had come, he thought,
at last, as he reached the Poivriere with Gevrol and the other police
agents. While he was clinging to the window shutters he saw by the
light of his ambition a pathway to success. It was at first only a
presentiment, but it soon became a supposition, and then a conviction
based upon actual facts, which had escaped his companions, but which
he had observed and carefully noted. He recognized that fortune had, at
last, turned in his favor when he saw Gevrol neglect all but the merest
formalities of examination, and when he heard him declare peremptorily
that this triple murder was merely the result of one of those ferocious
quarrels so frequent among vagrants in the outskirts of the city.

“Ah, well!” he thought; “have it your own way--trust in appearances,
since you will see nothing beneath them! But I will prove to you that my
youthful theory is better than all your experience.”

The inspector’s carelessness gave Lecoq a perfect right to secretly seek
information on his own account; but by warning his superior officers
before attempting anything on his own responsibility, he would protect
himself against any accusation of ambition or of unduly taking advantage
of his comrade. Such charges might prove most dangerous for his future
prospects in a profession where so much rivalry is seen, and where
wounded vanity has so many opportunities to avenge itself by resorting
to all sorts of petty treason. Accordingly, he spoke to his superior
officer--saying just enough to be able to remark, in case of success:
“Ah! I warned you!”--just enough so as not to dispel any of Gevrol’s
doubts.

The permission which Lecoq obtained to remain in charge of the bodies
was his first triumph of the best possible augury; but he knew how to
dissimulate, and it was in a tone of the utmost indifference that he
requested one of his comrades to remain with him. Then, while the others
were making ready to depart, he seated himself upon the corner of the
table, apparently oblivious of all that was passing around. He did not
dare to lift his head, for fear of betraying his joy, so much did
he fear that his companions might read his hopes and plans in the
expression of his face.

Inwardly he was wild with impatience. Though the murderer submitted with
good grace to the precautions that were taken to prevent his escape, it
required some time to bind the hands of the Widow Chupin, who fought and
howled as if they were burning her alive. “They will never go!” Lecoq
murmured to himself.

They did so at last, however. Gevrol gave the order to start, and left
the house, addressing a laughing good-by to his subordinate. The latter
made no reply. He followed his comrades as far as the threshold to make
sure that they were really going, for he trembled at the thought that
Gevrol might reflect, change his mind, and return to solve the mystery,
as was his right.

His anxiety was needless, however. The squad gradually faded away in the
distance, and the cries of Widow Chupin died away in the stillness of
the night. It was only then that Lecoq reentered the room. He could
no longer conceal his delight; his eyes sparkled as might those of a
conqueror taking possession of some vast empire: he stamped his foot
upon the floor and exclaimed with exultation: “Now the mystery belongs
to us two alone!”

Authorized by Gevrol to choose one of his comrades to remain with him at
the Poivriere, Lecoq had requested the least intelligent of the party
to keep him company. He was not influenced by a fear of being obliged to
share the fruits of success with his companion, but by the necessity of
having an assistant from whom he could, in case of need, exact implicit
obedience.

The comrade Lecoq selected was a man of about fifty, who, after a term
of cavalry service, had become an agent of the prefecture. In the humble
office that he occupied he had seen prefect succeed prefect, and might
probably have filled an entire prison with the culprits he had arrested
with his own hands. Experience had not, however, made him any the
shrewder or any the more zealous. Still he had this merit, when he
received an order he executed it with military exactitude, so far as he
understood it. Of course if he had failed to understand it, so much the
worse. It might, indeed, be said of him, that he discharged his duties
like a blind man, like an old horse trained for a riding school.

When he had a moment’s leisure, and a little money in his pocket, he
invariably got drunk. Indeed, he spent his life between two fits of
intoxication, without ever rising above a condition of semi-lucidity.
His comrades had known, but had forgotten, his name, and his partiality
for a certain beverage had accordingly induced them to call him “Father
Absinthe.”

With his limited powers of observation, he naturally did not observe
the tone of triumph in his young companion’s voice. “Upon my word,” he
remarked, when they were alone, “your idea of keeping me here was a good
one, and I thank you for it. While the others spend the night paddling
about in the slush, I shall get a good sleep.”

Here he stood, in a room that was splashed with blood, that was
shuddering, so to speak, with crime, and yet face to face with the still
warm bodies of three murdered men he could talk of sleep!

But, after all, what did it matter to him? He had seen so many similar
scenes in his time. And does not habit infallibly lead to professional
indifference, making the soldier cool and composed in the midst of
conflict, and rendering the surgeon impassible when the patient shrieks
and writhes beneath his operating knife.

“I have been upstairs, looking about,” pursued Father Absinthe; “I saw a
bed up there, and we can mount guard here, by turns.”

With an imperious gesture, Lecoq interrupted him. “You must give up
that idea, Father Absinthe,” he said, “we are not here to sleep, but to
collect information--to make the most careful researches, and to note
all the probabilities. In a few hours the commissary of police, the
legal physician, and the public prosecutor will be here. I wish to have
a report ready for them.”

This proposition seemed anything but pleasing to the old police agent.
“Eh! what is the use of that?” he exclaimed. “I know the General. When
he goes in search of the commissary, as he has gone this evening, there
is nothing more to be done. Do you think you can see anything that he
didn’t see?”

“I think that Gevrol, like every one else, is liable to be mistaken. I
think that he believes too implicitly in what seems to him evidence. I
could swear that this affair is not what it seems to be; and I am sure
that if we like we can discover the mystery which is concealed beneath
present appearances.”

Although Lecoq’s vehemence was intense, he did not succeed in making
any impression upon his companion, who with a yawn that threatened to
dislocate his jaws replied: “Perhaps you are right; but I am going to
bed. This need not prevent you from searching around, however; and if
you find anything you can wake me.”

Lecoq made no sign of impatience: nor in reality was he impatient. These
words afforded him the opportunity for which he was longing. “You will
give me a moment first,” he remarked. “In five minutes, by your watch, I
promise to let you put your finger on the mystery that I suspect here.”

“Well, go on for five minutes.”

“After that you shall be free, Father Absinthe. Only it is clear that if
I unravel the mystery alone, I alone ought to pocket the reward that a
solution will certainly bring.”

At the word “reward” the old police agent pricked up his ears. He was
dazzled by the vision of an infinite number of bottles of the greenish
liquor whose name he bore. “Convince me, then,” said he, taking a seat
upon a stool, which he had lifted from the floor.

Lecoq remained standing in front of him. “To begin with,” he remarked,
“whom do you suppose the person we have just arrested to be?”

“A porter, probably, or a vagabond.”

“That is to say, a man belonging to the lowest class of society:
consequently, a fellow without education.”

“Certainly.”

Lecoq spoke with his eyes fixed upon those of his companion. He
distrusted his own powers, as is usual with persons of real merit, but
he felt that if he could succeed in making his convictions penetrate his
comrade’s obtuse mind, their exactitude would be virtually proved.

“And now,” he continued, “what would you say if I showed you that this
young man had received an excellent, even refined, education?”

“I should reply that it was very extraordinary. I should reply that--but
what a fool I am! You have not proved it to me yet.”

“But I can do so very easily. Do you remember the words that he uttered
as he fell?”

“Yes, I remember them perfectly. He said: ‘It is the Prussians who are
coming.’”

“What do you suppose he meant by that?”

“What a question! I should suppose that he did not like the Prussians,
and that he supposed he was offering us a terrible insult.”

Lecoq was waiting anxiously for this response. “Ah, well; Father
Absinthe,” he said gravely, “you are wrong, quite wrong. And that this
man has an education superior to his apparent position is proved by the
fact that you did not understand his meaning, nor his intention. It was
this single phrase that enlightened me.”

Father Absinthe’s physiognomy expressed the strange and comical
perplexity of a man who is so thoroughly mystified that he knows not
whether to laugh, or to be angry. After reflecting a little, he decided
to adopt the latter course. “You are rather too young to impose upon an
old fellow like me,” he remarked. “I don’t like boasters--”

“One moment!” interrupted Lecoq; “allow me to explain. You have
certainly heard of a terrible battle which resulted in one of the
greatest defeats that ever happened to France--the battle of Waterloo?”

“I don’t see the connection--”

“Answer, if you please.”

“Yes--then! I have heard of it!”

“Very well; you must know then that for some time victory seemed likely
to rest with the banners of France. The English began to fall back, and
the emperor had already exclaimed: ‘We have them!’ when suddenly on the
right, a little in the rear, a large body of troops was seen advancing.
It was the Prussian army. The battle of Waterloo was lost.”

In all his life, worthy Father Absinthe had never made such a strenuous
effort to understand anything. In this case his perseverance was not
wholly useless, for, springing from his stool, and probably in much the
same tone that Archimedes cried “Eureka!” he exclaimed, “I understand.
The man’s words were only an allusion.”

“It is as you have said,” remarked Lecoq, approvingly. “But I had
not finished. If the emperor was thrown into consternation by the
appearance of the Prussians, it was because he was momentarily
expecting the arrival of one of his own generals from the same
direction--Grouchy--with thirty-five thousand men. So if this man’s
allusion was exact and complete, he was not expecting an enemy, but a
friend. Now draw your own conclusions.”

Father Absinthe was amazed but convinced: and his eyes, heavy with sleep
a few moments before, now opened to their widest extent. “Good heavens!”
 he murmured, “if you put it in that way! But I forget; you must have
seen something as you were looking through the shutters.”

The young man shook his head. “Upon my honor,” he declared, “I saw
nothing save the struggle between the murderer and the poor devil
dressed as a soldier. It was that sentence alone that aroused my
attention.”

“Wonderful! prodigious!” exclaimed the astonished old man.

“I will add that reflection has confirmed my suspicions. I ask myself
why this man, instead of flying at once, should have waited and remained
there, at that door, to parley with us.”

With a bound, Father Absinthe sprang again to his feet. “Why?” he
interrupted; “because he had accomplices, and he wished to give them
time to escape. Ah! I understand it all now.”

A triumphant smile parted Lecoq’s lips. “That is what I said to myself,”
 he replied, “and now it is easy to verify my suspicions. There is snow
outside, isn’t there?”

It was not necessary to say any more. The elder officer seized the
light, and followed by his companion, he hastened to the back door of
the house, which opened into a small garden. In this sheltered enclosure
the snow had not melted, and upon its white surface the dark stains
of numerous footprints presented themselves. Without hesitation,
Lecoq threw himself upon his knees in the snow; he rose again almost
immediately. “These indentations were not made by the men’s feet,” said
he. “There have been women here.”




III

Obstinate men of Father Absinthe’s stamp, who are at first always
inclined to differ from other people’s opinions, are the very
individuals who end in madly adopting them. When an idea has at last
penetrated their empty brains, they twist and turn it, dwell upon it,
and develop it until it exceeds the bounds of reason.

Hence, the police veteran was now much more strongly convinced than
his companion that the usually clever Gevrol had been mistaken, and
accordingly he laughed the inspector to scorn. On hearing Lecoq affirm
that women had taken part in the horrible scene at the Poivriere, his
joy was extreme--“A fine affair!” he exclaimed; “an excellent case!” And
suddenly recollecting a maxim that has been handed down from the time
of Cicero, he added in sententious tones: “Who holds the woman holds the
cause!”

Lecoq did not deign to reply. He was standing upon the threshold,
leaning against the framework of the door, his hand pressed to his
forehead, as motionless as a statue. The discovery he had just made, and
which so delighted Father Absinthe, filled him with consternation. It
was the death of his hopes, the annihilation of the ingenious structure
which his imagination had built upon the foundation of a single
sentence.

There was no longer any mystery--, so celebrity was not to be gained by
a brilliant stroke!

For the presence of two women in this vile den explained everything in
the most natural and commonplace fashion. Their presence explained the
quarrel, the testimony of Widow Chupin, the dying declaration of the
pretended soldier. The behavior of the murderer was also explained. He
had remained to cover the retreat of the two women; he had sacrificed
himself in order to save them, an act of gallantry so common in the
French character, that any scoundrel of the barrieres might have
performed it.

Still, the strange allusion to the battle of Waterloo remained
unexplained. But what did that prove now? Nothing, simply nothing.
However, who could say how low an unworthy passion might cause a man
even of birth and breeding to descend? And the carnival afforded an
opportunity for the parties to disguise themselves.

But while Lecoq was turning and twisting all these probabilities in his
mind, Father Absinthe became impatient. “Are we going to remain here
until doomsday?” he asked. “Are we to pause just at the moment when our
search has been productive of such brilliant results?”

“Brilliant results!” These words stung the young man as deeply as the
keenest irony could have done. “Leave me alone,” he replied gruffly;
“and, above all, don’t walk about the garden, as by doing so, you’ll
damage any footprints.”

His companion swore a little; but soon became silent in his turn. He was
constrained to submit to the irresistible ascendency of superior will
and intelligence.

Lecoq was engaged in following out his course of reasoning. “The
murderer, leaving the ball at the Rainbow, a dancing-house not far from
here, near the fortifications, came to this wine-shop, accompanied by
two women. He found three men drinking here, who either began teasing
him, or who displayed too much gallantry toward his companions. He
became angry. The others threatened him; he was one against three; he
was armed; he became wild with rage, and fired--”

He checked himself, and an instant after added, aloud: “But was it the
murderer who brought these women here? If he is tried, this will be the
important point. It is necessary to obtain information regarding it.”

He immediately went back into the house, closely followed by his
colleague, and began an examination of the footprints round about the
door that Gevrol had forced open. Labor lost. There was but little snow
on the ground near the entrance of the hovel, and so many persons
had passed in and out that Lecoq could discover nothing. What a
disappointment after his patient hopes! Lecoq could have cried
with rage. He saw the opportunity for which he had sighed so long
indefinitely postponed. He fancied he could hear Gevrol’s coarse
sarcasms. “Enough of this,” he murmured, under his breath. “The General
was right, and I am a fool!”

He was so positively convinced that one could do no more than discover
the circumstances of some commonplace, vulgar broil, that he began to
wonder if it would not be wise to renounce his search and take a nap,
while awaiting the coming of the commissary of police.

But Father Absinthe was no longer of this opinion. This worthy man, who
was far from suspecting the nature of his companion’s reflections could
not explain his inaction. “Come! my boy,” said he, “have you lost your
wits? This is losing time, it seems to me. The authorities will arrive
in a few hours, and what report shall we be able to give them! As for
me, if you desire to go to sleep, I shall pursue the investigation
alone.”

Disappointed as he was, the young police officer could not repress a
smile. He recognized his own exhortation of a few moments before. It
was the old man who had suddenly become intrepid. “To work, then!” he
sighed, like a man who, while foreseeing defeat, wishes, at least, to
have no cause for self-reproach.

He found it, however, extremely difficult to follow the footprints in
the open air by the uncertain light of a candle, which was extinguished
by the least breath of wind. “I wonder if there is a lantern in the
house,” he said. “If we could only lay our hands upon one!”

They searched everywhere, and, at last, upstairs in the Widow Chupin’s
own room, they found a well-trimmed lantern, so small and compact that
it certainly had never been intended for honest purposes.

“A regular burglar’s implement,” said Father Absinthe, with a coarse
laugh.

The implement was useful in any case; as both men agreed when
they returned to the garden and recommenced their investigations
systematically. They advanced very slowly and with extreme caution. The
old man carefully held the lantern in the best position, while Lecoq,
on his knees, studied each footprint with the attention of a chiromancer
professing to read the future in the hand of a rich client. This
new examination assured Lecoq that he had been correct in his first
supposition. It was plain that two women had left the Poivriere by the
back door. They had started off running, as was proved by the length of
the steps and the shape of the footprints.

The difference in the tracks left by the two fugitives was so remarkable
that it did not escape Father Absinthe’s eyes. “Sapristi!” he muttered;
“one of these jades can boast of having a pretty foot at the end of her
leg!”

He was right. One of the tracks betrayed a small, coquettish, slender
foot, clad in an elegant high-heeled boot with a narrow sole and an
arched instep. The other denoted a broad, short foot growing wider
toward the end. It had evidently been incased in a strong, low shoe.

This was indeed a clue. Lecoq’s hopes at once revived; so eagerly does
a man welcome any supposition that is in accordance with his desires.
Trembling with anxiety, he went to examine some other footprints a short
distance from these; and an excited exclamation at once escaped his
lips.

“What is it?” eagerly inquired the other agent: “what do you see?”

“Come and look for yourself, see there!” cried Lecoq.

The old man bent down, and his surprise was so great that he almost
dropped the lantern. “Oh!” said he in a stifled voice, “a man’s
footprint!”

“Exactly. And this fellow wore the finest of boots. See that imprint,
how clear, how neat it is!”

Worthy Father Absinthe was scratching his ear furiously, his usual
method of quickening his rather slow wits. “But it seems to me,” he
ventured to say at last, “that this individual was not coming from this
ill-fated hovel.”

“Of course not; the direction of the foot tells you that. No, he was
not going away, he was coming here. But he did not pass beyond the spot
where we are now standing. He was standing on tiptoe with outstretched
neck and listening ears, when, on reaching this spot, he heard some
noise, fear seized him, and he fled.”

“Or rather, the women were going out as he was coming, and--”

“No, the women were outside the garden when he entered it.”

This assertion seemed far too audacious to suit Lecoq’s companion, who
remarked: “One can not be sure of that.”

“I am sure of it, however; and can prove it conclusively. If you doubt
it, it is because your eyes are growing old. Bring your lantern a little
nearer--yes, here it is--our man placed his large foot upon one of the
marks made by the woman with the small foot and almost effaced it.”
 This unexceptionable piece of circumstantial evidence stupefied the old
police agent.

“Now,” continued Lecoq, “could this man have been the accomplice whom
the murderer was expecting? Might it not have been some strolling
vagrant whose attention was attracted by the two pistol shots? This is
what we must ascertain. And we will ascertain it. Come!”

A wooden fence of lattice-work, rather more than three feet high,
was all that separated the Widow Chupin’s garden from the waste land
surrounding it. When Lecoq made the circuit of the house to cut off the
murderer’s escape he had encountered this obstacle, and, fearing lest he
should arrive too late, he had leaped the fence to the great detriment
of his pantaloons, without even asking himself if there was a gate or
not. There was one, however--a light gate of lattice-work similar to the
fence, turning upon iron hinges, and closed by a wooden button. Now it
was straight toward this gate that these footprints in the snow led the
two police agents. Some new thought must have struck the younger man,
for he suddenly paused. “Ah!” he murmured, “these two women did not come
to the Poivriere this evening for the first time.”

“Why do you think that, my boy?” inquired Father Absinthe.

“I could almost swear it. How, unless they were in the habit of coming
to this den, could they have been aware of the existence of this gate?
Could they have discovered it on such a dark, foggy night? No; for I,
who can, without boasting, say that I have good eyes--I did not see it.”

“Ah! yes, that is true!”

“These two women, however, came here without hesitating, in a straight
line; and note that to do this, it was necessary for them to cross the
garden diagonally.”

The veteran would have given something if he could have found some
objection to offer; but unfortunately he could find none. “Upon my
word!” he exclaimed, “yours is a droll way of proceeding. You are only
a conscript; I am a veteran in the service, and have assisted in more
affairs of this sort than you are years old, but never have I seen--”

“Nonsense!” interrupted Lecoq, “you will see much more. For example, I
can prove to you that although the women knew the exact position of the
gate, the man knew it only by hearsay.”

“The proof!”

“The fact is easily demonstrated. Study the man’s footprints, and you,
who are very sharp, will see at once that he deviated greatly from the
straight course. He was in such doubt that he was obliged to search for
the gate with his hand stretched out before him--and his fingers have
left their imprint on the thin covering of snow that lies upon the upper
railing of the fence.”

The old man would have been glad to verify this statement for himself,
as he said, but Lecoq was in a hurry. “Let us go on, let us go on!” said
he. “You can verify my assertions some other time.”

They left the garden and followed the footprints which led them toward
the outer boulevards, inclining somewhat in the direction of the Rue de
Patay. There was now no longer any need of close attention. No one save
the fugitives had crossed this lonely waste since the last fall of snow.
A child could have followed the track, so clear and distinct it was.
Four series of footprints, very unlike in character, formed the track;
two of these had evidently been left by the women; the other two, one
going and one returning, had been made by the man. On several occasions
the latter had placed his foot exactly on the footprints left by the two
women, half effacing them, thus dispelling all doubt as to the precise
moment of his approach.

About a hundred yards from the Poivriere, Lecoq suddenly seized his
colleague’s arm. “Halt!” he exclaimed, “we have reached a good place; I
can see unmistakable proofs.”

The spot, all unenclosed as it was, was evidently utilized by some
builder for the storage of various kinds of lumber. The ground was
strewn with large blocks of granite, some chiseled, some in the rough,
with numerous long planks and logs of wood in their midst. In front of
one of these logs, the surface of which had been evidently wiped, all
the various footprints came together, mingling confusedly.

“Here,” declared the young detective, “our fugitives met the man and
took counsel with him. One of the women, the one with the little feet,
sat down upon this log.”

“We ought to make quite sure of that,” said Father Absinthe, in an
oracular tone.

But his companion cut short his desire for verification. “You, my old
friend,” said he, “are going to do me the kindness to keep perfectly
still: pass me the lantern and do not move.”

Lecoq’s modest tone had suddenly become so imperious that his colleague
dared offer no resistance. Like a soldier at the command to halt,
he remained erect, motionless, and mute, following his colleague’s
movements with an inquisitive, wondering eye.

Quick in his motions, and understanding how to maneuvre the lantern
in accordance with his wishes, the young police agent explored the
surroundings in a very short space of time. A bloodhound in pursuit of
his prey would have been less alert, less discerning, less agile. He
came and went, now turning, now pausing, now retreating, now hurrying on
again without any apparent reason; he scrutinized, he questioned every
surrounding object: the ground, the logs of wood, the blocks of stone,
in a word, nothing escaped his glance. For a moment he would remain
standing, then fall upon his knees, and at times lie flat upon his
stomach with his face so near the ground that his breath must have
melted the snow. He had drawn a tape-line from his pocket, and using it
with a carpenter’s dexterity, he measured, measured, and measured.

And all his movements were accompanied with the wild gestures of a
madman, interspersed with oaths or short laughs, with exclamations of
disappointment or delight. After a quarter of an hour of this strange
exercise, he turned to Father Absinthe, placed the lantern on a stone,
wiped his hands with his pocket-handkerchief, and said: “Now I know
everything!”

“Well, that is saying a great deal!”

“When I say everything, I mean all that is connected with the episode of
the drama which ended in that bloody bout in the hovel. This expanse of
earth covered with snow is a white page upon which the people we are
in search of have written, not only their movements, their goings,
and comings, but also their secret thoughts, their alternate hopes and
anxieties. What do these footprints say to you, Papa Absinthe? To me
they are alive like the persons who made them; they breathe, speak,
accuse!”

The old agent was saying to himself: “Certainly, this fellow is
intelligent, undeniably shrewd; but he is very disagreeable.”

“These are the facts as I have read them,” pursued Lecoq. “When the
murderer repaired to the Poivriere with the two women, his companion--I
should say his accomplice--came here to wait. He was a tall man of
middle age; he wore a soft hat and a shaggy brown overcoat; he was,
moreover, probably married, or had been so, as he had a wedding-ring on
the little finger of his right hand--”

His companion’s despairing gestures obliged the speaker to pause.
This description of a person whose existence had but just now been
demonstrated, these precise details given in a tone of absolute
certainty, completely upset all Father Absinthe’s ideas, increasing his
perplexity beyond all bounds.

“This is not right,” he growled, “this is not kind. You are poking
fun at me. I take the thing seriously; I listen to you, I obey you
in everything, and then you mock me in this way. We find a clue,
and instead of following it up, you stop to relate all these absurd
stories.”

“No,” replied his companion, “I am not jesting, and I have told you
nothing of which I am not absolutely sure, nothing that is not strictly
and indisputably true.”

“And you would have me believe--”

“Fear nothing, papa; I would not have you do violence to your
convictions. When I have told you my reasons, and my means of
information, you will laugh at the simplicity of the theory that seems
so incomprehensible to you now.”

“Go on, then,” said the good man, in a tone of resignation.

“We had decided,” rejoined Lecoq, “that the accomplice mounted guard
here. The time seemed long, and, growing impatient, he paced to and
fro--the length of this log of wood--occasionally pausing to listen.
Hearing nothing, he stamped his foot, doubtless exclaiming: ‘What the
deuce has happened to him down there!’ He had made about thirty turns (I
have counted them), when a sound broke the stillness--the two women were
coming.”

On hearing Lecoq’s recital, all the conflicting sentiments that are
awakened in a child’s mind by a fairy tale--doubt, faith, anxiety,
and hope--filled Father Absinthe’s heart. What should he believe? what
should he refuse to believe? He did not know. How was he to separate the
true from the false among all these equally surprising assertions? On
the other hand, the gravity of his companion, which certainly was not
feigned, dismissed all idea of pleasantry.

Finally, curiosity began to torture him. “We had reached the point where
the women made their appearance,” said he.

“Yes, indeed,” responded Lecoq, “but here all certainty ceases; no more
proofs, only suppositions. Still, I have every reason to believe that
our fugitives left the drinking den before the beginning of the fight,
before the cries that attracted our attention. Who were they? I can only
conjecture. I suspect, however, that they were not equals in rank. I am
inclined to think that one was the mistress, the other her servant.”

“That is proved,” ventured the old man, “by the great difference in
their feet and in their shoes.”

This shrewd observation elicited a smile from Lecoq. “That difference,”
 he replied, seriously, “is something, of course; but it was not that
which decided me in my opinion. If greater or less perfection of the
extremities regulated social distinctions, many mistresses would be
servants. What struck me was this: when the two women rushed wildly from
Mother Chupin’s house, the woman with the small feet sprang across the
garden with one bound, she darted on some distance in advance of the
other. The terror of the situation, the vileness of the den, the horror
of the scandal, the thought of safety, inspired her with marvelous
energy. But her strength, as often happens with delicate and nervous
women, lasted only a few seconds. She was not half-way from the
Poivriere when her speed relaxed, her limbs trembled. Ten steps farther
on she tottered and almost fell. Some steps farther, and she became so
exhausted that she let go her hold upon her skirts; they trailed upon
the snow, tracing a faint circle there. Then the woman with the broad
feet came to aid her. She seized her companion round the waist; she
dragged her along; their footprints here are mingled confusedly; then,
seeing that her friend was about to fall, she caught her up in her
strong arms and carried her--for you will see that the footprints made
by the woman with the small feet suddenly cease at this point.”

Was Lecoq merely amusing himself by inventing this story? Was this scene
anything but a work of imagination? Was the accent of deep and sincere
conviction which he imparted to his words only feigned?

Father Absinthe was still in doubt, but he thought of a way in which he
might satisfy his uncertainty. He caught up the lantern and hurried off
to examine these footprints which he had not known how to read, which
had been speechless to him, but which yielded their secret to another.
He was obliged to agree with his companion. All that Lecoq had described
was written there; he saw the confused footprints, the circle made by
the sweeping skirts, the cessation of the tiny imprints.

On his return, his countenance betrayed a respectful and astonished
admiration, and it was with a shade of embarrassment that he said: “You
can scarcely blame an old man for being a little like St. Thomas. ‘I
have touched it with my fingers,’ and now I am content to follow you.”

The young police agent could not, indeed, blame his colleague for his
incredulity. Resuming his recital, he continued: “Then the accomplice,
who had heard the fugitives coming, ran to meet them, and he aided the
woman with large feet in carrying her companion. The latter must have
been really ill, for the accomplice took off his hat and used it in
brushing the snow off this log. Then, thinking the surface was not
yet dry enough, he wiped it with the skirt of his overcoat. Were these
civilities pure gallantry, or the usual attentions of an inferior? I
have asked myself that question. This much, however, is certain,
while the woman with the small feet was recovering her strength, half
reclining upon this board, the other took the accomplice a little on
one side, five or six steps away to the left, just beside that enormous
block of granite. There she talked with him, and, as he listened, the
man leaned upon the snow-covered stone. His hand left a very distinct
imprint there. Then, as the conversation continued, he rested his elbow
upon the snowy surface.”

Like all men of limited intelligence, Father Absinthe had suddenly
passed from unreasoning distrust to unquestioning confidence.
Henceforth, he could believe anything for the very same reason that
had, at first, made him believe nothing. Having no idea of the bounds
of human reasoning and penetration, he saw no limits to the conjectural
genius of his companion. With perfect faith, therefore, he inquired:
“And what was the accomplice saying to the woman with the broad shoes?”

Lecoq smiled at this simplicity, but the other did not see him do so.
“It is rather difficult for me to answer that question,” replied the
young detective, “I think, however, that the woman was explaining to
the man the immensity and imminence of the danger that threatened his
companion, and that they were trying to devise some means to rescue him
from it. Perhaps she brought him orders given by the murderer. It
is certain that she ended by beseeching the accomplice to run to the
Poivriere and see what was passing there. And he did so, for his tracks
start from this block of granite.”

“And only to think,” exclaimed Father Absinthe, “that we were in the
hovel at that very moment. A word from Gevrol, and we might have had
handcuffs on the whole gang! How unfortunate!”

Lecoq was not sufficiently disinterested to share his companion’s
regret. On the contrary, he was very thankful for Gevrol’s blunder. Had
it not been for that, how would he ever have found an opportunity of
investigating an affair that grew more and more mysterious as his search
proceeded, but which he hoped to fathom finally.

“To conclude,” he resumed, “the accomplice soon returned, he had
witnessed the scene, and was evidently afraid. He feared that the
thought of exploring the premises might enter the minds of the police.
It was to the lady with small feet that he addressed himself. He
explained the necessity of flight, and told her that even a moment’s
delay might be fatal. At his words, she summoned all her energy; she
rose and hastened away, clinging to the arm of her companion. Did
the man indicate the route they were to take, or did they know it
themselves? This much is certain, he accompanied them some distance, in
order to watch over them. But besides protecting these women, he had a
still more sacred duty to perform--that of succoring his accomplice, if
possible. He retraced his steps, passed by here once more, and the
last footprint that I can discover leads in the direction of the Rue
du Chateau des Rentiers. He wished to know what would become of the
murderer, and went to place himself where he might see him pass by with
his captors.”

Like a dilettante who can scarcely restrain his applause until the close
of the aria that delights him, Father Absinthe had been unable during
the recital to entirely suppress his admiration. But it was not until
Lecoq ceased speaking that he gave full vent to his enthusiasm: “Here is
a detective if you like!” he exclaimed. “And they pretend that Gevrol is
shrewd! What has he ever done to compare with this? Ah! shall I tell you
what I think? Why, in comparison with you, the General is a mere John
the Baptist.”

Certainly the flattery was gross, but it was impossible to doubt its
sincerity. This was the first time that the balmy dew of praise had
fallen upon Lecoq’s vanity, and it greatly delighted him, although he
modestly replied: “Nonsense, you are too kind, papa. After all, what
have I done that is so very clever? I told you that the man was of
middle age. It was not difficult to see that after one had examined his
heavy, dragging step. I told you that he was tall--an easy matter. When
I saw that he had been leaning upon that block of granite there to the
left, I measured the block in question. It is almost five feet five
inches in height, consequently a man who could rest his elbow upon it
must be at least six feet high. The mark of his hand proves that I am
not mistaken. On seeing that he had brushed away the snow which covered
the plank, I asked myself what he had used; I thought that it might be
his cap, and the mark left by the peak proves that I was right. Finally,
if I have discovered the color and the material of his overcoat, it is
only because when he wiped the wet board, some splinters of the wood
tore off a few tiny flakes of brown wool, which I have found, and which
will figure in the trial. But what does this amount to, after all?
Nothing. We have only discovered the first clues of the affair. Still,
we are on the right scent--so, forward then!”

The old officer was electrified, and, like an echo, he repeated:
“Forward!”




IV

That night the vagabonds, who had taken refuge in the neighborhood of
the Poivriere, had a very bad time of it; for while those who managed
to sleep were disturbed by frightful dreams of a police raid, those who
remained awake witnessed some strange incidents, well calculated to
fill their minds with terror. On hearing the shots fired inside Mother
Chupin’s drinking den, most of the vagrants concluded that there had
been a collision between the police and some of their comrades, and they
immediately began prowling about, eagerly listening and watching, and
ready to take flight at the least sign of danger. At first they could
discover no particular reasons for alarm. But later on, at about two
o’clock in the morning, just as they were beginning to feel secure
again, the fog lifted a little, and they witnessed a phenomenon well
calculated to arouse anxiety.

Upon the unoccupied tract of land, which the people of the neighborhood
called the “plain,” a small but very bright light was seen describing
the most capricious evolutions. It moved here and there without any
apparent aim, tracing the most inexplicable zigzags, sometimes sinking
to the earth, sometimes rising to a height of four or five feet, at
others remaining quite motionless, and the next second flying off like
a ball. In spite of the place and the season of the year, the less
ignorant among vagabonds believed the light to be some ignis fatuus, one
of those luminous meteors that raise from the marshes and float about
in the atmosphere at the bidding of the wind. In point of fact, however,
this ignis fatuus was the lantern by the light of which the two police
agents were pursuing their investigations.

After thus suddenly revealing his capacity to his first disciple, Lecoq
found himself involved in a cruel perplexity. He had not the boldness
and promptness of decision which is the gift of a prosperous past, and
was hesitating between two courses, both equally reasonable, and both
offering strong probabilities of success. He stood between two paths,
that made by the two women on the one side, and that made by the
accomplice on the other. Which should he take? For he could not hope
to follow both. Seated upon the log where the women had rested a few
moments before, with his hand pressed upon his forehead, he reflected
and weighed the chances.

“If I follow the man I shall learn nothing that I do not know already.
He has gone to hover round the party; he has followed them at a
distance, he has seen them lock up his accomplice, and he is undoubtedly
prowling round about the station house. If I hurried in pursuit, could I
hope to overtake and capture him? No; too long a time has elapsed.”

Father Absinthe listened to this monologue with intense curiosity,
as anxious as an unsophisticated person who, having questioned a
clairvoyant in regard to some lost articles, is waiting the oracle’s
response.

“To follow the women,” continued the young man, “to what would that
lead? Perhaps to an important discovery, perhaps to nothing.”

However, he preferred the unknown, which, with all its chances of
failure, had chances of success as well. He rose, his course was
decided.

“Father Absinthe,” said he, “we are going to follow the footprints of
these two women, and wherever they lead us we will go.”

Inspired with equal ardor they began their walk. At the end of the path
upon which they had entered they fancied they observed, as in some magic
glass, the one the fruits, the other the glory of success. They hurried
forward. At first it was only play to follow the distinct footprints
that led toward the Seine. But it was not long before they were obliged
to proceed more slowly.

On leaving the waste ground they arrived at the outer limits of
civilization, so to speak; and strange footprints mingled constantly
with the footprints of the fugitives, at times even effacing them. In
many spots, either on account of exposure or the nature of the soil,
the thaw had completed its work, and there were large patches of ground
entirely free from snow. In such cases they lost the trail, and it
required all Lecoq’s sagacity and all his companion’s good-will to find
it again.

On such occasions Father Absinthe planted his cane in the earth, near
the last footprint that had been discovered, and Lecoq and himself
hunted all over the ground around this point, much after the fashion
of a couple of bloodhounds thrown off the scent. Then it was that the
lantern moved about so strangely. More than a dozen times, in spite of
all their efforts, they would have lost the clue entirely had it not
been for the elegant shoes worn by the lady with the little feet. These
had such small and extremely high heels that the impression they left
could not be mistaken. They sank down three or four inches in the snow,
or the mud, and their tell-tale impress remained as clear and distinct
as that of a seal.

Thanks to these heels, the pursuers were able to discover that the two
fugitives had not gone up the Rue de Patay, as might have been supposed.
Probably they had considered this street too frequented, and too well
lighted. They had only crossed it, just below the Rue de la Croix-Rouge,
and had profited by an empty space between two houses to regain the open
ground.

“Certainly these women were well acquainted with the locality,” murmured
Lecoq.

Indeed, the topography of the district evidently had no secrets for
them, for, on quitting the Rue de Patay, they had immediately turned
to the right, so as to avoid several large excavations, from which a
quantity of brick clay had been dug.

But at last the trail was recovered, and the detectives followed it as
far as the Rue du Chevaleret. Here the footprints abruptly ceased. Lecoq
discovered eight or ten footmarks left by the woman who wore the broad
shoes, but that was all. Hereabout, moreover, the condition of the
ground was not calculated to facilitate an exploration of this nature.
There had been a great deal of passing to and fro in the Rue du
Chevaleret, and not merely was there scarcely any snow left on the
footpaths, but the middle of the street was transformed into a river of
slush.

“Did these people recollect at last that the snow might betray them? Did
they take the middle of the road?” grumbled the young police agent.

Certainly they could not have crossed to a vacant space as they had done
just before, for on the other side of the street extended a long factory
wall.

“Ah!” sighed Father Absinthe, “we have our labor for our pains.”

But Lecoq possessed a temperament that refused to acknowledge defeat.
Animated by the cold anger of a man who sees the object which he was
about to seize disappear from before his eyes, he recommenced his
search, and was well repaid for his efforts.

“I understand!” he cried suddenly, “I comprehend--I see!”

Father Absinthe drew near. He did not see nor divine anything! but he no
longer doubted his companion’s powers.

“Look there,” said Lecoq; “what are those marks?”

“Marks left by the wheels of some carriage that plainly turned here.”

“Very well, papa, these tracks explain everything. When they reached
this spot, our fugitives saw the light of an approaching cab, which
was returning from the centre of Paris. It was empty, and proved their
salvation. They waited, and when it came nearer they hailed the driver.
No doubt they promised him a handsome fare; this is indeed evident,
since he consented to go back again. He turned round here; they got into
the vehicle, and that is why the footprints go no further.”

This explanation did not please Lecoq’s companion. “Have we made any
great progress now that we know that?” he asked.

Lecoq could not restrain an impulse to shrug his shoulders. “Did you
expect that the tracks made by the fugitives would lead us through Paris
and up to their very doors?” he asked.

“No; but--”

“Then what would you ask more? Do you think that I shall not know how to
find this driver to-morrow? He was returning with his empty vehicle, his
day’s work was ended; hence, his stable is in the neighborhood. Do you
suppose that he will have forgotten that he took up two persons in the
Rue du Chevaleret? He will tell us where he drove them; but that will
not do us any good, for, of course, they will not have given him their
real address. But at all events he can probably give us a description
of them, tell us how they were dressed, describe their appearance, their
manner, and their age. And with that, and what we already know--”

An eloquent gesture expressed the remainder of his thought, then he
added: “We must now go back to the Poivriere, and go quickly. And you,
my friend, may now extinguish your lantern.”

While doing his best to keep pace with his companion, who was in such
haste to get back to the Poivriere that he almost ran, Father Absinthe’s
thoughts were as busy as his legs, and an entirely new train of ideas
was awakened in his mind.

During the twenty-five years that he had been connected with the police
force, the good man--to use his own expression--had seen many of his
colleagues walk over him and win, after only a few months’ work, a
promotion that his long years of service had not gained for him. In
these cases he had not failed to accuse his superiors of injustice, and
his fortunate rivals of gross flattery. In his opinion, seniority was
the only claim to advancement--the only, the best, the most respectable
claim; and he was wont to sum up all his opinions, all his grief and
bitterness of mind in one phrase: “It is infamous to pass over an old
member of the service.”

To-night, however, Father Absinthe discovered that there is something
else in the world besides seniority, and sufficient reasons for what
he had formerly regarded as favoritism. He secretly confessed that this
newcomer whom he had treated so carelessly had just followed up a clue
as he, veteran though he was, would never have succeeded in doing.

But communing with himself was not this good man’s forte; he soon grew
weary of reflection; and on reaching a place where they were obliged to
proceed more slowly on account of the badness of the road, he deemed
it a favorable opportunity to resume the conversation. “You are silent,
comrade,” he ventured to remark, “and one might swear that you were not
exactly pleased.”

This surprising result of the old man’s reflections would have amazed
Lecoq, if his mind had not been a hundred leagues away. “No, I am not
pleased,” he responded.

“And why, pray? Only ten minutes ago you were as gay as a lark.”

“Then I did not see the misfortune that threatens us.”

“A misfortune!”

“A very great misfortune. Do you not perceive that the weather has
undesirably changed. It is evident that the wind is now coming from the
south. The fog has disappeared, but the sky is cloudy and threatening.
It will rain in less than an hour.”

“A few drops are falling now; I just felt one.”

These words produced on Lecoq much the same effect as a whip-up on a
spirited horse. He sprang forward, and, adopting a still more hurried
pace, exclaimed: “Let us make haste! let us make haste!”

The old police agent followed him as in duty bound; but his mind was, if
possible, still more troubled by the replies of his young companion. A
great misfortune! The wind from the south! Rain! He did not, he could
not see the connection.

Greatly puzzled, and not a little anxious, Father Absinthe asked for an
explanation, although he had but little more breath than was absolutely
necessary to enable him to continue the forced march he was making.
“Upon my word,” said he, “I have racked my brains--”

His companion took pity on his anxiety. “What!” he exclaimed, as he
still hastened forward, “you do not understand that our investigation,
my success, and your reward, are dependent upon those black clouds which
the wind is driving toward us!”

“Oh!”

“Twenty minutes of merely gentle rain, and our time and labor will be
lost. If it rains, the snow will melt, and then farewell to our proofs.
Let us get on--let us get on more quickly! You know very well that in
such cases words don’t suffice. If we declare to the public prosecutor
that we have seen these footprints, he will ask, where? And what can we
say? If we swear by all the gods that we have seen the footprints of a
man and of two women, the investigating magistrate will say, ‘Let me
see them.’ And who will feel sheepish then? Father Absinthe and Lecoq.
Besides, Gevrol would not fail to declare that we were saying what was
not true, in order to enhance our own value, and humiliate him.”

“What an idea!”

“Faster, papa, faster; you will have all day to-morrow to be indignant.
Perhaps it will not rain. In that case, these perfect, clear, and
easily recognizable footprints will prove the culprits’ ruin. How can
we preserve them? By what process could we solidify them? I would deluge
them with my blood if that could only cause them to congeal.”

Father Absinthe was just then thinking that his share of the labor had
hitherto been the least important; for he had merely held the lantern.
But here was a chance for him to acquire a real and substantial right to
the prospective reward. “I know a method,” said he, “by which one could
preserve these marks in the snow.”

At these words the younger man stopped short. “You know--you?” he
interrupted.

“Yes, I know,” replied the old detective, with the evident satisfaction
of a man who has gained his revenge. “They invented a way at the time of
that affair at the Maison Blanche, last December.”

“I recollect.”

“Ah! well, on the snow in the courtyard there was a footprint that
attracted a detective’s attention. He said that the whole evidence
depended on that mark alone, that it was worth more than ten years’ hard
work in following up the case. Naturally, he desired to preserve it.
They sent for a great chemist--”

“Go on, go on.”

“I have never seen the method put into practise, but an expert told me
all about it, and showed me the mold they obtained. He explained it to
me precisely, on account of my profession.”

Lecoq was trembling with impatience. “And how did they obtain the mold?”
 he asked abruptly.

“Wait: I was just going to explain. They take some of the best gelatine,
and allow it to soak in cold water. When it becomes thoroughly softened,
they heat it until it forms a liquid, of moderate consistency. Then when
it is just cool enough, they pour a nice little covering of it upon the
footprint.”

Lecoq felt the irritation that is natural to a person who has just heard
a bad joke, or who has lost his time in listening to a fool.

“Enough!” he interrupted, angrily. “That method can be found in all the
manuals. It is excellent, no doubt, but how can it serve us? Have you
any gelatine about you?”

“No.”

“Nor have I. You might as well have counseled me to pour melted lead
upon the footprints to fix them.”

They continued their way, and five minutes later, without having
exchanged another word, they reentered the Widow Chupin’s hovel. The
first impulse of the older man would have been to rest to breathe, but
Lecoq did not give him time to do so.

“Make haste: get me a dish--a plate--anything!” cried the young
detective, “and bring me some water; gather together all the boards and
old boxes you can find lying about.”

While his companion was obeying him, Lecoq armed himself with a fragment
of one of the broken bottles, and began scraping away furiously at the
plastered wall that separated the two rooms.

His mind, disconcerted at first by the imminence of this unexpected
catastrophe, a fall of rain, had now regained its equilibrium. He had
reflected, he had thought of a way by which failure might possibly be
averted--and he hoped for ultimate success. When he had accumulated some
seven or eight handfuls of fine plaster dust, he mixed one-half with a
little water so as to form a thin paste, leaving the rest untouched on
the side of the plate.

“Now, papa,” said he, “come and hold the light for me.”

When in the garden, the young man sought for the deepest and most
distinct of the footprints, knelt beside it, and began his experiment,
trembling with anxiety. He first sprinkled upon the impression a fine
coating of dry plaster, and then upon this coating, with infinite care,
he poured his liquid solution drop by drop.

What luck! the experiment was successful! The plaster united in a
homogeneous mass, forming a perfect model of the impression. Thus, after
an hour’s labor, Lecoq possessed half a dozen of these casts, which
might, perhaps, be a little wanting in clearness of outline, but which
were quite perfect enough to be used as evidence.

The young detective’s alarm had been well founded, for it was already
beginning to rain. Still, he had plenty of time to cover a number of the
footprints with the boxes and pieces of board which Father Absinthe had
collected, thus placing them, as it were, beyond the reach of a thaw.
Now he could breathe. The authorities might come, for the most important
part of his task was completed.




V

It was some distance from the Poivriere to the Rue de Chevaleret, even
by way of the plain, and fully four hours had been occupied by Lecoq and
his colleague in collecting their elements of information.

All this while, the Widow Chupin’s abode had remained open, accessible
to any chance visitor. Still, when, on his return, the young police
agent remembered this neglect of elementary precautions, he did not feel
alarmed. Considering all the circumstances, it was very difficult
to believe that any serious harm could have resulted from this
carelessness.

For who would have been likely to visit this drinking-den after
midnight? Its bad name served the purpose of a bulwark. The most daring
vagrants did not drink there without some disquietude, fearing that if
the liquor caused them to lose consciousness, they might be robbed or
perhaps even murdered. Hence, if any one had been attracted to this
notoriously dangerous drinking-shop by the light that streamed through
the open door, it could only have been some very reckless person
returning late at night from the ball at the Rainbow, with a few sous
left in his pocket. But, even then, a single glance inside would have
sufficed to put the bravest to flight.

In less than a second the young police agent had weighed all these
possibilities, concerning which he did not breathe a word to Father
Absinthe. When, little by little, the excitement caused by his
successive hopes and disappointments, and by the accomplishment of the
experiment with the footprints had died away, and he had regained his
usual calm of mind, he made a careful inspection of the abode, and was
by no means satisfied with himself. He had experimented upon Father
Absinthe with his new system of investigation, just as an aspiring
orator tries his powers before his least gifted friends, not before
the cleverest. He had certainly overwhelmed the old veteran by his
superiority; he had literally crushed him. But what great merit, what
wonderful victory was this? Why should he boast of having outwitted
Father Absinthe, one of the least sagacious men in the service?

If he could only have given some startling proofs of his energy or
of his penetration! But, after all, what had he accomplished? Was the
mystery solved? Was his success more than problematical? When one thread
is drawn out, the skein is not untangled. This night would undoubtedly
decide his future as a detective, so he swore that if he could not
conquer his vanity, he would, at least, compel himself to conceal it.
Hence, it was in a very modest tone that he said to his companion: “We
have done all that we can do outside, now, would it not be wise to busy
ourselves with the inside of the house?”

Everything looked exactly in the same state as when the two men left the
room. A candle, with a charred smoking wick, cast its flickering light
upon the same scene of disorder, revealing to view the rigid features of
the three victims. Without losing a moment, Lecoq began to pick up and
study the various objects scattered over the floor. Some of these still
remained intact. The Widow Chupin had recoiled from the expense of a
tiled floor, judging the bare ground upon which the cabin was built
quite good enough for the feet of her customers. This ground, which must
originally have been well beaten down, had, by constant use and damp,
become well-nigh as muddy as the soil outside.

The first fruits of Lecoq’s search were a large salad-bowl and a big
iron spoon, the latter so twisted and bent that it had evidently been
used as a weapon during the conflict. On inspecting the bowl, it became
evident that when the quarrel began the victims were regaling themselves
with the familiar mixture of water, wine, and sugar, known round about
the barrieres as vin a la Frangaise. After the salad-bowl, the two men
picked up five of the weighty glasses ordinarily used in wine-shops, and
which, while looking as though they would contain half a bottle, are
in point of fact so thick at the bottom that they hold next to nothing.
Three of these glasses were broken, two were whole. All of them had
contained wine--the same vin a la Frangaise. This was plain, but for
greater surety, Lecoq applied his tongue to the bluish mixture
remaining in the bottom of each glass. “The deuce!” he muttered, with an
astonished air.

Then he examined successively the surfaces of the three overturned
tables. Upon one of these, the one nearest the fireplace and the window,
the still wet marks of the five glasses, of the salad-bowl, and even
of the spoons could be distinguished. Lecoq very properly regarded
this circumstance as a matter of the greatest importance, for it proved
clearly enough that five persons had emptied the salad-bowl in company.
Who were these five persons?

“Oh! oh!” suddenly exclaimed Lecoq in two entirely different tones.
“Then the two women could not have been with the murderer!”

A very simple mode of discovery had presented itself to his mind. It
was to ascertain if there were any other glasses, and what they had
contained. After a fresh search on the floor, a sixth glass was found,
similar in form to the others, but much smaller. Its smell showed that
it had contained brandy. Then these two women had not been with the
murderer, and therefore he could not have fought because the other
men had insulted them. This discovery proved the inaccuracy of Lecoq’s
original suppositions. It was an unexpected check, and he was mourning
over it in silence, when Father Absinthe, who had not ceased ferreting
about, uttered a cry of surprise.

The young man turned; he saw that his companion had become very pale.
“What is it?” he asked.

“Some one has been here in our absence.”

“Impossible!”

It was not impossible--it was true. When Gevrol had torn the apron
off Widow Chupin’s head he had thrown it upon the steps of the stairs;
neither of the police agents had since touched it. And yet the pockets
of this apron were now turned inside out; this was a proof, this was
evidence. At this discovery Lecoq was overcome with consternation, and
the contraction of his features revealed the struggle going on in
his mind. “Who could have been here?” he murmured. “Robbers? That is
improbable.”

Then, after a long silence which his companion took good care not to
interrupt, he added: “The person who came here, who dared to penetrate
into this abode and face the corpses of these murdered men--this person
could have been none other than the accomplice. But it is not enough to
suspect this, it is necessary to know it. I must--I will know it!”

They searched for a long time, and it was not until after an hour of
earnest work that, in front of the door forced open by the police, they
discovered in the mud, just inside the marks made by Gevrol’s tread, a
footprint that bore a close resemblance to those left by the man who
had entered the garden. They compared the impressions and recognized the
same designs formed by the nails upon the sole of the boot.

“It must have been the accomplice!” exclaimed Lecoq. “He watched us,
he saw us go away, and then he entered. But why? What pressing,
irresistible necessity made him decide to brave such imminent danger?”
 He seized his companion’s hand, nearly crushing it in his excitement:
“Ah! I know why!” continued he, violently. “I understand only too well.
Some article that would have served to throw light on this horrible
affair had been left or forgotten, or lost here, and to obtain it, to
find it, he decided to run this terrible risk. And to think that it was
my fault, my fault alone, that this convincing proof escaped us! And
I thought myself so shrewd! What a lesson! The door should have been
locked; any fool would have thought of it--” Here he checked himself,
and remained with open mouth and distended eyes, pointing with his
finger to one of the corners of the room.

“What is the matter?” asked his frightened companion.

Lecoq made no reply, but slowly, and with the stiff movements of a
somnambulist, he approached the spot to which he had pointed, stooped,
picked up something, and said: “My folly is not deserving of such luck.”

The object he had found was an earring composed of a single large
diamond. The setting was of marvelous workmanship. “This diamond,”
 declared Lecoq, after a moment’s examination, “must be worth at least
five or six thousand francs.”

“Are you in earnest?”

“I think I could swear to it.”

He would not have troubled about such a preamble as “I think” a few
hours before, but the blunder he had made was a lesson that would not be
forgotten so long as he lived.

“Perhaps it was that same diamond earring that the accomplice came to
seek,” ventured Father Absinthe.

“The supposition is scarcely admissible. In that case, he would not have
sought for it in Mother Chupin’s apron. No, he must have been seeking
for something else--a letter, for example.”

The older man was not listening; he had taken the earring, and was
examining it in his turn. “And to think,” he murmured, astonished by
the brilliancy of the stone, “to think that a woman who had ten thousand
francs’ worth of jewels in her ears would have come to the Poivriere.
Who would have believed it?”

Lecoq shook his head thoughtfully. “Yes, it is very strange, very
improbable, very absurd. And yet we shall see many things quite as
strange if we ever arrive--which I very much doubt--at a solution of
this mysterious affair.”

Day was breaking, cold, cheerless, and gloomy, when Lecoq and his
colleague concluded their investigation. There was not an inch of space
that had not been explored, carefully examined and studied, one might
almost say, with a magnifying glass. There now only remained to draw up
the report.

The younger man seated himself at the table, and, with the view of
making his recital as intelligible as possible, he began by sketching a
plan of the scene of the murder.

[[Graphic Omitted]]

It will be seen that in the memoranda appended to this explanatory
diagram, Lecoq had not once written his own name. In noting the things
that he had imagined or discovered, he referred to himself simply as one
of the police. This was not so much modesty as calculation. By hiding
one’s self on well-chosen occasions, one gains greater notoriety when
one emerges from the shade. It was also through cunning that he gave
Gevrol such a prominent position. These tactics, rather subtle, perhaps,
but after all perfectly fair, could not fail to call attention to the
man who had shown himself so efficient when the efforts of his chief had
been merely confined to breaking open the door.

The document Lecoq drew up was not a _proces-verbal_, a formal act
reserved for the officers of judiciary police; it was a simple report,
that would be admitted under the title of an inquiry, and yet the young
detective composed it with quite as much care as a general would have
displayed in drawing up the bulletin of his first victory.

While Lecoq was drawing and writing, Father Absinthe leaned over his
shoulder to watch him. The plan amazed that worthy man. He had seen a
great deal; but he had always supposed that it was necessary to be an
engineer, an architect, or, at least, a carpenter, to execute such work.
Not at all. With a tape-line with which to take some measurements, and
a bit of board in place of a rule, his inexperienced colleague had
soon accomplished the miracle. Father Absinthe’s respect for Lecoq was
thereby greatly augmented. It is true that the worthy veteran had not
noticed the explosion of the young police agent’s vanity, nor his return
to his former modest demeanor. He had not observed his alarm, nor his
perplexity, nor his lack of penetration.

After a few moments, Father Absinthe ceased watching his companion. He
felt weary after the labors of the night, his head was burning, and
he shivered and his knees trembled. Perhaps, though he was by no means
sensitive, he felt the influence of the horrors that surrounded him, and
which seemed more sinister than ever in the bleak light of morning.
He began to ferret in the cupboards, and at last succeeded in
discovering--oh, marvelous fortune!--a bottle of brandy, three parts
full. He hesitated for an instant, then he poured out a glass, and
drained it at a single draft.

“Will you have some?” he inquired of his companion. “It is not a very
famous brand, to be sure; but it is just as good, it makes one’s blood
circulate and enlivens one.”

Lecoq refused; he did not need to be enlivened. All his faculties were
hard at work. He intended that, after a single perusal of his report,
the investigating magistrate should say: “Let the officer who drew up
this document be sent for.” It must be remembered that Lecoq’s future
depended upon such an order. Accordingly, he took particular care to be
brief, clear, and concise, to plainly indicate how his suspicions on the
subject of the murder had been aroused, how they had increased, and how
they had been confirmed. He explained by what series of deductions he
had succeeded in establishing a theory which, if it was not the
truth, was at least plausible enough to serve as the basis for further
investigation.

Then he enumerated the articles of conviction ranged on the table before
him. There were the flakes of brown wool collected upon the plank, the
valuable earring, the models of the different footprints in the garden,
and the Widow Chupin’s apron with its pockets turned inside out. There
was also the murderer’s revolver, with two barrels discharged and three
still loaded. This weapon, although not of an ornamental character, was
still a specimen of highly finished workmanship. It bore the name of one
Stephens, 14 Skinner Street, a well-known London gunsmith.

Lecoq felt convinced that by examining the bodies of the victims he
would obtain other and perhaps very valuable information; but he did not
dare venture upon such a course. Besides his own inexperience in such a
matter, there was Gevrol to be thought of, and the inspector, furious
at his own mistake, would not fail to declare that, by changing the
attitude of the bodies, Lecoq had rendered a satisfactory examination by
the physicians impossible.

The young detective accordingly tried to console himself for his forced
inaction in this respect, and he was rereading his report, modifying
a few expressions, when Father Absinthe, who was standing upon the
threshold of the outer door, called to him.

“Is there anything new?” asked Lecoq.

“Yes,” was the reply. “Here come Gevrol and two of our comrades with the
commissary of police and two other gentlemen.”

It was, indeed, the commissary who was approaching, interested but
not disturbed by this triple murder which was sure to make his
arrondissement the subject of Parisian conversation during the next few
days. Why, indeed, should he be troubled about it? For Gevrol, whose
opinion in such matters might be regarded as an authority, had taken
care to reassure him when he went to arouse him from his slumbers.

“It was only a fight between some old offenders; former jail birds,
habitues of the Poivriere,” he had said, adding sententiously: “If all
these ruffians would kill one another, we might have some little peace.”

He added that as the murderer had been arrested and placed in
confinement, there was nothing urgent about the case. Accordingly, the
commissary thought there was no harm in taking another nap and waiting
until morning before beginning the inquiry. He had seen the murderer,
reported the case to the prefecture, and now he was coming--leisurely
enough--accompanied by two physicians, appointed by the authorities
to draw up a _medico-legal_ report in all such cases. The party also
comprised a sergeant-major of the 53d regiment of infantry of the line,
who had been summoned by the commissary to identify, if possible, the
murdered man who wore a uniform, for if one might believe the number
engraved upon the buttons of his overcoat, he belonged to the 53d
regiment, now stationed at the neighboring fort.

As the party approached it was evident that Inspector Gevrol was even
less disturbed than the commissary. He whistled as he walked along,
flourishing his cane, which never left his hand, and already laughing
in his sleeve over the discomfiture of the presumptuous fool who had
desired to remain to glean, where he, the experienced and skilful
officer, had perceived nothing. As soon as he was within speaking
distance, the inspector called to Father Absinthe, who, after warning
Lecoq, remained on the threshold, leaning against the door-post, puffing
his pipe, as immovable as a sphinx.

“Ah, well, old man!” cried Gevrol, “have you any great melodrama, very
dark and very mysterious, to relate to us?”

“I have nothing to relate myself,” replied the old detective, without
even drawing his pipe from his lips, “I am too stupid, that is perfectly
understood. But Monsieur Lecoq will tell you something that will
astonish you.”

The prefix, “monsieur,” which the old police agent used in speaking
of his colleague, displeased Gevrol so much that he pretended not to
understand. “Who are you speaking of?” he asked abruptly.

“Of my colleague, of course, who is now busy finishing his report--of
Monsieur Lecoq.” Quite unintentionally, the worthy fellow had certainly
become the young police agent’s godfather. From that day forward,
for his enemies as well as for his friends, he was and he remained
“Monsieur” Lecoq.

“Ah! ah!” said the inspector, whose hearing was evidently impaired. “Ah,
he has discovered--”

“The pot of roses which others did not scent, General.” By this remark,
Father Absinthe made an enemy of his superior officer. But he cared
little for that: Lecoq had become his deity, and no matter what the
future might reserve, the old veteran had resolved to follow his young
colleague’s fortunes.

“We’ll see about that,” murmured the inspector, mentally resolving to
have an eye on this youth whom success might transform into a rival. He
said no more, for the little party which he preceded had now overtaken
him, and he stood aside to make way for the commissary of police.

This commissary was far from being a novice. He had served for many
years, and yet he could not repress a gesture of horror as he entered
the Poivriere. The sergeant-major of the 53d, who followed him, an old
soldier, decorated and medaled--who had smelt powder many scores of
times--was still more overcome. He grew as pale as the corpses lying on
the ground, and was obliged to lean against the wall for support. The
two physicians alone retained their stoical indifference.

Lecoq had risen, his report in his hand; he bowed, and assuming a
respectful attitude, was waiting to be questioned.

“You must have passed a frightful night,” said the commissary, kindly;
“and quite unnecessarily, since any investigation was superfluous.”

“I think, however,” replied the young police agent, having recourse
to all his diplomacy, “that my time has not been entirely lost. I have
acted according to the instructions of my superior officer; I have
searched the premises thoroughly, and I have ascertained many things.
I have, for example, acquired the certainty that the murderer had
a friend, possibly an accomplice, of whom I can give quite a close
description. He must have been of middle age, and wore, if I am not
mistaken, a soft cap and a brown woolen overcoat: as for his boots--”

“Zounds!” exclaimed Gevrol, “and I--” He stopped short, like a man whose
impulse had exceeded his discretion, and who would have gladly recalled
his words.

“And you?” inquired the commissary, “pray, what do you mean?”

The inspector had gone too far to draw back, and, unwittingly, was now
obliged to act as his own executioner. “I was about to mention,” he
said, “that this morning, an hour or so ago, while I was waiting for
you, sir, before the station-house, at the Barriere d’Italie, where the
murderer is confined, I noticed close by an individual whose appearance
was not unlike that of the man described by Lecoq. This man seemed to
be very intoxicated, for he reeled and staggered against the walls. He
tried to cross the street, but fell down in the middle of it, in such a
position that he would inevitably have been crushed by the first passing
vehicle.”

Lecoq turned away his head; he did not wish them to read in his eyes how
perfectly he understood the whole game.

“Seeing this,” pursued Gevrol, “I called two men and asked them to
aid me in raising the poor devil. We went up to him; he had apparently
fallen asleep: we shook him--we made him sit up; we told him that he
could not remain there, but he immediately flew into a furious rage. He
swore at us, threatened us, and began fighting us. And, on my word, we
had to take him to the station-house, and leave him there to recover
from the effects of his drunken debauch.”

“Did you shut him up in the same cell with the murderer?” inquired
Lecoq.

“Naturally. You know very well that there are only two cages in the
station-house at the barriere--one for men and the other for women;
consequently--”

The commissary seemed thoughtful. “Ah! that’s very unfortunate,” he
stammered; “and there is no remedy.”

“Excuse me, there is one,” observed Gevrol, “I can send one of my men to
the station-house with an order to detain the drunken man--”

Lecoq interposed with a gesture: “Trouble lost,” he said coldly. “If
this individual is an accomplice, he has got sober by now--rest assured
of that, and is already far away.”

“Then what is to be done?” asked the inspector, with an ironical air.
“May one be permitted to ask the advice of Monsieur Lecoq.”

“I think chance offered us a splendid opportunity, and we did not know
how to seize it; and that the best thing we can do now is to give over
mourning, and prepare to profit by the next opportunity that presents
itself.”

Gevrol was, however, determined to send one of his men to the
station-house; and it was not until the messenger had started that Lecoq
commenced the reading of his report. He read it rapidly, refraining
as much as possible from placing the decisive proofs in strong relief,
reserving these for his own benefit; but so strong was the logic of his
deductions that he was frequently interrupted by approving remarks from
the commissary and the two physicians.

Gevrol, who alone represented the opposition, shrugged his shoulders
till they were well-nigh dislocated, and grew literally green with
jealousy.

“I think that you alone, young man, have judged correctly in this
affair,” said the commissary when Lecoq had finished reading. “I may be
mistaken; but your explanations have made me alter my opinion concerning
the murderer’s attitude while I was questioning him (which was only for
a moment). He refused, obstinately refused, to answer my questions, and
wouldn’t even give me his name.”

The commissary was silent for a moment, reviewing the past circumstances
in his mind, and it was in a serious tone that he eventually added: “We
are, I feel convinced, in presence of one of those mysterious crimes the
causes of which are beyond the reach of human sagacity--this strikes me
as being one of those enigmatical cases which human justice never can
reach.” Lecoq made no audible rejoinder; but he smiled to himself and
thought: “We will see about that.”




VI

No consultation held at the bedside of a dying man ever took place in
the presence of two physicians so utterly unlike each other as those who
accompanied the commissary of police to the Poivriere.

One of them, a tall old man with a bald head, wearing a broad-brimmed
hat, and an overcoat of antique cut, was evidently one of those modest
savants encountered occasionally in the byways of Paris--one of those
healers devoted to their art, who too often die in obscurity, after
rendering immense services to mankind. He had the gracious calmness of a
man who, having seen so much of human misery, has nothing left to learn,
and no troubled conscience could have possibly sustained his searching
glance, which was as keen as his lancet.

His colleague--young, fresh-looking, light-haired, and jovial--was
somewhat foppishly attired; and his white hands were encased in handsome
fur gloves. There was a soft self-satisfied smile on his face, and
he had the manners of those practitioners who, for profit’s sake,
invariably recommend the infallible panaceas invented each month in
chemical laboratories and advertised ad nauseam in the back pages of
newspapers. He had probably written more than one article upon “Medicine
for the use of the people”; puffing various mixtures, pills, ointments,
and plasters for the benefit of their respective inventors.

“I will request you, gentlemen,” said the commissary of police, “to
begin your duties by examining the victim who wears a military costume.
Here is a sergeant-major summoned to answer a question of identity, whom
I must send back to his quarters as soon as possible.”

The two physicians responded with a gesture of assent, and aided by
Father Absinthe and another agent of police, they lifted the body and
laid it upon two tables, which had previously been placed end to end.
They were not obliged to make any note of the attitude in which they
found the body, since the unfortunate man, who was still alive when the
police entered the cabin, had been moved before he expired.

“Approach, sergeant,” ordered the commissary, “and look carefully at
this man.”

It was with very evident repugnance that the old soldier obeyed.

“What is the uniform that he wears?”

“It is the uniform of the 2d battalion of the 53d regiment of the line.”

“Do you recognize him?”

“Not at all.”

“Are you sure that he does not belong to your regiment?”

“I can not say for certain: there are some conscripts at the Depot whom
I have never seen. But I am ready to swear that he had never formed
part of the 2d battalion--which, by the way, is mine, and in which I am
sergeant-major.”

Lecoq, who had hitherto remained in the background, now stepped forward.
“It might be as well,” he suggested, “to note the numbers marked on the
other articles of clothing.”

“That is a very good idea,” said the commissary, approvingly.

“Here is his shako,” added the young police agent. “It bears the number
3,129.”

The officials followed Lecoq’s advice, and soon discovered that each
article of clothing worn by the unfortunate man bore a different number.

“The deuce!” murmured the sergeant; “there is every indication--But it
is very singular.”

Invited to consider what he was going to say, the brave trooper
evidently made an effort to collect his intellectual faculties. “I would
stake my epaulets that this fellow never was a soldier,” he said at
last. “He must have disguised himself to take part in the Shrove Sunday
carnival.”

“Why do you think that?”

“Oh, I know it better than I can explain it. I know it by his hair, by
his nails, by his whole appearance, by a certain _je ne sais quoi_; in
short, I know it by everything and by nothing. Why look, the poor devil
did not even know how to put on his shoes; he has laced his gaiters
wrong side outwards.” Evidently further doubt was impossible after this
evidence, which confirmed the truth of Lecoq’s first remark to Inspector
Gevrol.

“Still, if this person was a civilian, how could he have procured this
clothing?” insisted the commissary. “Could he have borrowed it from the
men in your company?”

“Yes, that is possible; but it is difficult to believe.”

“Is there no way by which you could ascertain?”

“Oh! very easily. I have only to run over to the fort and order an
inspection of clothing.”

“Do so,” approved the commissary; “it would be an excellent way of
getting at the truth.”

But Lecoq had just thought of a method quite as convincing, and much
more prompt. “One word, sergeant,” said he, “isn’t cast off military
clothing sold by public auction?”

“Yes; at least once a year, after the inspection.”

“And are not the articles thus sold marked in some way?”

“Assuredly.”

“Then see if there isn’t some mark of the kind on this poor wretch’s
uniform.”

The sergeant turned up the collar of the coat and examined the
waist-band of the pantaloons. “You are right,” he said, “these are
condemned garments.”

The eyes of the young police agent sparkled. “We must then believe that
the poor devil purchased this costume,” he observed. “Where? Necessarily
at the Temple, from one of the dealers in military clothing. There are
only five or six of these establishments. I will go from one to another
of them, and the person who sold these clothes will certainly recognize
them by some trade mark.”

“And that will assist us very much,” growled Gevrol. The sergeant-major,
to his great relief, now received permission to retire, but not without
having been warned that very probably the commissary would require his
deposition. The moment had come to search the garments of the pretended
soldier, and the commissary, who performed this duty himself, hoped that
some clue as to the man’s identity would be forthcoming. He proceeded
with his task, at the same time dictating to one of the men a
_proces-verbal_ of the search; that is to say, a minute description of
all the articles he found upon the dead man’s person. In the right hand
trousers pocket some tobacco, a pipe, and a few matches were found; in
the left hand one, a linen handkerchief of good quality, but unmarked,
and a soiled leather pocket-book, containing seven francs and sixty
centimes.

There appeared to be nothing more, and the commissary was expressing
his regret, when, on carefully examining the pocket-book he found a
compartment which had at first escaped his notice, being hidden by a
leather flap. This compartment contained a carefully folded paper. The
commissary unfolded it and read the contents aloud:


“My dear Gustave,--To-morrow, Sunday evening, do not fail to come to the
ball at the Rainbow, according to our agreement. If you have no money
pass by my house, and I will leave some with the concierge, who will
give it to you.

“Be at the ball by eight o’clock. If I am not already there, it will
not be long before I make my appearance. Everything is going on
satisfactorily.

“Lacheneur.”


Alas! what did this letter reveal? Only that the dead man’s name was
Gustave; that he had some connection with a man named Lacheneur, who had
advanced him money for a certain object; and that they had met at the
Rainbow some hours before the murder.

It was little--very little--but still it was something. It was a clue;
and in this absolute darkness even the faintest gleam of light was
eagerly welcomed.

“Lacheneur!” growled Gevrol; “the poor devil uttered that name in his
last agony.”

“Precisely,” insisted Father Absinthe, “and he declared that he wished
to revenge himself upon him. He accused him of having drawn him into a
trap. Unfortunately, death cut his story short.”

Lecoq was silent. The commissary of police had handed him the letter,
and he was studying it with the closest attention. The paper on which
it was written was of the ordinary kind; the ink was blue. In one of the
corners was a half-effaced stamp, of which one could just distinguish
the word--Beaumarchais.

This was enough for Lecoq. “This letter,” he thought, “was certainly
written in a cafe on the Boulevard Beaumarchais. In which one? I must
ascertain that point, for this Lacheneur must be found.”

While the agents of the prefecture were gathered around the commissary,
holding council and deliberating, the physicians began their delicate
and disagreeable task. With the assistance of Father Absinthe, they
removed the clothing of the pretended soldier, and then, with sleeves
rolled up, they bent over their “subject” like surgeons in the schools
of anatomy, and examined, inspected, and appraised him physically.
Very willingly would the younger doctor have dispensed with these
formalities, which he considered very ridiculous, and entirely
unnecessary; but the old physician had too high a regard for his
profession, and for the duty he had been called upon to fulfil, to
neglect the slightest detail. Minutely, and with the most scrupulous
exactitude, he noted the height of the dead man, his supposed age, the
nature of his temperament, the color and length of his hair, and the
degree of development of his muscular system.

Then the doctors passed to an examination of the wound. Lecoq had judged
correctly. The medical men declared it to be a fracture of the base
of the skull. It could, they stated, only have been caused by some
instrument with a very broad surface, or by a violent knock of the head
against some hard substance of considerable magnitude.

But no weapon, other than the revolver, had been found; and it was
evidently not heavy enough to produce such a wound. There must, then,
necessarily, have been a hand-to-hand struggle between the pretended
soldier and the murderer; and the latter, seizing his adversary by the
throat, had dashed him violently against the wall. The presence of some
very tiny but very numerous spots of extravasated blood about the neck
made this theory extremely plausible.

No other wound, not even a bruise or a scratch, was to be found. Hence,
it became evident that this terrible struggle must have been exceedingly
short. The murder of the pretended soldier must have been consummated
between the moment when the squad of police heard the shrieks of despair
and the moment when Lecoq peered through the shutter and saw the victim
fall.

The examination of the other murdered man required different but
even greater precautions than those adopted by the doctors in their
inspection of the pseudo soldier. The position of these two victims
had been respected; they were still lying across the hearth as they had
fallen, and their attitude was a matter of great importance, since it
might have decisive bearing on the case. Now, this attitude was such
that one could not fail to be impressed with the idea that with both
these men death had been instantaneous. They were both stretched out
upon their backs, their limbs extended, and their hands wide open.

No contraction or extension of the muscles, no trace of conflict could
be perceived; it seemed evident that they had been taken unawares, the
more so as their faces expressed the most intense terror.

“Thus,” said the old doctor, “we may reasonably suppose that they were
stupefied by some entirely unexpected, strange, and frightful spectacle.
I have come across this terrified expression depicted upon the faces of
dead people more than once. I recollect noticing it upon the features of
a woman who died suddenly from the shock she experienced when one of
her neighbors, with the view of playing her a trick, entered her house
disguised as a ghost.”

Lecoq followed the physician’s explanations, and tried to make them
agree with the vague hypotheses that were revolving in his own brain.
But who could these individuals be? Would they, in death, guard the
secret of their identity, as the other victim had done?

The first subject examined by the physicians was over fifty years of
age. His hair was very thin and quite gray and his face was closely
shaven, excepting a thick tuft of hair on his rather prominent chin.
He was very poorly clad, wearing a soiled woolen blouse and a pair of
dilapidated trousers hanging in rags over his boots, which were very
much trodden down at the heels. The old doctor declared that this man
must have been instantly killed by a bullet. The size of the circular
wound, the absence of blood around its edge, and the blackened and
burnt state of the flesh demonstrated this fact with almost mathematical
precision.

The great difference that exists in wounds made by firearms, according
to the distance from which the death-dealing missile comes, was seen
when the physicians began to examine the last of the murdered men. The
ball that had caused the latter’s death had scarcely crossed a yard of
space before reaching him, and his wound was not nearly so hideous in
aspect as the other’s. This individual, who was at least fifteen years
younger than his companion, was short and remarkably ugly; his face,
which was quite beardless, being pitted all over by the smallpox. His
garb was such as is worn by the worst frequenters of the barriere. His
trousers were of a gray checked material, and his blouse, turned back at
the throat, was blue. It was noticed that his boots had been blackened
quite recently. The smart glazed cap that lay on the floor beside him
was in harmony with his carefully curled hair and gaudy necktie.

These were the only facts that the physicians’ report set forth in
technical terms, this was the only information obtained by the most
careful investigation. The two men’s pockets were explored and turned
inside out; but they contained nothing that gave the slightest clue to
their identity, either as regards name, social position, or profession.
There was not even the slightest indication on any of these points, not
a letter, nor an address, not a fragment of paper, nothing--not even
such common articles of personal use, as a tobacco pouch, a knife, or a
pipe which might be recognized, and thus establish the owner’s identity.
A little tobacco in a paper bag, a couple of pocket handkerchiefs that
were unmarked, a packet of cigarettes--these were the only articles
discovered beyond the money which the victims carried loose in their
pockets. On this point, it should be mentioned that the elder man had
sixty-seven francs about him, and the younger one, two louis.

Rarely had the police found themselves in the presence of so strange an
affair, without the slightest clue to guide them. Of course, there was
the fact itself, as evidenced by the bodies of the three victims;
but the authorities were quite ignorant of the circumstances that had
attended and of the motive that had inspired the crime. Certainly, they
might hope with the powerful means of investigation at their disposal
to finally arrive at the truth in the course of time, and after repeated
efforts. But, in the mean while, all was mystery, and so strangely did
the case present itself that it could not safely be said who was really
responsible for the horrible tragedy at the Poivriere.

The murderer had certainly been arrested; but if he persisted in his
obstinacy, how were they to ascertain his name? He protested that he had
merely killed in self-defense. How could it be shown that such was not
the case? Nothing was known concerning the victims; one of whom had with
his dying breath accused himself. Then again, an inexplicable influence
tied the Widow Chupin’s tongue. Two women, one of whom had lost an
earring valued at 5,000 francs, had witnessed the struggle--then
disappeared. An accomplice, after two acts of unheard-of audacity, had
also made his escape. And all these people--the women, the murderer,
the keeper of the saloon, the accomplice, and the victims--were equally
strange and mysterious, equally liable not to be what they seemed.

Perhaps the commissary of police thought he would spend a very
unpleasant quarter of an hour at the prefecture when he reported the
case. Certainly, he spoke of the crime in a very despondent tone.

“It will now be best,” he said at last, “to transport these three bodies
to the Morgue. There they will doubtless be identified.” He reflected
for a moment, and then added: “And to think that one of these dead men
is perhaps Lacheneur himself!”

“That is scarcely possible,” said Lecoq. “The spurious soldier, being
the last to die, had seen his companions fall. If he had supposed
Lacheneur to be dead, he would not have spoken of vengeance.”

Gevrol, who for the past two hours had pretended to pay no attention to
the proceedings, now approached. He was not the man to yield even to the
strongest evidence. “If Monsieur, the Commissary, will listen to me, he
shall hear my opinion, which is a trifle more definite than M. Lecoq’s
fancies.”

Before he could say any more, the sound of a vehicle stopping before
the door of the cabin interrupted him, and an instant afterward the
investigating magistrate entered the room.

All the officials assembled at the Poivriere knew at least by sight the
magistrate who now made his appearance, and Gevrol, an old habitue
of the Palais de Justice, mechanically murmured his name: “M. Maurice
d’Escorval.”

He was the son of that famous Baron d’Escorval, who, in 1815, sealed his
devotion to the empire with his blood, and upon whom Napoleon, in the
Memorial of St. Helena, pronounced this magnificent eulogium: “Men
as honest as he may, I believe, exist; but more honest, no, it is not
possible.”

Having entered upon his duties as magistrate early in life, and being
endowed with remarkable talents, it was at first supposed that
the younger D’Escorval would rise to the most exalted rank in his
profession. But he had disappointed all such prognostications by
resolutely refusing the more elevated positions that were offered to
him, in order to retain his modest but useful functions in the public
prosecutor’s offices at Paris. To explain his repeated refusals, he said
that life in the capital had more charms for him than the most enviable
advancement in provincial centres. But it was hard to understand
this declaration, for in spite of his brilliant connections and large
fortune, he had, ever since the death of his eldest brother, led a most
retired life, his existence merely being revealed by his untiring labors
and the good he did to those around him.

He was now about forty-two years of age, but appeared much younger,
although a few furrows already crossed his brow. One would have admired
his face, had it not been for the puzzling immobility that marred its
beauty, the sarcastic curl of his thin lips, and the gloomy expression
of his pale-blue eyes. To say that he was cold and grave, did not
express the truth, it was saying too little. He was gravity and coldness
personified, with a shade of hauteur added.

Impressed by the horror of the scene the instant he placed his foot upon
the threshold, M. d’Escorval acknowledged the presence of the physicians
and the commissary by a slight nod of the head. The others in the room
had no existence so far as he was concerned. At once his faculties went
to work. He studied the ground, and carefully noted all the surroundings
with the attentive sagacity of a magistrate who realizes the immense
weight of even the slightest detail, and who fully appreciates the
eloquence of circumstantial evidence.

“This is a serious affair,” he said gravely; “very serious.”

The commissary’s only response was to lift his eyes to heaven. A gesture
that plainly implied, “I quite agree with you!” The fact is, that for
the past two hours the worthy commissary’s responsibility had weighed
heavily upon him, and he secretly blessed the investigating magistrate
for relieving him of it.

“The public prosecutor was unable to accompany me,” resumed M.
d’Escorval, “he has not the gift of omnipresence, and I doubt if it will
be possible for him to join me here. Let us, therefore, begin operations
at once.”

The curiosity of those present had become intense; and the commissary
only expressed the general feeling when he said: “You have undoubtedly
questioned the murderer, sir, and have learnt--”

“I have learnt nothing,” interrupted M. d’Escorval, apparently much
astonished at the interruption.

He took a chair and sat himself down, and while his clerk was busy in
authenticating the commissary’s _proces-verbal_, he began to read the
report prepared by Lecoq.

Pale, agitated, and nervous, the young police agent tried to read upon
the magistrate’s impassive face the impression produced by the document.
His future depended upon the magistrate’s approval or disapproval; and
it was not with a fuddled mind like that of Father Absinthe that he had
now to deal, but with a superior intelligence.

“If I could only plead my own cause,” he thought. “What are cold written
phrases in comparison with spoken, living words, palpitating with
emotion and imbued with the convictions of the speaker.”

However, he was soon reassured. The magistrate’s face retained its
immobility, but again and again did M. d’Escorval nod his head in token
of approval, and occasionally some point more ingenious than the others
extorted from his lips the exclamations: “Not bad--very good!”

When he had finished the perusal he turned to the commissary and
remarked: “All this is very unlike your report of this morning, which
represented the affair as a low broil between a party of miserable
vagabonds.”

The observation was only too just and fair; and the commissary deeply
regretted that he had trusted to Gevrol’s representations, and remained
in bed. “This morning,” he responded evasively, “I only gave you my
first impressions. These have been modified by subsequent researches, so
that--”

“Oh!” interrupted the magistrate, “I did not intend to reproach you; on
the contrary, I must congratulate you. One could not have done better
nor acted more promptly. The investigation that has been carried out
shows great penetration and research, and the results are given with
unusual clearness, and wonderful precision.”

Lecoq’s head whirled.

The commissary hesitated for an instant. At first he was sorely tempted
to confiscate this praise to his own profit. If he drove away the
unworthy thought, it was because he was an honest man, and more than
that, because he was not displeased to have the opportunity to do Gevrol
a bad turn and punish him for his presumptuous folly.

“I must confess,” he said with some embarrassment, “that the merit of
this investigation does not belong to me.”

“To whom, then, shall I attribute it--to the inspector?” thought M.
d’Escorval, not without surprise, for having occasionally employed
Gevrol, he did not expect from him such ingenuity and sagacity as was
displayed in this report. “Is it you, then, who have conducted this
investigation so ably?” he asked.

“Upon my word, no!” responded Inspector Gevrol. “I, myself, am not
so clever as all that. I content myself with telling what I actually
discover; and I only give proofs when I have them in hand. May I be hung
if the grounds of this report have any existence save in the brains of
the man who imagined them.” Perhaps the inspector really believed what
he said, being one of those persons who are blinded by vanity to such a
degree that, with the most convincing evidence before their eyes, they
obstinately deny it.

“And yet,” insisted the magistrate, “these women whose footprints have
been detected must have existed. The accomplice who left the flakes of
wool adhering to the plank is a real being. This earring is a positive,
palpable proof.”

Gevrol had hard work to refrain from shrugging his shoulders. “All this
can be satisfactorily explained,” he said, “without a search of twelve
or fourteen hours. That the murderer had an accomplice is possible. The
presence of the women is very natural. Wherever there are male thieves,
you will find female thieves as well. As for the diamond--what does that
prove? That the scoundrels had just met with a stroke of good luck, that
they had come here to divide their booty, and that the quarrel arose
from the division.”

This was an explanation, and such a plausable one, that M. d’Escorval
was silent, reflecting before he announced his decision. “Decidedly,”
 he declared at last, “decidedly, I adopt the hypothesis set forth in the
report. Who prepared it?”

Gevrol’s face turned red with anger. “One of my men,” he replied, “a
clever, adroit fellow, Monsieur Lecoq. Come forward, Lecoq, that the
magistrate may see you.”

The young man advanced, his lips tightly compressed so as to conceal a
smile of satisfaction which almost betrayed itself.

“My report, sir, is only a summary,” he began, “but I have certain
ideas--”

“Which you will acquaint me with, when I ask for them,” interrupted the
magistrate. And oblivious of Lecoq’s chagrin, he drew from his clerk’s
portfolio two forms, which he filled up and handed to Gevrol, saying:
“Here are two orders; take them to the station, where the murderer and
the landlady of this cabin are confined, and have them conducted to the
prefecture, where they will be privately examined.”

Having given these directions, M. d’Escorval was turning toward the
physicians, when Lecoq, at the risk of a second rebuff, interposed. “May
I venture, sir, to beg of you to confide this message to me?” he asked
of the investigating magistrate.

“Impossible, I may have need of you here.”

“I desired, sir, to collect certain evidence and an opportunity to do so
may not present itself again.”

The magistrate perhaps fathomed the young man’s motive. “Then, let it be
so,” he replied, “but after your task is completed you must wait for
me at the prefecture, where I shall proceed as soon as I have finished
here. You may go.”

Lecoq did not wait for the order to be repeated. He snatched up the
papers, and hastened away.

He literally flew over the ground, and strange to say he no longer
experienced any fatigue from the labors of the preceding night. Never
had he felt so strong and alert, either in body or mind. He was
very hopeful of success. He had every confidence in himself, and his
happiness would indeed have been complete if he had had another judge
to deal with. But M. d’Escorval overawed him to such a degree that he
became almost paralyzed in his presence. With what a disdainful glance
the magistrate had surveyed him! With what an imperious tone he had
imposed silence upon him--and that, too, when he had found his work
deserving of commendation.

“Still, never mind,” the young detective mentally exclaimed, “no one
ever tastes perfect happiness here below.”

And concentrating all his thoughts on the task before him, he hurried on
his way.




VII

When, after a rapid walk of twenty minutes, Lecoq reached the police
station near the Barriere d’Italie, the doorkeeper, with his pipe in
his mouth, was pacing slowly to and fro before the guard-house. His
thoughtful air, and the anxious glances he cast every now and then
toward one of the little grated windows of the building sufficed to
indicate that some very rare bird indeed had been entrusted to his
keeping. As soon as he recognized Lecoq, his brow cleared, and he paused
in his promenade.

“Ah, well!” he inquired, “what news do you bring?”

“I have an order to conduct the prisoners to the prefecture.”

The keeper rubbed his hands, and his smile of satisfaction plainly
implied that he felt a load the less on his shoulders.

“Capital! capital!” he exclaimed. “The Black Maria, the prison van, will
pass here in less than an hour; we will throw them in, and hurry the
driver off--”

Lecoq was obliged to interrupt the keeper’s transports of satisfaction.
“Are the prisoners alone?” he inquired.

“Quite alone: the woman in one cell, and the man in the other. This
has been a remarkably quiet night, for Shrove Sunday! Quite surprising
indeed! It is true your hunt was interrupted.”

“You had a drunken man here, however.”

“No--yes--that’s true--this morning just at daybreak. A poor devil, who
is under a great obligation to Gevrol.”

The involuntary irony of this remark did not escape Lecoq. “Yes, under a
great obligation, indeed!” he said with a derisive laugh.

“You may laugh as much as you like,” retorted the keeper, “but such is
really the case; if it hadn’t been for Gevrol the man would certainly
have been run over.”

“And what has become of him?”

The keeper shrugged his shoulders. “You ask me too much,” he responded.
He was a worthy fellow who had been spending the night at a friend’s
house, and on coming out into the open air, the wine flew into his head.
He told us all about it when he got sober, half an hour afterward. I
never saw a man so vexed as he was. He wept, and stammered: “The father
of a family, and at my age too! Oh! it is shameful! What shall I say to
my wife? What will the children think?”

“Did he talk much about his wife?”

“He talked about nothing else. He mentioned her name--Eudosia Leocadie,
or some name of that sort. He declared that he should be ruined if we
kept him here. He begged us to send for the commissary, to go to his
house, and when we set him free, I thought he would go mad with joy; he
kissed our hands, and thanked us again and again!”

“And did you place him in the same cage as the murderer?” inquired
Lecoq.

“Of course.”

“Then they talked with each other.”

“Talked? Why, the drunkard was so ‘gone’ I tell you, that he couldn’t
have said ‘bread’ distinctly. When he was placed in a cell, bang! He
fell down like a log of wood. As soon as he recovered, we let him out.
I’m sure, they didn’t talk to each other.”

The young police agent had grown very thoughtful. “I was evidently
right,” he murmured.

“What did you say?” inquired the keeper.

“Nothing,” replied Lecoq, who was not inclined to communicate his
reflections to the custodian of the guard-house. These reflections of
his were by no means pleasant ones. “I was right,” he thought; “this
pretended drunkard was none other than the accomplice. He is evidently
an adroit, audacious, cool-headed fellow. While we were tracking his
footprints he was watching us. When we had got to some distance, he was
bold enough to enter the hovel. Then he came here and compelled them
to arrest him; and thanks to an assumption of childish simplicity,
he succeeded in finding an opportunity to speak with the murderer. He
played his part perfectly. Still, I know that he did play a part, and
that is something. I know that one must believe exactly the opposite of
what he said. He talked of his family, his wife and children--hence, he
has neither children, wife, nor family.”

Lecoq suddenly checked himself, remembering that he had no time to waste
in conjectures. “What kind of fellow was this drunkard?” he inquired.

“He was tall and stout, with full ruddy cheeks, a pair of white
whiskers, small eyes, a broad flat nose, and a good-natured, jovial
manner.”

“How old would you suppose him to be?”

“Between forty and fifty.”

“Did you form any idea of his profession?”

“It’s my opinion, that what with his soft cap and his heavy brown
overcoat, he must be either a clerk or the keeper of some little shop.”

Having obtained this description, which agreed with the result of his
investigations, Lecoq was about to enter the station house when a
sudden thought brought him to a standstill. “I hope this man has had no
communication with this Widow Chupin!” he exclaimed.

The keeper laughed heartily. “How could he have had any?” he responded.
“Isn’t the old woman alone in her cell? Ah, the old wretch! She has been
cursing and threatening ever since she arrived. Never in my whole life
have I heard such language as she has used. It has been enough to make
the very stones blush; even the drunken man was so shocked that he went
to the grating in the door, and told her to be quiet.”

Lecoq’s glance and gesture were so expressive of impatience and wrath
that the keeper paused in his recital much perturbed. “What is the
matter?” he stammered. “Why are you angry?”

“Because,” replied Lecoq, furiously, “because--” Not wishing to disclose
the real cause of his anger, he entered the station house, saying that
he wanted to see the prisoner.

Left alone, the keeper began to swear in his turn. “These police agents
are all alike,” he grumbled. “They question you, you tell them all they
desire to know; and afterward, if you venture to ask them anything, they
reply: ‘nothing,’ or ‘because.’ They have too much authority; it makes
them proud.”

Looking through the little latticed window in the door, by which the men
on guard watch the prisoners, Lecoq eagerly examined the appearance of
the assumed murderer. He was obliged to ask himself if this was really
the same man he had seen some hours previously at the Poivriere,
standing on the threshold of the inner door, and holding the whole squad
of police agents in check by the intense fury of his attitude. Now, on
the contrary, he seemed, as it were, the personification of weakness and
despondency. He was seated on a bench opposite the grating in the door,
his elbows resting on his knees, his chin upon his hand, his under lip
hanging low and his eyes fixed upon vacancy.

“No,” murmured Lecoq, “no, this man is not what he seems to be.”

So saying he entered the cell, the culprit raised his head, gave the
detective an indifferent glance, but did not utter a word.

“Well, how goes it?” asked Lecoq.

“I am innocent!” responded the prisoner, in a hoarse, discordant voice.

“I hope so, I am sure--but that is for the magistrate to decide. I came
to see if you wanted anything.”

“No,” replied the murderer, but a second later he changed his mind. “All
the same,” he said, “I shouldn’t mind a crust and a drink of wine.”

“You shall have them,” replied Lecoq, who at once went out to forage
in the neighborhood for eatables of some sort. In his opinion, if the
murderer had asked for a drink after at first refusing to partake of
anything, it was solely with the view of conveying the idea that he was
really the kind of man he pretended to be.

At all events, whoever he might be, the prisoner ate with an excellent
appetite. He then took up the large glass of wine that had been brought
him, drained it slowly, and remarked: “That’s capital! There can be
nothing to beat that!”

This seeming satisfaction greatly disappointed Lecoq, who had selected,
as a test, one of those horribly thick, bluish, nauseous mixtures in
vogue around the barrieres--hoping, nay, almost expecting, that the
murderer would not drink it without some sign of repugnance. And yet the
contrary proved the case. However, the young detective had no time to
ponder over the circumstance, for a rumble of wheels now announced the
approach of that lugubrious vehicle, the Black Maria.

When the Widow Chupin was removed from her cell she fought and scratched
and cried “Murder!” at the top of her voice; and it was only by sheer
force that she was at length got into the van. Then it was that the
officials turned to the assassin. Lecoq certainly expected some sign of
repugnance now, and he watched the prisoner closely. But he was again
doomed to disappointment. The culprit entered the vehicle in the most
unconcerned manner, and took possession of his compartment like one
accustomed to it, knowing the most comfortable position to assume in
such close quarters.

“Ah! what an unfortunate morning,” murmured Lecoq, disconsolately.
“Still I will lie in wait for him at the prefecture.”

When the door of the prison-van had been securely closed, the driver
cracked his whip, and the sturdy horses started off at a brisk trot.
Lecoq had taken his seat in front, between the driver and the guard; but
his mind was so engrossed with his own thoughts that he heard nothing
of their conversation, which was very jovial, although frequently
interrupted by the shrill voice of the Widow Chupin, who sang and yelled
her imprecations alternately.

It is needless, however, to recapitulate her oaths; let us rather follow
the train of Lecoq’s meditation. By what means could he secure some clue
to the murderer’s identity? He was still convinced that the prisoner
must belong to the higher ranks of society. After all, it was not so
extraordinary that he should have succeeded in feigning an appetite,
that he should have concealed his distaste for a nauseous beverage, and
that he should have entered the Black Maria without hesitation. Such
conduct was quite possible, indeed almost probable on the part of a man,
endowed with considerable strength of will, and realizing the imminence
of his peril. But granting this, would he be equally able to hide his
feelings when he was obliged to submit to the humiliating formalities
that awaited him--formalities which in certain cases can, and must, be
pushed even to the verge of insult and outrage?

No; Lecoq could not believe that this would be possible. He felt sure
that the disgraceful position in which the prisoner would find himself
would cause him to revolt, to lose his self-control, to utter some word
that might give the desired clue.

It was not until the gloomy vehicle had turned off the Pont Neuf on to
the Quai de l’Horloge that the young detective became conscious of what
was transpiring around him. Soon the van passed through an open gateway,
and drew up in a small, damp courtyard.

Lecoq immediately alighted, and opened the door of the compartment in
which the supposed murderer was confined, exclaiming as he did so: “Here
we are, get out.” There was no fear of the prisoner escaping. The iron
gate had been closed, and at least a dozen agents were standing near at
hand, waiting to have a look at the new arrivals.

The prisoner slowly stepped to the ground. His expression of face
remained unchanged, and each gesture evinced the perfect indifference of
a man accustomed to such ordeals.

Lecoq scrutinized his demeanor as attentively as an anatomist might have
watched the action of a muscle. He noted that the prisoner seemed to
experience a sensation of satisfaction directly his foot touched
the pavement of the courtyard, that he drew a long breath, and then
stretched and shook himself, as if to regain the elasticity of his
limbs, cramped by confinement in the narrow compartment from which he
had just emerged. Then he glanced around him, and a scarcely perceptible
smile played upon his lips. One might have sworn that the place was
familiar to him, that he was well acquainted with these high grim walls,
these grated windows, these heavy doors--in short, with all the sinister
belongings of a prison.

“Good Lord!” murmured Lecoq, greatly chagrined, “does he indeed
recognize the place?”

And his sense of disappointment and disquietude increased when, without
waiting for a word, a motion, or a sign, the prisoner turned toward
one of the five or six doors that opened into the courtyard. Without an
instant’s hesitation he walked straight toward the very doorway he was
expected to enter--Lecoq asked himself was it chance? But his amazement
and disappointment increased tenfold when, after entering the gloomy
corridor, he saw the culprit proceed some little distance, resolutely
turn to the left, pass by the keeper’s room, and finally enter the
registrar’s office. An old offender could not have done better.

Big drops of perspiration stood on Lecoq’s forehead. “This man,” thought
he, “has certainly been here before; he knows the ropes.”

The registrar’s office was a large room heated almost to suffocation by
an immense stove, and badly lighted by three small windows, the panes
of which were covered with a thick coating of dust. There sat the clerk
reading a newspaper, spread out over the open register--that fatal book
in which are inscribed the names of all those whom misconduct, crime,
misfortune, madness, or error have brought to these grim portals.

Three or four attendants, who were awaiting the hour for entering upon
their duties, reclined half asleep upon the wooden benches that lined
three sides of the room. These benches, with a couple of tables, and
some dilapidated chairs, constituted the entire furniture of the office,
in one corner of which stood a measuring machine, under which each
culprit was obliged to pass, the exact height of the prisoners being
recorded in order that the description of their persons might be
complete in every respect.

At the entrance of the culprit accompanied by Lecoq, the clerk raised
his head. “Ah!” said he, “has the van arrived?”

“Yes,” responded Lecoq. And showing the orders signed by M. d’Escorval,
he added: “Here are this man’s papers.”

The registrar took the documents and read them. “Oh!” he exclaimed,
“a triple assassination! Oh! oh!” The glance he gave the prisoner
was positively deferential. This was no common culprit, no ordinary
vagabond, no vulgar thief.

“The investigating magistrate orders a private examination,” continued
the clerk, “and I must get the prisoner other clothing, as the things
he is wearing now will be used as evidence. Let some one go at once and
tell the superintendent that the other occupants of the van must wait.”

At this moment, the governor of the Depot entered the office. The clerk
at once dipped his pen in the ink, and turning to the prisoner he asked:
“What is your name?”

“May.”

“Your Christian name?”

“I have none.”

“What, have you no Christian name?”

The prisoner seemed to reflect for a moment, and then answered, sulkily:
“I may as well tell you that you need not tire yourself by questioning
me. I shan’t answer any one else but the magistrate. You would like to
make me cut my own throat, wouldn’t you? A very clever trick, of course,
but one that won’t do for me.”

“You must see that you only aggravate your situation,” observed the
governor.

“Not in the least. I am innocent; you wish to ruin me. I only defend
myself. Get anything more out of me now, if you can. But you had better
give me back what they took from me at the station-house. My hundred and
thirty-six francs and eight sous. I shall need them when I get out of
this place. I want you to make a note of them on the register. Where are
they?”

The money had been given to Lecoq by the keeper of the station-house,
who had found it upon the prisoner when he was placed in his custody.
Lecoq now laid it upon the table.

“Here are your hundred and thirty-six francs and eight sous,” said he,
“and also your knife, your handkerchief, and four cigars.”

An expression of lively contentment was discernible on the prisoner’s
features.

“Now,” resumed the clerk, “will you answer?”

But the governor perceived the futility of further questioning; and
silencing the clerk by a gesture, he told the prisoner to take off his
boots.

Lecoq thought the assassin’s glance wavered as he heard this order. Was
it only a fancy?

“Why must I do that?” asked the culprit.

“To pass under the beam,” replied the clerk. “We must make a note of
your exact height.”

The prisoner made no reply, but sat down and drew off his heavy boots.
The heel of the right one was worn down on the inside. It was, moreover,
noticed that the prisoner wore no socks, and that his feet were coated
with mud.

“You only wear boots on Sundays, then?” remarked Lecoq.

“Why do you think that?”

“By the mud with which your feet are covered, as high as the
ankle-bone.”

“What of that?” exclaimed the prisoner, in an insolent tone. “Is it a
crime not to have a marchioness’s feet?”

“It is a crime you are not guilty of, at all events,” said the young
detective slowly. “Do you think I can’t see that if the mud were picked
off your feet would be white and neat? The nails have been carefully cut
and polished--”

He paused. A new idea inspired by his genius for investigation had just
crossed Lecoq’s mind. Pushing a chair in front of the prisoner, and
spreading a newspaper over it, he said: “Will you place your foot
there?”

The man did not comply with the request.

“It is useless to resist,” exclaimed the governor, “we are in force.”

The prisoner delayed no longer. He placed his foot on the chair, as
he had been ordered, and Lecoq, with the aid of a knife, proceeded to
remove the fragments of mud that adhered to the skin.

Anywhere else so strange and grotesque a proceeding would have excited
laughter, but here, in this gloomy chamber, the anteroom of the assize
court, an otherwise trivial act is fraught with serious import. Nothing
astonishes; and should a smile threaten to curve one’s lips, it is
instantly repressed.

All the spectators, from the governor of the prison to the keepers, had
witnessed many other incidents equally absurd; and no one thought of
inquiring the detective’s motive. This much was known already; that the
prisoner was trying to conceal his identity. Now it was necessary to
establish it, at any cost, and Lecoq had probably discovered some means
of attaining this end.

The operation was soon concluded; and Lecoq swept the dust off the paper
into the palm of his hand. He divided it into two parts, enclosing one
portion in a scrap of paper, and slipping it into his own pocket. With
the remainder he formed a package which he handed to the governor,
saying: “I beg you, sir, to take charge of this, and to seal it up here,
in presence of the prisoner. This formality is necessary, so that by and
by he may not pretend that the dust has been changed.”

The governor complied with the request, and as he placed this “bit
of proof” (as he styled it) in a small satchel for safe keeping, the
prisoner shrugged his shoulders with a sneering laugh. Still, beneath
this cynical gaiety Lecoq thought he could detect poignant anxiety.
Chance owed him the compensation of this slight triumph; for previous
events had deceived all his calculations.

The prisoner did not offer the slightest objection when he was ordered
to undress, and to exchange his soiled and bloodstained garments for
the clothing furnished by the Government. Not a muscle of his face moved
while he submitted his person to one of those ignominous examinations
which make the blood rush to the forehead of the lowest criminal. It was
with perfect indifference that he allowed an inspector to comb his hair
and beard, and to examine the inside of his mouth, so as to make sure
that he had not concealed either some fragment of glass, by the aid
of which captives can sever the strongest bars, or one of those
microscopical bits of lead with which prisoners write the notes they
exchange, rolled up in a morsel of bread, and called “postilions.”

These formalities having been concluded, the superintendent rang for
one of the keepers. “Conduct this man to No. 3 of the secret cells,” he
ordered.

There was no need to drag the prisoner away. He walked out, as he had
entered, preceding the guard, like some old habitue, who knows where he
is going.

“What a rascal!” exclaimed the clerk.

“Then you think--” began Lecoq, baffled but not convinced.

“Ah! there can be no doubt of it,” declared the governor. “This man is
certainly a dangerous criminal--an old offender--I think I have seen him
before--I could almost swear to it.”

Thus it was evident these people, with their long, varied experience,
shared Gevrol’s opinion; Lecoq stood alone. He did not discuss the
matter--what good would it have done? Besides, the Widow Chupin was just
being brought in.

The journey must have calmed her nerves, for she had become as gentle
as a lamb. It was in a wheedling voice, and with tearful eyes, that she
called upon these “good gentlemen” to witness the shameful injustice
with which she was treated--she, an honest woman. Was she not the
mainstay of her family (since her son Polyte was in custody, charged
with pocket-picking), hence what would become of her daughter-in-law,
and of her grandson Toto, who had no one to look after them but her?

Still, when her name had been taken, and a keeper was ordered to remove
her, nature reasserted itself, and scarcely had she entered the corridor
than she was heard quarreling with the guard.

“You are wrong not to be polite,” she said; “you are losing a good fee,
without counting many a good drink I would stand you when I get out of
here.”

Lecoq was now free until M. d’Escorval’s arrival. He wandered through
the gloomy corridors, from office to office, but finding himself
assailed with questions by every one he came across, he eventually left
the Depot, and went and sat down on one of the benches beside the quay.
Here he tried to collect his thoughts. His convictions were unchanged.
He was more than ever convinced that the prisoner was concealing his
real social standing, but, on the other hand, it was evident that he was
well acquainted with the prison and its usages.

He had also proved himself to be endowed with far more cleverness than
Lecoq had supposed. What self-control! What powers of dissimulation
he had displayed! He had not so much as frowned while undergoing the
severest ordeals, and he had managed to deceive the most experienced
eyes in Paris.

The young detective had waited during nearly three hours, as motionless
as the bench on which he was seated, and so absorbed in studying his
case that he had thought neither of the cold nor of the flight of
time, when a carriage drew up before the entrance of the prison, and M.
d’Escorval alighted, followed by his clerk.

Lecoq rose and hastened, well-nigh breathless with anxiety, toward the
magistrate.

“My researches on the spot,” said this functionary, “confirm me in the
belief that you are right. Is there anything fresh?”

“Yes, sir; a fact that is apparently very trivial, though, in truth, it
is of importance that--”

“Very well!” interrupted the magistrate. “You will explain it to me by
and by. First of all, I must summarily examine the prisoners. A mere
matter of form for to-day. Wait for me here.”

Although the magistrate promised to make haste, Lecoq expected that
at least an hour would elapse before he reappeared. In this he was
mistaken. Twenty minutes later, M. d’Escorval emerged from the prison
without his clerk.

He was walking very fast, and instead of approaching the young
detective, he called to him at some little distance. “I must return home
at once,” he said, “instantly; I can not listen to you.”

“But, sir--”

“Enough! the bodies of the victims have been taken to the Morgue. Keep
a sharp lookout there. Then, this evening make--well--do whatever you
think best.”

“But, sir, I must--”

“To-morrow!--to-morrow, at nine o’clock, in my office in the Palais de
Justice.”

Lecoq wished to insist upon a hearing, but M. d’Escorval had entered, or
rather thrown himself into, his carriage, and the coachman was already
whipping up the horse.

“And to think that he’s an investigating magistrate,” panted Lecoq, left
spellbound on the quay. “Has he gone mad?” As he spoke, an uncharitable
thought took possession of his mind. “Can it be,” he murmured, “that M.
d’Escorval holds the key to the mystery? Perhaps he wishes to get rid of
me.”

This suspicion was so terrible that Lecoq hastened back to the prison,
hoping that the prisoner’s bearing might help to solve his doubts.
On peering through the grated aperture in the door of the cell, he
perceived the prisoner lying on the pallet that stood opposite the
door. His face was turned toward the wall, and he was enveloped in the
coverlid up to his eyes. He was not asleep, for Lecoq could detect a
strange movement of the body, which puzzled and annoyed him. On applying
his ear instead of his eye to the aperture, he distinguished a stifled
moan. There could no longer be any doubt. The death rattle was sounding
in the prisoner’s throat.

“Help! help!” cried Lecoq, greatly excited. “The prisoner is killing
himself!”

A dozen keepers hastened to the spot. The door was quickly opened,
and it was then ascertained that the prisoner, having torn a strip of
binding from his clothes, had fastened it round his neck and tried to
strangle himself with the assistance of a spoon that had been left him
with his food. He was already unconscious, and the prison doctor, who
immediately bled him, declared that had another ten minutes elapsed,
help would have arrived too late.

When the prisoner regained his senses, he gazed around him with a
wild, puzzled stare. One might have supposed that he was amazed to find
himself still alive. Suddenly a couple of big tears welled from his
swollen eyelids, and rolled down his cheeks. He was pressed with
questions, but did not vouchsafe so much as a single word in response.
As he was in such a desperate frame of mind, and as the orders to
keep him in solitary confinement prevented the governor giving him a
companion, it was decided to put a straight waistcoat on him. Lecoq
assisted at this operation, and then walked away, puzzled, thoughtful,
and agitated. Intuition told him that these mysterious occurrences
concealed some terrible drama.

“Still, what can have occurred since the prisoner’s arrival here?” he
murmured. “Has he confessed his guilt to the magistrate, or what is his
reason for attempting so desperate an act?”




VIII

Lecoq did not sleep that night, although he had been on his feet for
more than forty hours, and had scarcely paused either to eat or drink.
Anxiety, hope, and even fatigue itself, had imparted to his body
the fictitious strength of fever, and to his intellect the unhealthy
acuteness which is so often the result of intense mental effort.

He no longer had to occupy himself with imaginary deductions, as in
former times when in the employ of his patron, the astronomer. Once
again did the fact prove stranger than fiction. Here was reality--a
terrible reality personified by the corpses of three victims lying on
the marble slabs at the Morgue. Still, if the catastrophe itself was a
patent fact, its motive, its surroundings, could only be conjectured.
Who could tell what circumstances had preceded and paved the way for
this tragical denouement?

It is true that all doubt might be dispelled by one discovery--the
identity of the murderer. Who was he? Who was right, Gevrol or Lecoq?
The former’s views were shared by the officials at the prison;
the latter stood alone. Again, the former’s opinion was based upon
formidable proof, the evidence of sight; while Lecoq’s hypothesis rested
only on a series of subtle observations and deductions, starting from a
single sentence that had fallen from the prisoner’s lips.

And yet Lecoq resolutely persisted in his theory, guided by the
following reasons. He learnt from M. d’Escorval’s clerk that when the
magistrate had examined the prisoner, the latter not only refused to
confess, but answered all the questions put to him in the most evasive
fashion. In several instances, moreover, he had not replied at all. If
the magistrate had not insisted, it was because this first examination
was a mere formality, solely intended to justify the somewhat premature
delivery of the order to imprison the accused.

Now, under these circumstances, how was one to explain the prisoner’s
attempt at self-destruction? Prison statistics show that habitual
offenders do not commit suicide. When apprehended for a criminal act,
they are sometimes seized with a wild frenzy and suffer repeated nervous
attacks; at others they fall into a dull stupor, just as some glutted
beast succumbs to sleep with the blood of his prey still dripping from
his lips. However, such men never think of putting an end to their days.
They hold fast to life, no matter how seriously they may be compromised.
In truth, they are cowards.

On the other hand, the unfortunate fellow who, in a moment of frenzy,
commits a crime, not unfrequently seeks to avoid the consequences of his
act by self-destruction.

Hence, the prisoner’s frustrated attempt at suicide was a strong
argument in favor of Lecoq’s theory. This wretched man’s secret must be
a terrible one since he held it dearer than life, since he had tried to
destroy himself that he might take it unrevealed to the grave.

Four o’clock was striking when Lecoq sprang from his bed on which he had
thrown himself without undressing; and five minutes later he was walking
down the Rue Montmartre. The weather was still cold and muggy; and a
thick fog hung over the city. But the young detective was too
engrossed with his own thoughts to pay attention to any atmospherical
unpleasantness. Walking with a brisk stride, he had just reached the
church of Saint Eustache, when a coarse, mocking voice accosted him with
the exclamation: “Ah, ha! my fine fellow!”

He looked up and perceived Gevrol, who, with three of his men, had come
to cast his nets round about the markets, whence the police generally
return with a good haul of thieves and vagabonds.

“You are up very early this morning, Monsieur Lecoq,” continued the
inspector; “you are still trying to discover our man’s identity, I
suppose?”

“Still trying.”

“Is he a prince in disguise, or only a marquis?”

“One or the other, I am quite certain.”

“All right then. In that case you will not refuse us the opportunity to
drink to your success.”

Lecoq consented, and the party entered a wine-shop close by. When the
glasses were filled, Lecoq turned to Gevrol and exclaimed: “Upon my
word, General, our meeting will save me a long walk. I was going to the
prefecture to request you, on M. d’Escorval’s behalf, to send one of
our comrades to the Morgue this morning. The affair at the Poivriere has
been noised about, and all the world will be there, so he desires some
officer to be present to watch the crowd and listen to the remarks of
the visitors.”

“All right; Father Absinthe shall be there when the doors open.”

To send Father Absinthe where a shrewd and subtle agent was required was
a mockery. Still Lecoq did not protest, for it was better to be badly
served than to be betrayed; and he could at least trust Father Absinthe.

“It doesn’t much matter,” continued Gevrol; “but you should have
informed me of this last evening. However, when I reached the prefecture
you had gone.”

“I had some work to do.”

“Yes?”

“At the station-house near the Barriere d’Italie. I wanted to know
whether the floor of the cell was paved or tiled.” So saying, Lecoq paid
the score, saluted his superior officer, and went out.

“Thunder!” exclaimed Gevrol, striking his glass violently upon the
counter. “Thunder! how that fellow provokes me! He does not know the A
B C of his profession. When he can’t discover anything, he invents
wonderful stories, and then misleads the magistrates with his
high-sounding phrases, in the hope of gaining promotion. I’ll give him
advancement with a vengeance! I’ll teach him to set himself above me!”

Lecoq had not been deceived. The evening before, he had visited the
station-house where the prisoner had first been confined, and had
compared the soil of the cell floor with the dust he had placed in
his pocket; and he carried away with him, as he believed, one of those
crushing proofs that often suffice to extort from the most obstinate
criminal a complete confession. If Lecoq was in haste to part company
with Gevrol, it was because he was anxious to pursue his investigations
still further, before appearing in M. d’Escorval’s presence. He was
determined to find the cab-driver who had been stopped by the two women
in the Rue du Chevaleret; and with this object in view, he had obtained
at the prefecture the names and addresses of all the cab-owners hiring
between the road to Fontainebleau and the Seine.

His earlier efforts at investigation proved unsuccessful. At the first
establishment he visited, the stable boys, who were not yet up, swore at
him roundly. In the second, he found the grooms at work, but none of the
drivers had as yet put in an appearance. Moreover, the owner refused to
show him the books upon which are recorded--or should be recorded--each
driver’s daily engagements. Lecoq was beginning to despair, when at
about half-past seven o’clock he reached an establishment just beyond
the fortifications belonging to a man named Trigault. Here he learned
that on Sunday night, or rather, early on Monday morning, one of the
drivers had been accosted on his way home by some persons who succeeded
in persuading him to drive them back into Paris.

This driver, who was then in the courtyard harnessing his horse, proved
to be a little old man, with a ruddy complexion, and a pair of small
eyes full of cunning. Lecoq walked up to him at once.

“Was it you,” he asked, “who, on Sunday night or rather on Monday,
between one and two in the morning, drove a couple of women from the Rue
du Chevaleret into Paris?”

The driver looked up, and surveying Lecoq attentively, cautiously
replied: “Perhaps.”

“It is a positive answer that I want.”

“Aha!” said the old man sneeringly, “you know two ladies who have lost
something in a cab, and so--”

The young detective trembled with satisfaction. This man was certainly
the one he was looking for. “Have you heard anything about a crime that
has been committed in the neighborhood?” he interrupted.

“Yes; a murder in a low wine-shop.”

“Well, then, I will tell you that these two women are mixed up in it;
they fled when we entered the place. I am trying to find them. I am a
detective; here is my card. Now, can you give me any information?”

The driver had grown very pale. “Ah! the wretches!” he exclaimed. “I
am no longer surprised at the luck-money they gave me--a louis and two
five-franc pieces for the fare--thirty francs in all. Cursed money! If I
hadn’t spent it, I’d throw it away!”

“And where did you drive them?”

“To the Rue de Bourgogne. I have forgotten the number, but I should
recognize the house.”

“Unfortunately, they would not have let you drive them to their own
door.”

“Who knows? I saw them ring the bell, and I think they went in just as I
drove away. Shall I take you there?”

Lecoq’s sole response was to spring on to the box, exclaiming: “Let us
be off.”

It was not to be supposed that the women who had escaped from the Widow
Chupin’s drinking-den at the moment of the murder were utterly devoid
of intelligence. Nor was it at all likely that these two fugitives,
conscious as they were of their perilous situation, had gone straight
to their real home in a vehicle hired on the public highway. Hence,
the driver’s hope of finding them in the Rue de Bourgogne was purely
chimerical. Lecoq was fully aware of this, and yet he did not hesitate
to jump on to the box and give the signal for starting. In so doing, he
obeyed a maxim which he had framed in his early days of meditation--a
maxim intended to assure his after-fame, and which ran as follows:
“Always suspect that which seems probable; and begin by believing what
appears incredible.”

As soon as the vehicle was well under way, the young detective proceeded
to ingratiate himself into the driver’s good graces, being anxious to
obtain all the information that this worthy was able to impart.

In a tone that implied that all trifling would be useless the cabman
cried: “Hey up, hey up, Cocotte!” and his mare pricked up her ears and
quickened her pace, so that the Rue de Choisy was speedily reached. Then
it was that Lecoq resumed his inquiries.

“Well, my good fellow,” he began, “you have told me the principal facts,
now I should like the details. How did these two women attract your
attention?”

“Oh, it was very simple. I had been having a most unfortunate day--six
hours on a stand on the Boulevards, with the rain pouring all the time.
It was simply awful. At midnight I had not made more than a franc and a
half for myself, but I was so wet and miserable and the horse seemed so
done up that I decided to go home. I did grumble, I can tell you.
Well, I had just passed the corner of the Rue Picard, in the Rue du
Chevaleret, when I saw two women standing under a lamp, some little
distance off. I did not pay any attention to them; for when a man is as
old as I am, women--”

“Go on!” said Lecoq, who could not restrain his impatience.

“I had already passed them, when they began to call after me. I
pretended I did not hear them; but one of them ran after the cab,
crying: ‘A louis! a louis for yourself!’ I hesitated for a moment, when
the woman added: ‘And ten francs for the fare!’ I then drew up.”

Lecoq was boiling over with impatience; but he felt that the wisest
course was not to interrupt the driver with questions, but to listen to
all he had to say.

“As you may suppose,” continued the coachman, “I wasn’t inclined to
trust two such suspicious characters, alone at that hour and in that
part of the city. So, just as they were about to get into the cab, I
called to them: ‘Wait a bit, my little friends, you have promised papa
some sous; where are they?’ The one who had called after the cab at once
handed me thirty francs, saying: ‘Above all, make haste!’”

“Your recital could not be more minute,” exclaimed Lecoq, approvingly.
“Now, how about these two women?”

“What do you mean?”

“I mean what kind of women did they seem to be; what did you take them
for?”

“Oh, for nothing very good!” replied the driver, with a knowing smile.

“Ah! and how were they dressed?”

“Like most of the girls who go to dance at the Rainbow. One of them,
however, was very neat and prim, while the other--well! she was a
terrible dowdy.”

“Which ran after you?”

“The girl who was neatly dressed, the one who--” The driver suddenly
paused: some vivid remembrance passed through his brain, and, abruptly
jerking the rains, he brought his horse to a standstill.

“Thunder!” he exclaimed. “Now I think of it, I did notice something
strange. One of the two women called the other ‘Madame’ as large as
life, while the other said ‘thee’ and ‘thou,’ and spoke as if she were
somebody.”

“Oh! oh! oh!” exclaimed the young detective, in three different keys.
“And which was it that said ‘thee’ and ‘thou’?”

“Why, the dowdy one. She with shabby dress and shoes as big as a gouty
man’s. You should have seen her shake the prim-looking girl, as if she
had been a plum tree. ‘You little fool!’ said she, ‘do you want to ruin
us? You will have time to faint when we get home; now come along. And
then she began to sob: ‘Indeed, madame, indeed I can’t!’ she said, and
really she seemed quite unable to move: in fact, she appeared to be so
ill that I said to myself: ‘Here is a young woman who has drunk more
than is good for her!’”

These facts confirmed even if they corrected Lecoq’s first suppositions.
As he had suspected, the social position of the two women was not the
same. He had been mistaken, however, in attributing the higher standing
to the woman wearing the shoes with the high heels, the marks of which
he had so particularly noticed in the snow, with all the attendant signs
of precipitation, terror, and weakness. In reality, social preeminence
belonged to the woman who had left the large, broad footprints behind
her. And not merely was she of a superior rank, but she had also shown
superior energy. Contrary to Lecoq’s original idea, it now seemed
evident that she was the mistress, and her companion the servant.

“Is that all, my good fellow?” he asked the driver, who during the last
few minutes had been busy with his horses.

“Yes,” replied the cabman, “except that I noticed that the shabbily
dressed woman who paid me had a hand as small as a child’s, and in spite
of her anger, her voice was as sweet as music.”

“Did you see her face?”

“I just caught a glimpse of it.”

“Could you tell if she were pretty, or whether she was a blonde or
brunette?”

So many questions at a time confused the driver. “Stop a minute!” he
replied. “In my opinion she wasn’t pretty, and I don’t believe she was
young, but she certainly was a blonde, and with plenty of hair too.”

“Was she tall or short, stout or slender?”

“Between the two.”

This was very vague. “And the other,” asked Lecoq, “the neatly dressed
one?”

“The deuce! As for her, I did not notice her at all; all I know about
her is that she was very small.”

“Would you recognize her if you met her again?”

“Good heavens! no.”

The vehicle was now rolling along the Rue de Bourgogne. Half-way down
the street the driver pulled up, and, turning to Lecoq, exclaimed: “Here
we are. That’s the house the hussies went into.”

To draw off the silk handkerchief that served him as a muffler, to fold
it and slip it into his pocket, to spring to the ground and enter
the house indicated, was only the work of an instant for the young
detective.

In the concierge’s little room he found an old woman knitting. Lecoq
bowed to her politely, and, displaying the silk handkerchief, exclaimed:
“Madame, I have come to return this article to one of your lodgers.”

“To which one?”

“Really, I don’t exactly know.”

In a moment the worthy dame imagined that this polite young man was
making fun of her. “You scamp--!” she began.

“Excuse me,” interrupted Lecoq; “allow me to finish. I must tell you
that at about three o’clock in the morning, of the day before yesterday,
I was quietly returning home, when two ladies, who were seemingly in
a great hurry, overtook me and passed on. One of them dropped this
handkerchief, which I picked up. I hastened after her to restore it,
but before I could overtake them they had rung the bell at your door and
were already in the house. I did not like to ring at such an unearthly
hour for fear of disturbing you. Yesterday I was so busy I couldn’t
come; however, here I am at last, and here’s the handkerchief.” So
saying, Lecoq laid the handkerchief on the table, and turned as if to
go, when the concierge detained him.

“Many thanks for your kindness,” said she, “but you can keep it. We have
no ladies in this house who are in the habit of coming home alone after
midnight.”

“Still I have eyes,” insisted Lecoq, “and I certainly saw--”

“Ah! I had forgotten,” exclaimed the old woman. “The night you speak
of some one certainly did ring the bell here. I pulled the string that
opens the door and listened, but not hearing any one close the door
or come upstairs, I said to myself: ‘Some mischievous fellow has been
playing a trick on me.’ I slipped on my dress and went out into the
hall, where I saw two women hastening toward the door. Before I could
reach them they slammed the door in my face. I opened it again as
quickly as I could and looked out into the street. But they were
hurrying away as fast as they could.”

“In what direction?”

“Oh! they were running toward the Rue de Varennes.”

Lecoq was baffled again; however, he bowed civilly to the concierge,
whom he might possibly have need of at another time, and then went back
to the cab. “As I had supposed, they do not live here,” he remarked to
the driver.

The latter shrugged his shoulders in evident vexation, which would
inevitably have vent in a torrent of words, if Lecoq, who had consulted
his watch, had not forestalled the outburst by saying: “Nine o’clock--I
am an hour behind time already: still I shall have some news to tell.
Now take me to the Morgue as quickly as possible.”

When a mysterious crime has been perpetrated, or a great catastrophe has
happened, and the identity of the victims has not been established,
“a great day” invariably follows at the Morgue. The attendants are so
accustomed to the horrors of the place that the most sickly sight fails
to impress them; and even under the most distressing circumstances, they
hasten gaily to and fro, exchanging jests well calculated to make an
ordinary mortal’s flesh creep. As a rule, they are far less interested
in the corpses laid out for public view on the marble slabs in the
principal hall than in the people of every age and station in life who
congregate here all day long; at times coming in search of some lost
relative or friend, but far more frequently impelled by idle curiosity.

As the vehicle conveying Lecoq reached the quay, the young detective
perceived that a large, excited crowd was gathered outside the
building. The newspapers had reported the tragedy at the Widow Chupin’s
drinking-den, of course, more or less correctly, and everybody wished to
see the victims.

On drawing near the Pont Notre Dame, Lecoq told the driver to pull up.
“I prefer to alight here, rather than in front of the Morgue,” he said,
springing to the ground. Then, producing first his watch, and next
his purse, he added: “We have been an hour and forty minutes, my good
fellow, consequently I owe you--”

“Nothing at all,” replied the driver, decidedly.

“But--”

“No--not a sou. I am too worried already to think that I took the money
these hussies offered me. It would only have served me right if the
liquor I bought with it had given me the gripes. Don’t be uneasy about
the score, and if you need a trap use mine for nothing, till you have
caught the jades.” As Lecoq’s purse was low, he did not insist. “You
will, at least, take my name and address?” continued the driver.

“Certainly. The magistrate will want your evidence, and a summons will
be sent you.”

“All right, then. Address it to Papillon (Eugene), driver, care of M.
Trigault. I lodge at his place, because I have some small interest in
the business, you see.”

The young detective was hastening away, when Papillon called him back.
“When you leave the Morgue you will want to go somewhere else,” he said,
“you told me that you had another appointment, and that you were already
late.”

“Yes, I ought to be at the Palais de Justice; but it is only a few steps
from here.”

“No matter. I will wait for you at the corner of the bridge. It’s
useless to say ‘no’; I’ve made up my mind, and I’m a Breton, you know. I
want you to ride out the thirty francs that those jades paid me.”

It would have been cruel to refuse such a request. Accordingly, Lecoq
made a gesture of assent, and then hurried toward the Morgue.

If there was a crowd on the roadway outside, it was because the gloomy
building itself was crammed full of people. Indeed, the sightseers, most
of whom could see nothing at all, were packed as closely as sardines,
and it was only by dint of well-nigh superhuman efforts that Lecoq
managed to effect an entrance. As usual, he found among the mob a large
number of girls and women; for, strange to say, the Parisian fair sex is
rather partial to the disgusting sights and horrible emotions that repay
a visit to the Morgue.

The shop and work girls who reside in the neighborhood readily go out of
their way to catch a glimpse of the corpses which crime, accident, and
suicide bring to this horrible place. A few, the more sensitive among
them, may come no further than the door, but the others enter, and
after a long stare return and recount their impressions to their less
courageous companions.

If there should be no corpse exhibited; if all the marble slabs are
unoccupied, strange as it may seem, the visitors turn hastily away with
an expression of disappointment or discontent. There was no fear of
their doing so, however, on the morrow of the tragedy at Poivriere, for
the mysterious murderer whose identity Lecoq was trying to establish had
furnished three victims for their delectation. Panting with curiosity,
they paid but little attention to the unhealthy atmosphere: and yet
a damp chill came from beyond the iron railings, while from the crowd
itself rose an infectious vapor, impregnated with the stench of the
chloride of lime used as a disinfectant.

As a continuous accompaniment to the exclamations, sighs, and whispered
comments of the bystanders came the murmur of the water trickling from a
spigot at the head of each slab; a tiny stream that flowed forth only to
fall in fine spray upon the marble. Through the small arched windows
a gray light stole in on the exposed bodies, bringing each muscle into
bold relief, revealing the ghastly tints of the lifeless flesh, and
imparting a sinister aspect to the tattered clothing hung around the
room to aid in the identification of the corpses. This clothing, after a
certain time, is sold--for nothing is wasted at the Morgue.

However, Lecoq was too occupied with his own thoughts to remark the
horrors of the scene. He scarcely bestowed a glance on the three
victims. He was looking for Father Absinthe, whom he could not perceive.
Had Gevrol intentionally or unintentionally failed to fulfil his
promise, or had Father Absinthe forgotten his duty in his morning dram?

Unable to explain the cause of his comrade’s absence, Lecoq addressed
himself to the head keeper: “It would seem that no one has recognized
the victims,” he remarked.

“No one. And yet, ever since opening, we have had an immense crowd. If I
were master here, on days like this, I would charge an admission fee of
two sous a head, with half-price for children. It would bring in a round
sum, more than enough to cover the expenses.”

The keeper’s reply seemed to offer an inducement to conversation, but
Lecoq did not seize it. “Excuse me,” he interrupted, “didn’t a detective
come here this morning?”

“Yes, there was one here.”

“Has he gone away then? I don’t see him anywhere?”

The keeper glanced suspiciously at his eager questioner, but after a
moment’s hesitation, he ventured to inquire: “Are you one of them?”

“Yes, I am,” replied Lecoq, exhibiting his card in support of his
assertion.

“And your name?”

“Is Lecoq.”

The keeper’s face brightened up. “In that case,” said he, “I have a
letter for you, written by your comrade, who was obliged to go away.
Here it is.”

The young detective at once tore open the envelope and read: “Monsieur
Lecoq--”

“Monsieur?” This simple formula of politeness brought a faint smile to
his lips. Was it not, on Father Absinthe’s part, an evident recognition
of his colleague’s superiority. Indeed, our hero accepted it as a token
of unquestioning devotion which it would be his duty to repay with a
master’s kind protection toward his first disciple. However, he had no
time to waste in thought, and accordingly at once proceeded to peruse
the note, which ran as follows:


“Monsieur Lecoq--I had been standing on duty since the opening of the
Morgue, when at about nine o’clock three young men entered, arm-in-arm.
From their manner and appearance, I judged them to be clerks in some
store or warehouse. Suddenly I noticed that one of them turned as white
as his shirt; and calling the attention of his companions to one of the
unknown victims, he whispered: ‘Gustave!’

“His comrades put their hands over his mouth, and one of them exclaimed:
‘What are you about, you fool, to mix yourself up with this affair! Do
you want to get us into trouble?’

“Thereupon they went out, and I followed them. But the person who had
first spoken was so overcome that he could scarcely drag himself along;
and his companions were obliged to take him to a little restaurant close
by. I entered it myself, and it is there I write this letter, in the
mean time watching them out of the corner of my eye. I send this note,
explaining my absence, to the head keeper, who will give it you. You
will understand that I am going to follow these men. A. B. S.”


The handwriting of this letter was almost illegible; and there were
mistakes in spelling in well-nigh every line; still, its meaning was
clear and exact, and could not fail to excite the most flattering hopes.

Lecoq’s face was so radiant when he returned to the cab that, as the old
coachman urged on his horse, he could not refrain from saying: “Things
are going on to suit you.”

A friendly “hush!” was the only response. It required all Lecoq’s
attention to classify this new information. When he alighted from the
cab in front of the Palais de Justice, he experienced considerable
difficulty in dismissing the old cabman, who insisted upon remaining at
his orders. He succeeded at last, however, but even when he had reached
the portico on the left side of the building, the worthy fellow,
standing up, still shouted at the top of his voice: “At M. Trigault’s
house--don’t forget--Father Papillon--No. 998--1,000 less 2--”

Lecoq had entered the left wing of the Palais. He climbed the stairs
till he had reached the third floor, and was about to enter the long,
narrow, badly-lighted corridor known as the Galerie de l’Instruction,
when, finding a doorkeeper installed behind a heavy oaken desk, he
remarked: “M. d’Escorval is, of course, in his office?”

The man shook his head. “No,” said he, “M. d’Escorval is not here this
morning, and he won’t be here for several weeks.”

“Why not! What do you mean?”

“Last night, as he was alighting from his carriage, at his own door, he
had a most unfortunate fall, and broke his leg.”




IX

Some men are wealthy. They own a carriage drawn by a pair of
high-stepping horses, and driven by a coachman in stylish livery; and
as they pass by, leaning back on comfortable cushions, they become the
object of many an envious glance. Sometimes, however, the coachman has
taken a drop too much, and upsets the carriage; perhaps the horses
run away and a general smash ensues; or, maybe, the hitherto fortunate
owner, in a moment of absent-mindedness, misses the step, and fractures
his leg on the curbstone. Such accidents occur every day; and their
long list should make humble foot-passengers bless the lowly lot which
preserves them from such peril.

On learning the misfortune that had befallen M. d’Escorval, Lecoq’s face
wore such an expression of consternation that the doorkeeper could not
help laughing. “What is there so very extraordinary about that I’ve told
you?” he asked.

“I--oh! nothing--”

The detective did not speak the truth. The fact is, he had just been
struck by the strange coincidence of two events--the supposed murderer’s
attempted suicide, and the magistrate’s fall. Still, he did not allow
the vague presentiment that flitted through his mind to assume any
definite form. For after all, what possible connection could there be
between the two occurrences? Then again, he never allowed himself to be
governed by prejudice, nor had he as yet enriched his formulary with an
axiom he afterward professed: “Distrust all circumstances that seem to
favor your secret wishes.”

Of course, Lecoq did not rejoice at M. d’Escorval’s accident; could he
have prevented it, he would have gladly done so. Still, he could not
help saying to himself that this stroke of misfortune would free him
from all further connection with a man whose superciliousness and
disdain had been painfully disagreeable to his feelings.

This thought caused a sensation of relief--almost one of
light-heartedness. “In that case,” said the young detective to the
doorkeeper, “I shall have nothing to do here this morning.”

“You must be joking,” was the reply. “Does the world stop moving because
one man is disabled? The news only arrived an hour ago; but all the
urgent business that M. d’Escorval had in charge has already been
divided among the other magistrates.”

“I came here about that terrible affair that occurred the other night
just beyond the Barriere de Fontainebleau.”

“Eh! Why didn’t you say so at once? A messenger has been sent to the
prefecture after you already. M. Segmuller has charge of the case, and
he’s waiting for you.”

Doubt and perplexity were plainly written on Lecoq’s forehead. He was
trying to remember the magistrate that bore this name, and wondered
whether he was a likely man to espouse his views.

“Yes,” resumed the doorkeeper, who seemed to be in a talkative mood, “M.
Segmuller--you don’t seem to know him. He is a worthy man, not quite so
grim as most of our gentlemen. A prisoner he had examined said one day:
‘That devil there has pumped me so well that I shall certainly have my
head chopped off; but, nevertheless, he’s a good fellow!”

His heart somewhat lightened by these favorable reports, Lecoq went
and tapped at a door that was indicated to him, and which bore the
number--22.

“Come in!” called out a pleasant voice.

The young detective entered, and found himself face to face with a
man of some forty years of age, tall and rather corpulent, who at once
exclaimed: “Ah! you are Lecoq. Very well--take a seat. I am busy just
now looking over the papers of the case, but I will attend to you in
five minutes.”

Lecoq obeyed, at the same time glancing furtively at the magistrate
with whom he was about to work. M. Segmuller’s appearance corresponded
perfectly with the description given by the doorkeeper. His plump face
wore an air of frankness and benevolence, and his blue eyes had a most
pleasant expression. Nevertheless, Lecoq distrusted these appearances,
and in so doing he was right.

Born near Strasbourg, M. Segmuller possessed that candid physiognomy
common to most of the natives of blonde Alsace--a deceitful mask, which,
behind seeming simplicity, not unfrequently conceals a Gascon cunning,
rendered all the more dangerous since it is allied with extreme caution.
He had a wonderfully alert, penetrating mind; but his system--every
magistrate has his own--was mainly good-humor. Unlike most of his
colleagues, who were as stiff and cutting in manner as the sword which
the statue of Justice usually holds in her hand, he made simplicity and
kindness of demeanor his leading trait, though, of course, without ever
losing sight of his magisterial duties.

Still, the tone of his voice was so paternal, and the subtle purport
of his questions so veiled by his seeming frankness, that most of those
whom he examined forgot the necessity of protecting themselves, and
unawares confessed their guilt. Thus, it frequently happened that while
some unsuspecting culprit was complacently congratulating himself upon
getting the best of the judge, the poor wretch was really being turned
inside out like a glove.

By the side of such a man as M. Segmuller a grave and slender clerk
would have excited distrust; so he had chosen one who was a caricature
of himself. This clerk’s name was Goguet. He was short but corpulent,
and his broad, beardless face habitually wore a silly smile, not out of
keeping with his intellect, which was none of the brightest.

As stated above, when Lecoq entered M. Segmuller’s room the latter was
busy studying the case which had so unexpectedly fallen into his hands.
All the articles which the young detective had collected, from the
flakes of wool to the diamond earring, were spread out upon the
magistrate’s desk. With the greatest attention, he perused the report
prepared by Lecoq, and according to the different phases of the affair,
he examined one or another of the objects before him, or else consulted
the plan of the ground.

“A good half-hour elapsed before he had completed his inspection, when
he threw himself back in his armchair. Monsieur Lecoq,” he said, slowly,
“Monsieur d’Escorval has informed me by a note on the margin of this
file of papers that you are an intelligent man, and that we can trust
you.”

“I am willing, at all events.”

“You speak too slightingly of yourself; this is the first time that an
agent has brought me a report as complete as yours. You are young, and
if you persevere, I think you will be able to accomplish great things in
your profession.”

Nervous with delight, Lecoq bowed and stammered his thanks.

“Your opinion in this matter coincides with mine,” continued M.
Segmuller, “and the public prosecutor informs me that M. d’Escorval
shares the same views. An enigma is before us; and it ought to be
solved.”

“Oh!--we’ll solve it, I am certain, sir,” exclaimed Lecoq, who at this
moment felt capable of the most extraordinary achievements. Indeed,
he would have gone through fire and water for the magistrate who had
received him so kindly, and his enthusiasm sparkled so plainly in his
eyes that M. Segmuller could not restrain a smile.

“I have strong hopes of it myself,” he responded; “but we are far
from the end. Now, what have you been doing since yesterday? Did
M. d’Escorval give you any orders? Have you obtained any fresh
information?”

“I don’t think I have wasted my time,” replied Lecoq, who at once
proceeded to relate the various facts that had come to his knowledge
since his departure from the Poivriere.

With rare precision and that happiness of expression which seldom fails
a man well acquainted with his subject, he recounted the daring feats
of the presumed accomplice, the points he had noted in the
supposed murderer’s conduct, the latter’s unsuccessful attempt at
self-destruction. He repeated the testimony given by the cab-driver, and
by the concierge in the Rue de Bourgogne, and then read the letter he
had received from Father Absinthe.

In conclusion, he placed on the magistrate’s desk some of the dirt he
had scraped from the prisoner’s feet; at the same time depositing beside
it a similar parcel of dust collected on the floor of the cell in which
the murderer was confined at the Barriere d’Italie.

When Lecoq had explained the reasons that had led him to collect this
soil, and the conclusions that might be drawn from a comparison of the
two parcels, M. Segmuller, who had been listening attentively, at once
exclaimed: “You are right. It may be that you have discovered a means to
confound all the prisoner’s denials. At all events, this is certainly a
proof of surprising sagacity on your part.”

So it must have been, for Goguet, the clerk, nodded approvingly.
“Capital!” he murmured. “I should never have thought of that.”

While he was talking, M. Segmuller had carefully placed all the
so-called “articles of conviction” in a large drawer, from which they
would not emerge until the trial. “Now,” said he, “I understand the case
well enough to examine the Widow Chupin. We may gain some information
from her.”

He was laying his hand upon the bell, when Lecoq stopped him with an
almost supplicating gesture. “I have one great favor to ask you, sir,”
 he observed.

“What is it?--speak.”

“I should very much like to be present at this examination. It takes so
little, sometimes, to awaken a happy inspiration.”

Although the law says that the accused shall first of all be privately
examined by the investigating magistrate assisted by his clerk, it also
allows the presence of police agents. Accordingly, M. Segmuller told
Lecoq that he might remain. At the same time he rang his bell; which was
speedily answered by a messenger.

“Has the Widow Chupin been brought here, in compliance with my orders?”
 asked M. Segmuller.

“Yes, sir; she is in the gallery outside.”

“Let her come in then.”

An instant later the hostess of the Poivriere entered the room, bowing
to the right and to the left. This was not her first appearance before
a magistrate, and she was not ignorant of the respect that is due to
justice. Accordingly, she had arrayed herself for her examination with
the utmost care. She had arranged her rebellious gray locks in smooth
bandeaux, and her garments, although of common material, looked
positively neat. She had even persuaded one of the prison warders to buy
her--with the money she had about her at the time of her arrest--a black
crape cap, and a couple of white pocket-handkerchiefs, intending to
deluge the latter with her tears, should the situation call for a
pathetic display.

She was indeed far too knowing to rely solely on the mere artifices of
dress; hence, she had also drawn upon her repertoire of grimaces for an
innocent, sad, and yet resigned expression, well fitted, in her opinion,
to win the sympathy and indulgence of the magistrate upon whom her fate
would depend.

Thus disguised, with downcast eyes and honeyed voice, she looked so
unlike the terrible termagant of the Poivriere, that her customers would
scarcely have recognized her. Indeed, an honest old bachelor might have
offered her twenty francs a month to take charge of his chambers--solely
on the strength of her good looks. But M. Segmuller had unmasked so many
hypocrites that he was not deceived for a moment. “What an old actress!”
 he muttered to himself, and, glancing at Lecoq, he perceived the same
thought sparkling in the young detective’s eyes. It is true that the
magistrate’s penetration may have been due to some notes he had just
perused--notes containing an abstract of the woman’s former life, and
furnished by the chief of police at the magistrate’s request.

With a gesture of authority M. Segmuller warned Goguet, the clerk with
the silly smile, to get his writing materials ready. He then turned
toward the Widow Chupin. “Your name?” he asked in a sharp tone.

“Aspasie Claperdty, my maiden name,” replied the old woman, “and to-day,
the Widow Chupin, at your service, sir;” so saying, she made a low
courtesy, and then added: “A lawful widow, you understand, sir; I have
my marriage papers safe in my chest at home; and if you wish to send any
one--”

“Your age?” interrupted the magistrate.

“Fifty-four.”

“Your profession?”

“Dealer in wines and spirits outside of Paris, near the Rue du
Chateau-des-Rentiers, just beyond the fortifications.”

A prisoner’s examination always begins with these questions as to
individuality, which gives both the magistrate and the culprit time
to study each other, to try, as it were, each other’s strength, before
joining in a serious struggle; just as two duelists, about to engage in
mortal combat, first try a few passes with the foils.

“Now,” resumed M. Segmuller, “we will note your antecedents. Have you
not already been found guilty of several offenses?”

The Widow Chupin was too well versed in criminal procedure to be
ignorant of those famous records which render the denial of identity
such a difficult matter in France. “I have been unfortunate, my good
judge,” she whined.

“Yes, several times. First of all, you were arrested on a charge of
receiving stolen goods.”

“But it was proved that I was innocent, that my character was whiter
than snow. My poor, dear husband had been deceived by his comrades; that
was all.”

“Possibly. But while your husband was undergoing his sentence, you were
condemned, first to one month’s and then to three months’ imprisonment
for stealing.”

“Oh, I had some enemies who did their best to ruin me.”

“Next you were imprisoned for having led some young girls astray.”

“They were good-for-nothing hussies, my kind sir, heartless,
unprincipled creatures. I did them many favors, and then they went and
related a batch of falsehoods to ruin me. I have always been too kind
and considerate toward others.”

The list of the woman’s offenses was not exhausted, but M. Segmuller
thought it useless to continue. “Such is your past,” he resumed. “At the
present time your wine-shop is the resort of rogues and criminals.
Your son is undergoing his fourth term of imprisonment; and it has been
clearly proved that you abetted and assisted him in his evil deeds. Your
daughter-in-law, by some miracle, has remained honest and industrious,
hence you have tormented and abused her to such an extent that the
authorities have been obliged to interfere. When she left your house you
tried to keep her child--no doubt meaning to bring it up after the same
fashion as its father.”

“This,” thought the Widow Chupin, “is the right moment to try and
soften the magistrate’s heart.” Accordingly, she drew one of her
new handkerchiefs from her pocket, and, by dint of rubbing her eyes,
endeavored to extract a tear. “Oh, unhappy me,” she groaned. “How can
any one imagine that I would harm my grandson, my poor little Toto! Why,
I should be worse than a wild beast to try and bring my own flesh and
blood to perdition.”

She soon perceived, however, that her lamentations did not much affect
M. Segmuller, hence, suddenly changing both her tone and manner, she
began her justification. She did not positively deny her past; but she
threw all the blame on the injustice of destiny, which, while favoring a
few, generally the less deserving, showed no mercy to others. Alas!
she was one of those who had had no luck in life, having always been
persecuted, despite her innocence. In this last affair, for instance,
how was she to blame? A triple murder had stained her shop with blood;
but the most respectable establishments are not exempt from similar
catastrophes. During her solitary confinement, she had, said she, dived
down into the deepest recesses of her conscience, and she was still
unable to discover what blame could justly be laid at her door.

“I can tell you,” interrupted the magistrate. “You are accused of
impeding the action of the law.”

“Good heavens! Is it possible?”

“And of seeking to defeat justice. This is equivalent to complicity,
Widow Chupin; take care. When the police entered your cabin, after this
crime had been committed, you refused to answer their questions.”

“I told them all that I knew.”

“Very well, then, you must repeat what you told them to me.”

M. Segmuller had reason to feel satisfied. He had conducted the
examination in such a way that the Widow Chupin would now have to
initiate a narrative of the tragedy. This excellent point gained; for
this shrewd old woman, possessed of all her coolness, would naturally
have been on her guard against any direct questions. Now, it was
essential that she should not suspect either what the magistrate knew
of the affair, or what he was ignorant of. By leaving her to her own
devices she might, in the course of the version which she proposed to
substitute for the truth, not merely strengthen Lecoq’s theories, but
also let fall some remark calculated to facilitate the task of future
investigation. Both M. Segmuller and Lecoq were of opinion that the
version of the crime which they were about to hear had been concocted
at the station-house of the Place d’Italie while the murderer and the
spurious drunkard were left together, and that it had been transmitted
by the accomplice to the widow during the brief conversation they were
allowed to have through the wicket of the latter’s cell.

Invited by the magistrate to recount the circumstances of the tragedy,
Mother Chupin did not hesitate for a moment. “Oh, it was a very simple
affair, my good sir,” she began. “I was sitting by my fireside on Sunday
evening, when suddenly the door opened, and three men and two women came
in.”

M. Segmuller and the young detective exchanged glances. The accomplice
had evidently seen Lecoq and his comrade examining the footprints, and
accordingly the presence of the two women was not to be denied.

“What time was this?” asked the magistrate.

“About eleven o’clock.”

“Go on.”

“As soon as they sat down they ordered a bowl of wine, a la Frangaise.
Without boasting, I may say that I haven’t an equal in preparing that
drink. Of course, I waited on them, and afterward, having a blouse to
mend for my boy, I went upstairs to my room, which is just over the
shop.”

“Leaving the people alone?”

“Yes, my judge.”

“That showed a great deal of confidence on your part.”

The widow sadly shook her head. “People as poor as I am don’t fear the
thieves,” she sighed.

“Go on--go on.”

“Well, I had been upstairs about half an hour, when I heard some one
below call out: ‘Eh! old woman!’ So I went down, and found a tall,
big-bearded man, who had just come in. He asked for a glass of brandy,
which I brought to a table where he had sat down by himself.”

“And then did you go upstairs again?” interrupted the magistrate.

The exclamation was ironical, of course, but no one could have told from
the Widow Chupin’s placid countenance whether she was aware that such
was the case.

“Precisely, my good sir,” she replied in the most composed manner. “Only
this time I had scarcely taken up my needle when I heard a terrible
uproar in the shop. I hurried downstairs to put a stop to it--but heaven
knows my interference would have been of little use. The three men who
had come in first of all had fallen upon the newcomer, and they were
beating him, my good sir, they were killing him. I screamed. Just then
the man who had come in alone drew a revolver from his pocket; he fired
and killed one of his assailants, who fell to the ground. I was so
frightened that I crouched on the staircase and threw my apron over
my head that I might not see the blood run. An instant later Monsieur
Gevrol arrived with his men; they forced open the door, and behold--”

The Widow Chupin here stopped short. These wretched old women, who have
trafficked in every sort of vice, and who have tasted every disgrace,
at times attain a perfection of hypocrisy calculated to deceive the most
subtle penetration. Any one unacquainted with the antecedents of the
landlady of the Poivriere would certainly have been impressed by her
apparent candor, so skillfully did she affect a display of frankness,
surprise, and fear. Her expression would have been simply perfect, had
it not been for her eyes, her small gray eyes, as restless as those of a
caged animal, and gleaming at intervals with craftiness and cunning.

There she stood, mentally rejoicing at the success of her narrative, for
she was convinced that the magistrate placed implicit confidence in her
revelations, although during her recital, delivered, by the way, with
conjurer-like volubility, not a muscle of M. Segmuller’s face had
betrayed what was passing in his mind. When she paused, out of breath,
he rose from his seat, and without a word approached his clerk to
inspect the notes taken during the earlier part of the examination.

From the corner where he was quietly seated, Lecoq did not cease
watching the prisoner. “She thinks that it’s all over,” he muttered to
himself; “she fancies that her deposition is accepted without question.”

If such were, indeed, the widow’s opinion, she was soon to be
undeceived; for, after addressing a few low-spoken words to the smiling
Goguet, M. Segmuller took a seat near the fireplace, convinced that the
moment had now come to abandon defensive tactics, and open fire on the
enemy’s position.

“So, Widow Chupin,” he began, “you tell us that you didn’t remain for a
single moment with the people who came into your shop that evening!”

“Not a moment.”

“They came in and ordered what they wanted; you waited on them, and then
left them to themselves?”

“Yes, my good sir.”

“It seems to me impossible that you didn’t overhear some words of their
conversation. What were they talking about?”

“I am not in the habit of playing spy over my customers.”

“Didn’t you hear anything?”

“Nothing at all.”

The magistrate shrugged his shoulders with an air of commiseration. “In
other words,” he remarked, “you refuse to inform justice--”

“Oh, my good sir!”

“Allow me to finish. All these improbable stories about leaving the shop
and mending your son’s clothes in your bedroom are so many inventions.
You have concocted them so as to be able to say to me: ‘I didn’t see
anything; I didn’t hear anything.’ If such is your system of defense,
I warn you that it will be impossible for you to maintain it, and I may
add that it would not be admitted by any tribunal.”

“It is not a system of defense; it is the truth.”

M. Segmuller seemed to reflect for a moment; then, suddenly, he
exclaimed: “Then you have nothing to tell me about this miserable
assassin?”

“But he is not an assassin, my good sir.”

“What do you mean by such an assertion?”

“I mean that he only killed the others in protecting himself. They
picked a quarrel with him; he was alone against three, and saw very
plainly that he could expect no mercy from brigands who--”

The color rose to the Widow Chupin’s cheeks, and she suddenly checked
herself, greatly embarrassed, and evidently regretting that she had
not bridled her tongue. It is true she might reasonably hope, that the
magistrate had imperfectly heard her words, and had failed to seize
their full purport, for two or three red-hot coals having fallen from
the grate on the hearth, he had taken up the tongs, and seemed to be
engrossed in the task of artistically arranging the fire.

“Who can tell me--who can prove to me that, on the contrary, it was not
this man who first attacked the others?” he murmured, thoughtfully.

“I can,” stoutly declared the widow, already forgetful of her prudent
hesitation, “I can swear it.”

M. Segmuller looked up, intense astonishment written upon his face. “How
can you know that?” he said slowly. “How can you swear it? You were in
your bedroom when the quarrel began.”

Silent and motionless in his corner, Lecoq was inwardly jubilant. This
was a most happy result, he thought, but a few questions more, and the
old woman would be obliged to contradict herself. What she had already
said sufficed to show that she must have a secret interest in the
matter, or else she would never have been so imprudently earnest in
defending the prisoner.

“However, you have probably been led to this conclusion by your
knowledge of the murderer’s character,” remarked M. Segmuller, “you are
apparently well acquainted with him.”

“Oh, I had never set eyes on him before that evening.”

“But he must have been in your establishment before?”

“Never in his life.”

“Oh, oh! Then how do you explain that on entering the shop while you
were upstairs, this unknown person--this stranger--should have called
out: ‘Here, old woman!’ Did he merely guess that the establishment was
kept by a woman; and that this woman was no longer young?”

“He did not say that.”

“Reflect a moment; you, yourself just told me so.”

“Oh, I didn’t say that, I’m sure, my good sir.”

“Yes, you did, and I will prove it by having your evidence read. Goguet,
read the passage, if you please.”

The smiling clerk looked back through his minutes and then, in his
clearest voice, he read these words, taken down as they fell from the
Widow Chupin’s lips: “I had been upstairs about half an hour, when I
heard some one below call out ‘Eh! old woman.’ So I went down,” etc.,
etc.

“Are you convinced?” asked M. Segmuller.

The old offender’s assurance was sensibly diminished by this proof
of her prevarication. However, instead of discussing the subject any
further, the magistrate glided over it as if he did not attach much
importance to the incident.

“And the other men,” he resumed, “those who were killed: did you know
them?”

“No, good sir, no more than I knew Adam and Eve.”

“And were you not surprised to see three men utterly unknown to you, and
accompanied by two women, enter your establishment?”

“Sometimes chance--”

“Come! you do not think of what you are saying. It was not chance that
brought these customers, in the middle of the night, to a wine-shop
with a reputation like yours--an establishment situated far from any
frequented route in the midst of a desolate waste.”

“I’m not a sorceress; I say what I think.”

“Then you did not even know the youngest of the victims, the man who was
attired as a soldier, he who was named Gustave?”

“Not at all.”

M. Segmuller noted the intonation of this response, and then slowly
added: “But you must have heard of one of Gustave’s friends, a man
called Lacheneur?”

On hearing this name, the landlady of the Poivriere became visibly
embarrassed, and it was in an altered voice that she stammered:
“Lacheneur! Lacheneur! no, I have never heard that name mentioned.”

Still despite her denial, the effect of M. Segmuller’s remark was
evident, and Lecoq secretly vowed that he would find this Lacheneur, at
any cost. Did not the “articles of conviction” comprise a letter sent by
this man to Gustave, and written, so Lecoq had reason to believe, in
a cafe on the Boulevard Beaumarchais? With such a clue and a little
patience, the mysterious Lacheneur might yet be discovered.

“Now,” continued M. Segmuller, “let us speak of the women who
accompanied these unfortunate men. What sort of women were they?”

“Oh! women of no account whatever!”

“Were they well dressed?”

“On the contrary, very miserably.”

“Well, give me a description of them.”

“They were tall and powerfully built, and indeed, as it was Shrove
Sunday, I first of all took them for men in disguise. They had hands
like shoulders of mutton, gruff voices, and very black hair. They were
as dark as mulattoes--”

“Enough!” interrupted the magistrate, “I require no further proof of
your mendacity. These women were short, and one of them was remarkably
fair.”

“I swear to you, my good sir--”

“Do not declare it upon oath. I shall be forced to confront you with an
honest man, who will tell you to your face that you are a liar!”

The widow did not reply, and there was a moment’s silence. M. Segmuller
determined to deal a decisive blow. “Do you also affirm that you had
nothing of a compromising character in the pocket of your apron?” he
asked.

“Nothing--you may have it examined; it was left in the house.”

“Then you still persist in your system,” resumed M. Segmuller. “Believe
me, you are wrong. Reflect--it rests with you to go to the Assize Court
as a witness, or an accomplice.”

Although the widow seemed crushed by this unexpected blow, the
magistrate did not add another word. Her deposition was read over to
her, she signed it, and was then led away.

M. Segmuller immediately seated himself at his desk, filled up a blank
form and handed it to his clerk, saying: “This is an order for the
governor of the Depot. Tell him to send the supposed murderer here at
once.”




X

If it is difficult to extort a confession from a man interested in
preserving silence and persuaded that no proofs can be produced against
him, it is a yet more arduous task to make a woman, similarly situated,
speak the truth. As they say at the Palais de Justice, one might as well
try to make the devil confess.

The examination of the Widow Chupin had been conducted with the greatest
possible care by M. Segmuller, who was as skilful in managing his
questions as a tried general in maneuvering his troops.

However, all that he had discovered was that the landlady of the
Poivriere was conniving with the murderer. The motive of her connivance
was yet unknown, and the murderer’s identity still a mystery. Both M.
Segmuller and Lecoq were nevertheless of the opinion that the old hag
knew everything. “It is almost certain,” remarked the magistrate, “that
she was acquainted with the people who came to her house--with the
women, the victims, the murderer--with all of them, in fact. I am
positive as regards that fellow Gustave--I read it in her eyes. I am
also convinced that she knows Lacheneur--the man upon whom the dying
soldier breathed vengeance--the mysterious personage who evidently
possesses the key to the enigma. That man must be found.”

“Ah!” replied Lecoq, “and I will find him even if I have to question
every one of the eleven hundred thousand men who constantly walk the
streets of Paris!”

This was promising so much that the magistrate, despite his
preoccupation, could not repress a smile.

“If this old woman would only decide to make a clean breast of it at her
next examination!” remarked Lecoq.

“Yes. But she won’t.”

The young detective shook his head despondently. Such was his own
opinion. He did not delude himself with false hopes, and he had noticed
between the Widow Chupin’s eyebrows those furrows which, according to
physiognomists, indicate a senseless, brutish obstinacy.

“Women never confess,” resumed the magistrate; “and even when they
seemingly resign themselves to such a course they are not sincere. They
fancy they have discovered some means of misleading their examiner. On
the contrary, evidence will crush the most obstinate man; he gives up
the struggle, and confesses. Now, a woman scoffs at evidence. Show her
the sun; tell her it’s daytime; at once she will close her eyes and
say to you, ‘No, it’s night.’ Male prisoners plan and combine different
systems of defense according to their social positions; the women, on
the contrary, have but one system, no matter what may be their condition
in life. They deny everything, persist in their denials even when the
proof against them is overwhelming, and then they cry. When I worry the
Chupin with disagreeable questions, at her next examination, you may be
sure she will turn her eyes into a fountain of tears.”

In his impatience, M. Segmuller angrily stamped his foot. He had many
weapons in his arsenal; but none strong enough to break a woman’s dogged
resistance.

“If I only understood the motive that guides this old hag!” he
continued. “But not a clue! Who can tell me what powerful interest
induces her to remain silent? Is it her own cause that she is defending?
Is she an accomplice? Is it certain that she did not aid the murderer in
planning an ambuscade?”

“Yes,” responded Lecoq, slowly, “yes; this supposition very naturally
presents itself to the mind. But think a moment, sir, such a theory
would prove that the idea we entertained a short time since is
altogether false. If the Widow Chupin is an accomplice, the murderer is
not the person we have supposed him to be; he is simply the man he seems
to be.”

This argument apparently convinced M. Segmuller. “What is your opinion?”
 he asked.

The young detective had formed his opinion a long while ago. But how
could he, a humble police agent, venture to express any decided views
when the magistrate hesitated? He understood well enough that his
position necessitated extreme reserve; hence, it was in the most modest
tone that he replied: “Might not the pretended drunkard have dazzled
Mother Chupin’s eyes with the prospect of a brilliant reward? Might he
not have promised her a considerable sum of money?”

He paused; Goguet, the smiling clerk, had just returned.

Behind him stood a private of the Garde de Paris who remained
respectfully on the threshold, his heels in a straight line, his right
hand raised to the peak of his shako, and his elbow on a level with his
eyes, in accordance with the regulations.

“The governor of the Depot,” said the soldier, “sends me to inquire if
he is to keep the Widow Chupin in solitary confinement; she complains
bitterly about it.”

M. Segmuller reflected for a moment. “Certainly,” he murmured, as if
replying to an objection made by his own conscience; “certainly, it
is an undoubted aggravation of suffering; but if I allow this woman
to associate with the other prisoners, she will certainly find some
opportunity to communicate with parties outside. This must not be; the
interests of justice and truth must be considered first.” The thought
embodied in these last words decided him. “Despite her complaints the
prisoner must be kept in solitary confinement until further orders,” he
said.

The soldier allowed his right hand to fall to his side, he carried
his right foot three inches behind his left heel, and wheeled around.
Goguet, the smiling clerk, then closed the door, and, drawing a large
envelope from his pocket, handed it to the magistrate. “Here is a
communication from the governor of the Depot,” said he.

The magistrate broke the seal, and read aloud, as follows:

“I feel compelled to advise M. Segmuller to take every precaution
with the view of assuring his own safety before proceeding with the
examination of the prisoner, May. Since his unsuccessful attempt at
suicide, this prisoner has been in such a state of excitement that we
have been obliged to keep him in a strait-waistcoat. He did not close
his eyes all last night, and the guards who watched him expected every
moment that he would become delirious. However, he did not utter a word.
When food was offered him this morning, he resolutely rejected it, and
I should not be surprised if it were his intention to starve himself
to death. I have rarely seen a more determined criminal. I think him
capable of any desperate act.”

“Ah!” exclaimed the clerk, whose smile had disappeared, “If I were
in your place, sir, I would only let him in here with an escort of
soldiers.”

“What! you--Goguet, you, an old clerk--make such a proposition! Can it
be that you’re frightened?”

“Frightened! No, certainly not; but--”

“Nonsense!” interrupted Lecoq, in a tone that betrayed superlative
confidence in his own muscles; “Am I not here?”

If M. Segmuller had seated himself at his desk, that article of
furniture would naturally have served as a rampart between the prisoner
and himself. For purposes of convenience he usually did place himself
behind it; but after Goguet’s display of fear, he would have blushed
to have taken the slightest measure of self-protection. Accordingly,
he went and sat down by the fireplace--as he had done a few moments
previously while questioning the Widow Chupin--and then ordered his
door-keeper to admit the prisoner alone. He emphasized this word
“alone.”

A moment later the door was flung open with a violent jerk, and the
prisoner entered, or rather precipitated himself into the room. Goguet
turned pale behind his table, and Lecoq advanced a step forward, ready
to spring upon the prisoner and pinion him should it be requisite. But
when the latter reached the centre of the room, he paused and looked
around him. “Where is the magistrate?” he inquired, in a hoarse voice.

“I am the magistrate,” replied M. Segmuller.

“No, the other one.”

“What other one?”

“The one who came to question me last evening.”

“He has met with an accident. Yesterday, after leaving you, he fell down
and broke his leg.”

“Oh!”

“And I am to take his place.”

The prisoner was apparently deaf to the explanation. Excitement had
seemingly given way to stupor. His features, hitherto contracted with
anger, now relaxed. He grew pale and tottered, as if about to fall.

“Compose yourself,” said the magistrate in a benevolent tone; “if you
are too weak to remain standing, take a seat.”

Already, with a powerful effort, the man had recovered his
self-possession. A momentary gleam flashed from his eyes. “Many thanks
for your kindness,” he replied, “but this is nothing. I felt a slight
sensation of dizziness, but it is over now.”

“Is it long since you have eaten anything?”

“I have eaten nothing since that man”--and so saying he pointed to
Lecoq--“brought me some bread and wine at the station house.”

“Wouldn’t you like to take something?”

“No--and yet--if you would be so kind--I should like a glass of water.”

“Will you not have some wine with it?”

“I should prefer pure water.”

His request was at once complied with. He drained a first glassful at
a single draft; the glass was then replenished and he drank again, this
time, however, more slowly. One might have supposed that he was drinking
in life itself. Certainly, when he laid down the empty glass, he seemed
quite another man.

Eighteen out of every twenty criminals who appear before our
investigating magistrates come prepared with a more or less complete
plan of defense, which they have conceived during their preliminary
confinement. Innocent or guilty, they have resolved, on playing some
part or other, which they begin to act as soon as they cross the
threshold of the room where the magistrate awaits them.

The moment they enter his presence, the magistrate needs to bring all
his powers of penetration into play; for such a culprit’s first attitude
as surely betrays his plan of defense as an index reveals a book’s
contents. In this case, however, M. Segmuller did not think that
appearances were deceitful. It seemed evident to him that the prisoner
was not feigning, but that the excited frenzy which marked his entrance
was as real as his after stupor.

At all events, there seemed no fear of the danger the governor of the
Depot had spoken of, and accordingly M. Segmuller seated himself at his
desk. Here he felt stronger and more at ease for his back being turned
to the window, his face was half hidden in shadow; and in case of need,
he could, by bending over his papers, conceal any sign of surprise or
discomfiture.

The prisoner, on the contrary, stood in the full light, and not a
movement of his features, not the fluttering of an eyelid could escape
the magistrate’s attention. He seemed to have completely recovered
from his indisposition; and his features assumed an expression which
indicated either careless indifference, or complete resignation.

“Do you feel better?” asked M. Segmuller.

“I feel very well.”

“I hope,” continued the magistrate, paternally, “that in future you will
know how to moderate your excitement. Yesterday you tried to destroy
yourself. It would have been another great crime added to many others--a
crime which--”

With a hasty movement of the hand, the prisoner interrupted him. “I
have committed no crime,” said he, in a rough, but no longer threatening
voice. “I was attacked, and I defended myself. Any one has a right to do
that. There were three men against me. It was a great misfortune; and
I would give my right hand to repair it; but my conscience does not
reproach me--that much!”

The prisoner’s “that much,” was a contemptuous snap of his finger and
thumb.

“And yet I’ve been arrested and treated like an assassin,” he continued.
“When I saw myself interred in that living tomb which you call a secret
cell, I grew afraid; I lost my senses. I said to myself: ‘My boy,
they’ve buried you alive; and it is better to die--to die quickly,
if you don’t wish to suffer.’ So I tried to strangle myself. My death
wouldn’t have caused the slightest sorrow to any one. I have neither
wife nor child depending upon me for support. However, my attempt was
frustrated. I was bled; and then placed in a strait-waistcoat, as if I
were a madman. Mad! I really believed I should become so. All night
long the jailors sat around me, like children amusing themselves by
tormenting a chained animal. They watched me, talked about me, and
passed the candle to and fro before my eyes.”

The prisoner talked forcibly, but without any attempt at oratorical
display; there was bitterness but not anger in his tone; in short, he
spoke with all the seeming sincerity of a man giving expression to some
deep emotion or conviction. As the magistrate and the detective heard
him speak, they were seized with the same idea. “This man,” they
thought, “is very clever; it won’t be easy to get the better of him.”

Then, after a moment’s reflection, M. Segmuller added aloud: “This
explains your first act of despair; but later on, for instance, even
this morning, you refused to eat the food that was offered you.”

As the prisoner heard this remark, his lowering face suddenly
brightened, he gave a comical wink, and finally burst into a hearty
laugh, gay, frank, and sonorous.

“That,” said he, “is quite another matter. Certainly, I refused all they
offered me, and now I will tell you why. As I had my hands confined in
the strait-waistcoat, the jailor tried to feed me just as a nurse tries
to feed a baby with pap. Now I wasn’t going to submit to that, so I
closed my lips as tightly as I could. Then he tried to force my mouth
open and push the spoon in, just as one might force a sick dog’s
jaws apart and pour some medicine down its throat. The deuce take
his impertinence! I tried to bite him: that’s the truth, and if I had
succeeded in getting his finger between my teeth, it would have stayed
there. However, because I wouldn’t be fed like a baby, all the prison
officials raised their hands to heaven in holy horror, and pointed at
me, saying: ‘What a terrible man! What an awful rascal!’”

The prisoner seemed to thoroughly enjoy the recollection of the scene he
had described, for he now burst into another hearty laugh, to the great
amazement of Lecoq, and the scandal of Goguet, the smiling clerk.

M. Segmuller also found it difficult to conceal his surprise. “You are
too reasonable, I hope,” he said, at last, “to attach any blame to these
men, who, in confining you in a strait-waistcoat, were merely obeying
the orders of their superior officers with the view of protecting you
from your own violent passions.”

“Hum!” responded the prisoner, suddenly growing serious. “I do blame
them, however, and if I had one of them in a corner--But, never mind, I
shall get over it. If I know myself aright, I have no more spite in my
composition than a chicken.”

“Your treatment depends on your own conduct,” rejoined M. Segmuller,
“If you will only remain calm, you shan’t be put in a strait-waistcoat
again. But you must promise me that you will be quiet and conduct
yourself properly.”

The murderer sadly shook his head. “I shall be very prudent hereafter,”
 said he, “but it is terribly hard to stay in prison with nothing to do.
If I had some comrades with me, we could laugh and chat, and the time
would slip by; but it is positively horrible to have to remain alone,
entirely alone, in that cold, damp cell, where not a sound can be
heard.”

The magistrate bent over his desk to make a note. The word “comrades”
 had attracted his attention, and he proposed to ask the prisoner to
explain it at a later stage of the inquiry.

“If you are innocent,” he remarked, “you will soon be released: but it
is necessary to prove your innocence.”

“What must I do to prove it?”

“Tell the truth, the whole truth: answer my questions honestly without
reserve.”

“As for that, you may depend upon me.” As he spoke the prisoner lifted
his hand, as if to call upon God to witness his sincerity.

But M. Segmuller immediately intervened: “Prisoners do not take the
oath,” said he.

“Indeed!” ejaculated the man with an astonished air, “that’s strange!”

Although the magistrate had apparently paid but little attention to the
prisoner, he had in point of fact carefully noted his attitude, his tone
of voice, his looks and gestures. M. Segmuller had, moreover, done
his utmost to set the culprit’s mind at ease, to quiet all possible
suspicion of a trap, and his inspection of the prisoner’s person led him
to believe that this result had been attained.

“Now,” said he, “you will give me your attention; and do not forget that
your liberty depends upon your frankness. What is your name?”

“May.”

“What is your Christian name?”

“I have none.”

“That is impossible.”

“I have been told that already three times since yesterday,” rejoined
the prisoner impatiently. “And yet it’s the truth. If I were a liar, I
could easily tell you that my name was Peter, James, or John. But
lying is not in my line. Really, I have no Christian name. If it were a
question of surnames, it would be quite another thing. I have had plenty
of them.”

“What were they?”

“Let me see--to commence with, when I was with Father Fougasse, I was
called Affiloir, because you see--”

“Who was this Father Fougasse?”

“The great wild beast tamer, sir. Ah! he could boast of a menagerie
and no mistake! Lions, tigers, and bears, serpents as big round as your
thigh, parrakeets of every color under the sun. Ah! it was a wonderful
collection. But unfortunately--”

Was the man jesting, or was he in earnest? It was so hard to decide,
that M. Segmuller and Lecoq were equally in doubt. As for Goguet, the
smiling clerk, he chuckled to himself as his pen ran over the paper.

“Enough,” interrupted the magistrate. “How old are you?”

“Forty-four or forty-five years of age.”

“Where were you born?”

“In Brittany, probably.”

M. Segmuller thought he could detect a hidden vein of irony in this
reply.

“I warn you,” said he, severely, “that if you go on in this way your
chances of recovering your liberty will be greatly compromised. Each of
your answers is a breach of propriety.”

As the supposed murderer heard these words, an expression of mingled
distress and anxiety was apparent in his face. “Ah! I meant no offense,
sir,” he sighed. “You questioned me, and I replied. You will see that
I have spoken the truth, if you will allow me to recount the history of
the whole affair.”

“When the prisoner speaks, the prosecution is enlightened,” so runs an
old proverb frequently quoted at the Palais de Justice. It does, indeed,
seem almost impossible for a culprit to say more than a few words in an
investigating magistrate’s presence, without betraying his intentions or
his thoughts; without, in short, revealing more or less of the secret he
is endeavoring to conceal. All criminals, even the most simple-minded,
understand this, and those who are shrewd prove remarkably reticent.
Confining themselves to the few facts upon which they have founded their
defense, they are careful not to travel any further unless absolutely
compelled to do so, and even then they only speak with the utmost
caution. When questioned, they reply, of course, but always briefly; and
they are very sparing of details.

In the present instance, however, the prisoner was prodigal of words. He
did not seem to think that there was any danger of his being the medium
of accomplishing his own decapitation. He did not hesitate like those
who are afraid of misplacing a word of the romance they are substituting
for the truth. Under other circumstances, this fact would have been a
strong argument in his favor.

“You may tell your own story, then,” said M. Segmuller in answer to the
prisoner’s indirect request.

The presumed murderer did not try to hide the satisfaction he
experienced at thus being allowed to plead his own cause, in his own
way. His eyes sparkled and his nostrils dilated as if with pleasure. He
sat himself dawn, threw his head back, passed his tongue over his lips
as if to moisten them, and said: “Am I to understand that you wish to
hear my history?”

“Yes.”

“Then you must know that one day about forty-five years ago, Father
Tringlot, the manager of a traveling acrobatic company, was going
from Guingamp to Saint Brieuc, in Brittany. He had with him two large
vehicles containing his wife, the necessary theatrical paraphernalia,
and the members of the company. Well, soon after passing Chatelaudren,
he perceived something white lying by the roadside, near the edge of a
ditch. ‘I must go and see what that is,’ he said to his wife. He stopped
the horses, alighted from the vehicle he was in, went to the ditch,
picked up the object he had noticed, and uttered a cry of surprise. You
will ask me what he had found? Ah! good heavens! A mere trifle. He had
found your humble servant, then about six months old.”

With these last words, the prisoner made a low bow to his audience.

“Naturally, Father Tringlot carried me to his wife. She was a
kind-hearted woman. She took me, examined me, fed me, and said: ‘He’s a
strong, healthy child; and we’ll keep him since his mother has been so
wicked as to abandon him by the roadside. I will teach him; and in five
or six years he will be a credit to us.’ They then asked each other what
name they should give me, and as it happened to be the first day of May,
they decided to call me after the month, and so it happens that May has
been my name from that day to this.”

The prisoner paused again and looked from one to another of his
listeners, as if seeking some sign of approval. None being forthcoming,
he proceeded with his story.

“Father Tringlot was an uneducated man, entirely ignorant of the law. He
did not inform the authorities that he had found a child, and, for this
reason, although I was living, I did not legally exist, for, to have
a legal existence it is necessary that one’s name, parentage, and
birthplace should figure upon a municipal register.

“When I grew older, I rather congratulated myself on Father Tringlot’s
neglect. ‘May, my boy,’ said I, ‘you are not put down on any government
register, consequently there’s no fear of your ever being drawn as a
soldier.’ I had a horror of military service, and a positive dread of
bullets and cannon balls. Later on, when I had passed the proper age for
the conscription, a lawyer told me that I should get into all kinds of
trouble if I sought a place on the civil register so late in the day;
and so I decided to exist surreptitiously. And this is why I have no
Christian name, and why I can’t exactly say where I was born.”

If truth has any particular accent of its own, as moralists have
asserted, the murderer had found that accent. Voice, gesture, glance,
expression, all were in accord; not a word of his long story had rung
false.

“Now,” said M. Segmuller, coldly, “what are your means of subsistence?”

By the prisoner’s discomfited mien one might have supposed that he
had expected to see the prison doors fly open at the conclusion of his
narrative. “I have a profession,” he replied plaintively. “The one that
Mother Tringlot taught me. I subsist by its practise; and I have lived
by it in France and other countries.”

The magistrate thought he had found a flaw in the prisoner’s armor. “You
say you have lived in foreign countries?” he inquired.

“Yes; during the seventeen years that I was with M. Simpson’s company, I
traveled most of the time in England and Germany.”

“Then you are a gymnast and an athlete. How is it that your hands are so
white and soft?”

Far from being embarrassed, the prisoner raised his hands from his
lap and examined them with evident complacency. “It is true they are
pretty,” said he, “but this is because I take good care of them and
scarcely use them.”

“Do they pay you, then, for doing nothing?”

“Ah, no, indeed! But, sir, my duty consists in speaking to the public,
in turning a compliment, in making things pass off pleasantly, as the
saying is; and, without boasting, I flatter myself that I have a certain
knack--”

M. Segmuller stroked his chin, according to his habit whenever he
considered that a prisoner had committed some grave blunder. “In that
case,” said he, “will you give me a specimen of your talent?”

“Ah, ha!” laughed the prisoner, evidently supposing this to be a jest on
the part of the magistrate. “Ah, ha!”

“Obey me, if you please,” insisted M. Segmuller.

The supposed murderer made no objection. His face at once assumed a
different expression, his features wearing a mingled air of impudence,
conceit, and irony. He caught up a ruler that was lying on the
magistrate’s desk, and, flourishing it wildly, began as follows, in a
shrill falsetto voice: “Silence, music! And you, big drum, hold your
peace! Now is the hour, now is the moment, ladies and gentlemen, to
witness the grand, unique performance of these great artists, unequaled
in the world for their feats upon the trapeze and the tight-rope, and in
innumerable other exercises of grace, suppleness, and strength!”

“That is sufficient,” interrupted the magistrate. “You can speak like
that in France; but what do you say in Germany?”

“Of course, I use the language of that country.”

“Let me hear, then!” retorted M. Segmuller, whose mother-tongue was
German.

The prisoner ceased his mocking manner, assumed an air of comical
importance, and without the slightest hesitation began to speak as
follows, in very emphatic tones: “Mit Be-willigung der hochloeblichen
Obrigkeit, wird heute, vor hiesiger ehrenwerthen Burgerschaft, zum
erstenmal aufgefuhrt--Genovesa, oder--”

This opening of the prisoner’s German harangue may be thus rendered:
“With the permission of the local authorities there will now be
presented before the honorable citizens, for the first time--Genevieve,
or the--”

“Enough,” said the magistrate, harshly. He rose, perhaps to conceal his
chagrin, and added: “We will send for an interpreter to tell us whether
you speak English as fluently.”

On hearing these words, Lecoq modestly stepped forward. “I understand
English,” said he.

“Very well. You hear, prisoner?”

But the man was already transformed. British gravity and apathy were
written upon his features; his gestures were stiff and constrained,
and in the most ponderous tones he exclaimed: “Walk up! ladies and
gentlemen, walk up! Long life to the queen and to the honorable mayor
of this town! No country, England excepted--our glorious England!--could
produce such a marvel, such a paragon--” For a minute or two longer he
continued in the same strain.

M. Segmuller was leaning upon his desk, his face hidden by his hands.
Lecoq, standing in front of the prisoner, could not conceal his
astonishment. Goguet, the smiling clerk, alone found the scene amusing.




XI

The governor of the Depot, a functionary who had gained the reputation
of an oracle by twenty years’ experience in prisons and with
prisoners--a man whom it was most difficult to deceive--had advised the
magistrate to surround himself with every precaution before examining
the prisoner, May.

And yet this man, characterized as a most dangerous criminal, and the
very announcement of whose coming had made the clerk turn pale, had
proved to be a practical, harmless, and jovial philosopher, vain of his
eloquence, a bohemian whose existence depended upon his ability to turn
a compliment; in short, a somewhat erratic genius.

This was certainly strange, but the seeming contradiction did not cause
M. Segmuller to abandon the theory propounded by Lecoq. On the contrary,
he was more than ever convinced of its truth. If he remained silent,
with his elbows leaning on the desk, and his hands clasped over his
eyes, it was only that he might gain time for reflection.

The prisoner’s attitude and manner were remarkable. When his English
harangue was finished, he remained standing in the centre of the room, a
half-pleased, half-anxious expression on his face. Still, he was as much
at ease as if he had been on the platform outside some stroller’s booth,
where, if one could believe his story, he had passed the greater part of
his life. It was in vain that the magistrate sought for some indication
of weakness on his features, which in their mobility were more
enigmatical than the lineaments of the Sphinx.

Thus far, M. Segmuller had been worsted in the encounter. It is true,
however, that he had not as yet ventured on any direct attack, nor had
he made use of any of the weapons which Lecoq had forged for his use.
Still he was none the less annoyed at his defeat, as it was easy to see
by the sharp manner in which he raised his head after a few moments’
silence. “I see that you speak three European languages correctly,” said
he. “It is a rare talent.”

The prisoner bowed, and smiled complacently. “Still that does not
establish your identity,” continued the magistrate. “Have you any
acquaintances in Paris? Can you indicate any respectable person who will
vouch for the truth of this story?”

“Ah! sir, it is seventeen years since I left France.”

“That is unfortunate, but the prosecution can not content itself with
such an explanation. What about your last employer, M. Simpson? Who is
he?”

“M. Simpson is a rich man,” replied the prisoner, rather coldly, “worth
more than two hundred thousand francs, and honest besides. In Germany he
traveled with a show of marionettes, and in England with a collection of
phenomena to suit the tastes of that country.”

“Very well! Then this millionaire could testify in your favor; it would
be easy to find him, I suppose?”

“Certainly,” responded May, emphatically. “M. Simpson would willingly
do me this favor. It would not be difficult for me to find him, only it
would require considerable time.”

“Why?”

“Because at the present moment he must be on his way to America. It was
on account of this journey that I left his company--I detest the ocean.”

A moment previously Lecoq’s anxiety had been so intense that his
heart almost stopped beating; on hearing these last words, however,
he regained all his self-possession. As for the magistrate, he merely
greeted the murderer’s reply with a brief but significant ejaculation.

“When I say that he is on his way,” resumed the prisoner, “I may be
mistaken. He may not have started yet, though he had certainly made all
his arrangements before we separated.”

“What ship was he to sail by?”

“He did not tell me.”

“Where was he when you left him?”

“At Leipsic.”

“When was this?”

“Last Wednesday.”

M. Segmuller shrugged his shoulders disdainfully. “So you say you were
in Leipsic on Wednesday? How long have you been in Paris?”

“Since Sunday afternoon, at four o’clock.”

“It will be necessary to prove that.”

Judging by the murderer’s contracted brow it might be conjectured
that he was making a strenuous effort to remember something. He cast
questioning glances first toward the ceiling and then toward the floor,
scratching his head and tapping his foot in evident perplexity. “How can
I prove it--how?” he murmured.

The magistrate did not appear disposed to wait. “Let me assist you,”
 said he. “The people at the inn where you boarded while in Leipsic must
remember you.”

“We did not stop at an inn.”

“Where did you eat and sleep, then?”

“In M. Simpson’s large traveling-carriage; it had been sold, but he was
not to give it up until he reached the port he was to sail from.”

“What port was that?”

“I don’t know.”

At this reply Lecoq, who had less experience than the magistrate in the
art of concealing one’s impressions, could not help rubbing his hands
with satisfaction. The prisoner was plainly convicted of falsehood,
indeed driven into a corner.

“So you have only your own word to offer in support of this story?”
 inquired M. Segmuller.

“Wait a moment,” said the prisoner, extending his arm as if to clutch at
a still vague inspiration--“wait a moment. When I arrived in Paris I had
with me a trunk containing my clothes. The linen is all marked with the
first letter of my name, and besides some ordinary coats and trousers,
there were a couple of costumes I used to wear when I appeared in
public.”

“Well, what have you done with all these things?”

“When I arrived in Paris, I took the trunk to a hotel, close by the
Northern Railway Station--”

“Go on. Tell us the name of this hotel,” said M. Segmuller, perceiving
that the prisoner had stopped short, evidently embarrassed.

“That’s just what I’m trying to recollect. I’ve forgotten it. But I
haven’t forgotten the house. I fancy I can see it now; and, if some one
would only take me to the neighborhood, I should certainly recognize
it. The people at the hotel would know me, and, besides, my trunk would
prove the truth of what I’ve told you.”

On hearing this statement, Lecoq mentally resolved to make a tour of
investigation through the various hotels surrounding the Gare du Nord.

“Very well,” retorted the magistrate. “Perhaps we will do as you
request. Now, there are two questions I desire to ask. If you arrived
in Paris at four o’clock in the afternoon, how did it happen that by
midnight of the same day you had discovered the Poivriere, which is
merely frequented by suspicious characters, and is situated in such a
lonely spot that it would be impossible to find it at night-time, if one
were not familiar with the surrounding localities? In the second place,
how does it happen, if you possess such clothing as you describe, that
you are so poorly dressed?”

The prisoner smiled at these questions. “I can easily explain that,” he
replied. “One’s clothes are soon spoiled when one travels third-class,
so on leaving Leipsic I put on the worst things I had. When I arrived
here, and felt my feet on the pavements of Paris, I went literally wild
with delight. I acted like a fool. I had some money in my pocket--it was
Shrove Sunday--and my only thought was to make a night of it. I did not
think of changing my clothes. As I had formerly been in the habit of
amusing myself round about the Barriere d’Italie, I hastened there and
entered a wine-shop. While I was eating a morsel, two men came in and
began talking about spending the night at a ball at the Rainbow. I
asked them to take me with them; they agreed, I paid their bills, and
we started. But soon after our arrival there these young men left me
and joined the dancers. It was not long before I grew weary of merely
looking on. Rather disappointed, I left the inn, and being foolish
enough not to ask my way, I wandered on till I lost myself, while
traversing a tract of unoccupied land. I was about to go back, when I
saw a light in the distance. I walked straight toward it, and reached
that cursed hovel.”

“What happened then?”

“Oh! I went in; called for some one. A woman came downstairs, and I
asked her for a glass of brandy. When she brought it, I sat down and
lighted a cigar. Then I looked about me. The interior was almost enough
to frighten one. Three men and two women were drinking and chatting in
low tones at another table. My face did not seem to suit them. One of
them got up, came toward me, and said: ‘You are a police agent; you’ve
come here to play the spy; that’s very plain.’ I answered that I wasn’t
a police agent. He replied that I was. I again declared that I wasn’t.
In short, he swore that he was sure of it, and that my beard was false.
So saying, he caught hold of my beard and pulled it. This made me mad. I
jumped up, and with a blow of my fist I felled him to the ground. In
an instant all the others were upon me! I had my revolver--you know the
rest.”

“And while all this was going on what were the two women doing?”

“Ah! I was too busy to pay any attention to them. They disappeared!”

“But you saw them when you entered the place--what were they like?”

“Oh! they were big, ugly creatures, as tall as grenadiers, and as dark
as moles!”

Between plausible falsehood, and improbable truth, justice--human
justice, and therefore liable to error--is compelled to decide as best
it can. For the past hour M. Segmuller had not been free from mental
disquietude. But all his doubts vanished when he heard the prisoner
declare that the two women were tall and dark. If he had said: “The
women were fair,” M. Segmuller would not have known what to believe, but
in the magistrate’s opinion the audacious falsehood he had just heard
proved that there was a perfect understanding between the supposed
murderer and Widow Chupin.

Certainly, M. Segmuller’s satisfaction was great; but his face did not
betray it. It was of the utmost importance that the prisoner should
believe that he had succeeded in deceiving his examiner. “You must
understand how necessary it is to find these women,” said the magistrate
kindly.

“If their testimony corresponds with your allegations, your innocence
will be proved conclusively.”

“Yes, I understand that; but how can I put my hand upon them?”

“The police can assist you--our agents are always at the service
of prisoners who desire to make use of them in establishing their
innocence. Did you make any observations which might aid in the
discovery of these women?”

Lecoq, whose eyes never wandered from the prisoner’s face, fancied that
he saw the faint shadow of a smile on the man’s lips.

“I remarked nothing,” said the prisoner coldly.

M. Segmuller had opened the drawer of his desk a moment before. He
now drew from it the earring which had been found on the scene of the
tragedy, and handing it abruptly to the prisoner, he asked: “So you
didn’t notice this in the ear of one of the women?”

The prisoner’s imperturbable coolness of demeanor did not forsake him.
He took the jewel in his hand, examined it attentively, held it up to
the light, admired its brilliant scintillations, and said: “It is a very
handsome stone, but I didn’t notice it.”

“This stone,” remarked the magistrate, “is a diamond.”

“Ah!”

“Yes; and worth several thousand francs.”

“So much as that!”

This exclamation may have been in accordance with the spirit of the part
assumed by the prisoner; though, at the same time, its simplicity
was undoubtedly far-fetched. It was strange that a nomad, such as the
murderer pretended to have been, acquainted with most of the countries
and capitals of Europe, should have displayed this astonishment on
learning the value of a diamond. Still, M. Segmuller did not seem to
notice the discrepancy.

“Another thing,” said he. “When you threw down your pistol, crying,
‘Come and take me,’ what did you intend to do?”

“I intended to make my escape.”

“In what way?”

“Why, of course, by the door, sir--by--”

“Yes, by the back door,” retorted the magistrate, with freezing irony.
“It remains for you to explain how you--you who had just entered that
hovel for the first time--could have known of this door’s existence.”

For once, in the course of the examination, the prisoner seemed
troubled. For an instant all his assurance forsook him. He evidently
perceived the danger of his position, and after a considerable effort he
contrived to burst out in a laugh. His laugh was a poor one, however; it
rang false, and failed to conceal a sensation of deep anxiety. Growing
gradually bolder, he at length exclaimed: “That’s nonsense, I had just
seen these two women go out by that very door.”

“Excuse me, you declared a minute ago that you did not see these women
leave: that you were too busy to watch their movements.”

“Did I say that?”

“Word for word; the passage shall be shown you. Goguet, find it.”

The clerk at once read the passage referred to, whereupon the prisoner
undertook to show that the remark had been misunderstood. He had
not said--at least, he did not intend to say--that; they had quite
misinterpreted his words. With such remarks did he try to palliate the
effect of his apparent blunders.

In the mean while, Lecoq was jubilant. “Ah, my fine fellow,” thought he,
“you are contradicting yourself--you are in deep water already--you are
lost. There’s no hope for you.”

The prisoner’s situation was indeed not unlike that of a bather, who,
unable to swim, imprudently advances into the sea until the water rises
above his chin. He may for a while have preserved his equilibrium,
despite the buffeting of the waves, but now he totters, loses his
footing--another second, and he will sink!

“Enough--enough!” said the magistrate, cutting the prisoner’s
embarrassed explanation short. “Now, if you started out merely with
the intention of amusing yourself, how did it happen that you took your
revolver with you?”

“I had it with me while I was traveling, and did not think of leaving it
at the hotel any more than I thought of changing my clothes.”

“Where did you purchase it?”

“It was given me by M. Simpson as a souvenir.”

“Confess that this M. Simpson is a very convenient personage,” said the
magistrate coldly. “Still, go on with your story. Only two chambers of
this murderous weapon were discharged, but three men were killed. You
have not told me the end of the affair.”

“What’s the use?” exclaimed the prisoner, in saddened tones. “Two of my
assailants had fallen; the struggle became an equal one. I seized the
remaining man, the soldier, round the body, and threw him down. He fell
against a corner of the table, and did not rise again.”

M. Segmuller had unfolded upon his desk the plan of the Poivriere drawn
by Lecoq. “Come here,” he said, addressing the prisoner, “and show me on
this paper the precise spot you and your adversaries occupied.”

May obeyed, and with an assurance of manner a little surprising in a man
in his position, he proceeded to explain the drama. “I entered,” said
he, “by this door, marked C; I seated myself at the table, H, to the
left of the entrance: my assailants occupied the table between the
fireplace, F, and the window, B.”

“I must admit,” said the magistrate, “that your assertions fully agree
with the statements of the physicians, who say that one of the shots
must have been fired about a yard off, and the other about two yards
off.”

This was a victory for the prisoner, but he only shrugged his shoulders
and murmured: “That proves that the physicians knew their business.”

Lecoq was delighted. This part of the prisoner’s narrative not merely
agreed with the doctor’s statements, but also confirmed his own
researches. The young detective felt that, had he been the examiner,
he would have conducted the investigation in precisely the same way.
Accordingly, he thanked heaven that M. Segmuller had supplied the place
of M. d’Escorval.

“This admitted,” resumed the magistrate, “it remains for you to explain
a sentence you uttered when the agent you see here arrested you.”

“What sentence?”

“You exclaimed: ‘Ah, it’s the Prussians who are coming; I’m lost!’ What
did you mean by that?”

A fleeting crimson tinge suffused the prisoner’s cheek. It was evident
that if he had anticipated the other questions, and had been prepared
for them, this one, at least, was unexpected. “It’s very strange,” said
he, with ill-disguised embarrassment, “that I should have said such a
thing!”

“Five persons heard you,” insisted the magistrate.

The prisoner did not immediately reply. He was evidently trying to gain
time, ransacking in his mind for a plausible explanation. “After all,”
 he ultimately said, “the thing’s quite possible. When I was with M.
Simpson, we had with us an old soldier who had belonged to Napoleon’s
body-guard and had fought at Waterloo. I recollect he was always
repeating that phrase. I must have caught the habit from him.”

This explanation, though rather slow in coming, was none the less
ingenious. At least, M. Segmuller appeared to be perfectly satisfied.
“That’s very plausible,” said he; “but there is one circumstance that
passes my comprehension. Were you freed from your assailants before the
police entered the place? Answer me, yes or no.”

“Yes.”

“Then why, instead of making your escape by the back door, the existence
of which you had divined, did you remain on the threshold of the door
leading into the back room, with a table before you to serve as a
barricade, and your revolver leveled at the police, as if to keep them
at bay?”

The prisoner hung his head, and the magistrate had to wait for his
answer. “I was a fool,” he stammered at last. “I didn’t know whether
these men were police agents or friends of the fellows I had killed.”

“In either case your own interest should have induced you to fly.”

The prisoner remained silent.

“Ah, well!” resumed M. Segmuller, “let me tell you my opinion. I believe
you designedly and voluntarily exposed yourself to the danger of being
arrested in order to protect the retreat of the two women who had just
left.”

“Why should I have risked my own safety for two hussies I did not even
know?”

“Excuse me. The prosecution is strongly inclined to believe that you
know these two women very well.”

“I should like to see any one prove that!” So saying, the prisoner
smiled sneeringly, but at once changed countenance when the magistrate
retorted in a tone of assurance: “I will prove it.”




XII

M. Segmuller certainly wished that a number had been branded upon
the enigmatical prisoner before him. And yet he did not by any means
despair, and his confidence, exaggerated though it might be, was not at
all feigned. He was of opinion that the weakest point of the prisoner’s
defense so far was his pretended ignorance concerning the two women. He
proposed to return to this subject later on. In the mean while, however,
there were other matters to be dealt with.

When he felt that his threat as regards the women had had time to
produce its full effect, the magistrate continued: “So, prisoner, you
assert that you were acquainted with none of the persons you met at the
Poivriere.”

“I swear it.”

“Have you never had occasion to meet a person called Lacheneur, an
individual whose name is connected with this unfortunate affair?”

“I heard the name for the first time when it was pronounced by the dying
soldier. Poor fellow! I had just dealt him his death blow; and yet his
last words testified to my innocence.”

This sentimental outburst produced no impression whatever upon the
magistrate. “In that case,” said he, “I suppose you are willing to
accept this soldier’s statement.”

The man hesitated, as if conscious that he had fallen into a snare, and
that he would be obliged to weigh each answer carefully. “I accept it,”
 said he at last. “Of course I accept it.”

“Very well, then. This soldier, as you must recollect, wished to
revenge himself on Lacheneur, who, by promising him a sum of money, had
inveigled him into a conspiracy. A conspiracy against whom? Evidently
against you; and yet you pretend that you had only arrived in Paris
that evening, and that mere chance brought you to the Poivriere. Can you
reconcile such conflicting statements?”

The prisoner had the hardihood to shrug his shoulders disdainfully. “I
see the matter in an entirely different light,” said he. “These people
were plotting mischief against I don’t know whom--and it was because I
was in their way that they sought a quarrel with me, without any cause
whatever.”

Skilfully as the magistrate had delivered this thrust, it had been as
skilfully parried; so skilfully, indeed, that Goguet, the smiling clerk,
could not conceal an approving grimace. Besides, on principle, he always
took the prisoner’s part, in a mild, Platonic way, of course.

“Let us consider the circumstances that followed your arrest,” resumed
M. Segmuller. “Why did you refuse to answer all the questions put to
you?”

A gleam of real or assumed resentment shone in the prisoner’s eyes.

“This examination,” he growled, “will alone suffice to make a culprit
out of an innocent man!”

“I advise you, in your own interest, to behave properly. Those who
arrested you observed that you were conversant with all the prison
formalities and rules.”

“Ah! sir, haven’t I told you that I have been arrested and put in prison
several times--always on account of my papers? I told you the truth, and
you shouldn’t taunt me for having done so.”

The prisoner had dropped his mask of careless gaiety, and had assumed
a surly, discontented tone. But his troubles were by no means ended;
in fact, the battle had only just begun. Laying a tiny linen bag on his
desk, M. Segmuller asked him if he recognized it.

“Perfectly! It is the package that the governor of the Depot placed in
his safe.”

The magistrate opened the bag, and poured the dust that it contained on
to a sheet of paper. “You are aware, prisoner,” said he, “that this dust
comes from the mud that was sticking to your feet. The police agent who
collected it has been to the station-house where you spent the night
of the murder, and has discovered that the composition of this dust is
identical with that of the floor of the cell you occupied.”

The prisoner listened with gaping mouth.

“Hence,” continued the magistrate, “it was certainly at the
station-house, and designedly, that you soiled your feet with that mud.
In doing so you had an object.”

“I wished--”

“Let me finish. Being determined to keep your identity secret, and to
assume the character of a member of the lower classes--of a mountebank,
if you please--you reflected that the care you bestow upon your person
might betray you. You foresaw the impression that would be caused when
the coarse, ill-fitting boots you wore were removed, and the officials
perceived your trim, clean feet, which are as well kept as your hands.
Accordingly, what did you do? You poured some of the water that was in
the pitcher in your cell on to the ground and then dabbled your feet in
the mud that had thus been formed.”

During these remarks the prisoner’s face wore, by turns, an expression
of anxiety, astonishment, irony, and mirth. When the magistrate had
finished, he burst into a hearty laugh.

“So that’s the result of twelve or fourteen hours’ research,” he at
length exclaimed, turning toward Lecoq. “Ah! Mr. Agent, it’s good to be
sharp, but not so sharp as that. The truth is, that when I was taken
to the station-house, forty-eight hours--thirty-six of them spent in a
railway carriage--had elapsed since I had taken off my boots. My feet
were red and swollen, and they burned like fire. What did I do? I poured
some water over them. As for your other suspicions, if I have a soft
white skin, it is only because I take care of myself. Besides, as
is usual with most men of my profession, I rarely wear anything but
slippers on my feet. This is so true that, on leaving Leipsic, I only
owned a single pair of boots, and that was an old cast-off pair given me
by M. Simpson.”

Lecoq struck his chest. “Fool, imbecile, idiot, that I am!” he thought.
“He was waiting to be questioned about this circumstance. He is so
wonderfully shrewd that, when he saw me take the dust, he divined my
intentions; and since then he has managed to concoct this story--a
plausible story enough--and one that any jury would believe.”

M. Segmuller was saying the same thing to himself. But he was not so
surprised nor so overcome by the skill the prisoner had displayed in
fencing with this point. “Let us continue,” said he. “Do you still
persist in your statements, prisoner?”

“Yes.”

“Very well; then I shall be forced to tell you that what you are saying
is untrue.”

The prisoner’s lips trembled visibly, and it was with difficulty that he
faltered: “May my first mouthful of bread strangle me, if I have uttered
a single falsehood!”

“A single falsehood! Wait.”

The magistrate drew from the drawer of his desk the molds of the
footprints prepared by Lecoq, and showing them to the murderer, he
said: “You told me a few minutes ago that the two women were as tall
as grenadiers; now, just look at the footprints made by these female
giants. They were as ‘dark as moles,’ you said; a witness will tell
you that one of them was a small, delicate-featured blonde, with an
exceedingly sweet voice.” He sought the prisoner’s eyes, gazed steadily
into them, and added slowly: “And this witness is the driver whose cab
was hired in the Rue de Chevaleret by the two fugitives, both short,
fair-haired women.”

This sentence fell like a thunderbolt upon the prisoner; he grew pale,
tottered, and leaned against the wall for support.

“Ah! you have told me the truth!” scornfully continued the pitiless
magistrate. “Then, who is this man who was waiting for you while you
were at the Poivriere? Who is this accomplice who, after your arrest,
dared to enter the Widow Chupin’s den to regain possession of some
compromising object--no doubt a letter--which he knew he would find in
the pocket of the Widow Chupin’s apron? Who is this devoted, courageous
friend who feigned drunkenness so effectually that even the police were
deceived, and thoughtlessly placed him in confinement with you? Dare you
deny that you have not arranged your system of defense in concert with
him? Can you affirm that he did not give the Widow Chupin counsel as to
the course she should pursue?”

But already, thanks to his power of self-control, the prisoner had
mastered his agitation. “All this,” said he, in a harsh voice, “is a
mere invention of the police!”

However faithfully one may describe an examination of this kind, a
narrative can convey no more idea of the real scene than a heap of cold
ashes can give the effect of a glowing fire. One can note down each
word, each ejaculation, but phraseology is powerless to portray the
repressed animation, the impassioned movements, the studied reticence,
the varied tones of voice, the now bold, now faltering glances, full
of hatred and suspicion, which follow each other in rapid succession,
mostly on the prisoner’s side, but not entirely so, for although the
magistrate may be an adept in the art of concealing his feelings, at
times nature can not be controlled.

When the prisoner reeled beneath the magistrate’s last words, the
latter could not control his feelings. “He yields,” he thought, “he
succumbs--he is mine!”

But all hope of immediate success vanished when M. Segmuller saw his
redoubtable adversary struggle against his momentary weakness, and
arm himself for the fight with renewed, and, if possible, even greater
energy. The magistrate perceived that it would require more than one
assault to over-come such a stubborn nature. So, in a voice rendered
still more harsh by disappointment, he resumed: “It is plain that you
are determined to deny evidence itself.”

The prisoner had recovered all his self-possession. He must have
bitterly regretted his weakness, for a fiendish spite glittered in his
eyes. “What evidence!” he asked, frowning. “This romance invented by the
police is very plausible, I don’t deny it; but it seems to me that the
truth is quite as probable. You talk to me about a cabman whose vehicle
was hired by two short, fair-haired women: but who can prove that these
women were the same that fled from the Poivriere?”

“The police agent you see here followed the tracks they left across the
snow.”

“Ah! at night-time--across fields intersected by ditches, and up a long
street--a fine rain falling all the while, and a thaw already beginning!
Oh, your story is very probable!”

As he spoke, the murderer extended his arm toward Lecoq, and then, in a
tone of crushing scorn, he added: “A man must have great confidence
in himself, or a wild longing for advancement, to try and get a man
guillotined on such evidence as that!”

At these words, Goguet, the smiling clerk, whose pen was rapidly flying
across the paper, could not help remarking to himself: “The arrow has
entered the bull’s-eye this time!”

The comment was not without foundation: for Lecoq was evidently cut to
the quick. Indeed, he was so incensed that, forgetful of his subordinate
position, he sprang to his feet, exclaiming: “This circumstance would be
of slight importance if it were not one of a long chain--”

“Be good enough to keep silent,” interrupted the magistrate, who,
turning to the prisoner, added: “The court does not utilize the proofs
and testimony collected by the police until it has examined and weighed
them.”

“No matter,” murmured the prisoner. “I should like to see this
cab-driver.”

“Have no fear about that; he shall repeat his evidence in your
presence.”

“Very well. I am satisfied then. I will ask him how he can distinguish
people’s faces when it is as dark as--”

He checked himself, apparently enlightened by a sudden inspiration.

“How stupid I am!” he exclaimed. “I’m losing my temper about these
people when you know all the while who they are. For of course the
cabmen drove them home.”

M. Segmuller saw that the prisoner understood him. He perceived,
moreover, that the latter was doing all he could to increase the mystery
that enshrouded this essential point of the case--a point upon which the
prosecution was particularly anxious to obtain information.

The prisoner was truly an incomparable comedian, for his last
observation was made in a tone of remarkable candor, just tinged with
sufficient irony to show that he felt he had nothing to fear in this
direction.

“If you are consistent with yourself,” remarked the magistrate, “you
will also deny the existence of an accomplice, of a--comrade.”

“What would be the use denying it, since you believe nothing that I
say? Only a moment ago you insinuated that my former employer was an
imaginary personage; so what need I say about my pretended accomplice?
According to your agents, he’s at all events a most faithful friend.
Indeed, this wonderful being--invented by Monsieur” (with these words
the prisoner pointed to Lecoq)--“was seemingly not satisfied at having
once escaped the police, for, according to your account, he voluntarily
placed himself in their clutches a second time. You gentlemen pretend
that he conferred first of all with me, and next with the Widow Chupin.
How did that happen? Perhaps after removing him from my cell, some of
your agents obligingly shut him up with the old woman.”

Goguet, the clerk, wrote all this down admiringly. “Here,” thought he,
“is a man of brain, who understands his case. He won’t need any lawyer’s
eloquence to put his defense favorably before a jury.”

“And after all,” continued the prisoner, “what are the proofs against
me? The name of Lacheneur faltered by a dying man; a few footprints on
some melting snow; a sleepy cab-driver’s declaration; and a vague doubt
about a drunkard’s identity. If that is all you have against me, it
certainly doesn’t amount to much--”

“Enough!” interrupted M. Segmuller. “Your assurance is perfect now;
though a moment ago your embarrassment was most remarkable. What was the
cause of it?”

“The cause!” indignantly exclaimed the prisoner, whom this query
had seemingly enraged; “the cause! Can’t you see, sir, that you are
torturing me frightfully, pitilessly! I am an innocent man, and you are
trying to deprive me of my life. You have been turning me this way and
that way for so many hours that I begin to feel as if I were standing on
the guillotine. Each time I open my mouth to speak I ask myself, is it
this answer that will send me to the scaffold? My anxiety and dismay
surprise you, do they? Why, since this examination began, I’ve felt the
cold knife graze my neck at least twenty times. I wouldn’t like my worst
enemy to be subjected to such torture as this.”

The prisoner’s description of his sufferings did not seem at all
exaggerated. His hair was saturated with perspiration, and big drops of
sweat rested on his pallid brow, or coursed down his cheeks on to his
beard.

“I am not your enemy,” said the magistrate more gently. “A magistrate is
neither a prisoner’s friend nor enemy, he is simply the friend of truth
and the executor of the law. I am not seeking either for an innocent man
or for a culprit; I merely wish to arrive at the truth. I must know who
you are--and I do know--”

“Ah!--if the assertion costs me my life--I’m May and none other.”

“No, you are not.”

“Who am I then? Some great man in disguise? Ah! I wish I were! In that
case, I should have satisfactory papers to show you; and then you would
set me free, for you know very well, my good sir, that I am as innocent
as you are.”

The magistrate had left his desk, and taken a seat by the fireplace
within a yard of the prisoner. “Do not insist,” said he. Then, suddenly
changing both manner and tone, he added with the urbanity that a man of
the world displays when addressing an equal:

“Do me the honor, sir, to believe me gifted with sufficient perspicuity
to recognize, under the difficult part you play to such perfection, a
very superior gentleman--a man endowed with remarkable talents.”

Lecoq perceived that this sudden change of manner had unnerved the
prisoner. He tried to laugh, but his merriment partook somewhat of the
nature of a sob, and big tears glistened in his eyes.

“I will not torture you any longer,” continued the magistrate. “In
subtle reasoning I confess that you have conquered me. However, when
I return to the charge I shall have proofs enough in my possession to
crush you.”

He reflected for a moment, then lingering over each word, he added:
“Only do not then expect from me the consideration I have shown you
to-day. Justice is human; that is, she is indulgent toward certain
crimes. She has fathomed the depth of the abyss into which blind passion
may hurl even an honest man. To-day I freely offer you any assistance
that will not conflict with my duty. Speak, shall I send this officer of
police away? Would you like me to send my clerk out of the room, on
an errand?” He said no more, but waited to see the effect of this last
effort.

The prisoner darted upon him one of those searching glances that seem
to pierce an adversary through. His lips moved; one might have supposed
that he was about to make a revelation. But no; suddenly he crossed
his arms over his chest, and murmured: “You are very frank, sir.
Unfortunately for me, I’m only a poor devil, as I’ve already told you.
My name is May, and I earn my living by speaking to the public and
turning a compliment.”

“I am forced to yield to your decision,” said the magistrate sadly. “The
clerk will now read the minutes of your examination--listen.”

While Goguet read the evidence aloud, the prisoner listened without
making any remark, but when asked to sign the document, he obstinately
refused to do so, fearing, he said, “some hidden treachery.”

A moment afterward the soldiers who had escorted him to the magistrate’s
room conducted him back to the Depot.




XIII

When the prisoner had gone, M. Segmuller sank back in his armchair,
literally exhausted. He was in that state of nervous prostration which
so often follows protracted but fruitless efforts. He had scarcely
strength enough to bathe his burning forehead and gleaming eyes with
cool, refreshing water.

This frightful examination had lasted no less than seven consecutive
hours.

The smiling clerk, who had kept his place at his desk busily writing the
whole while, now rose to his feet, glad of an opportunity to stretch his
limbs and snap his fingers, cramped by holding the pen. Still, he was
not in the least degree bored. He invariably took a semi-theatrical
interest in the dramas that were daily enacted in his presence; his
excitement being all the greater owing to the uncertainty that shrouded
the finish of the final act--a finish that only too often belied the
ordinary rules and deductions of writers for the stage.

“What a knave!” he exclaimed after vainly waiting for the magistrate or
the detective to express an opinion, “what a rascal!”

M. Segmuller ordinarily put considerable confidence in his clerk’s long
experience. He sometimes even went so far as to consult him, doubtless
somewhat in the same style that Moliere consulted his servant. But, on
this occasion he did not accept his opinion.

“No,” said he in a thoughtful tone, “that man is not a knave. When I
spoke to him kindly he was really touched; he wept, he hesitated. I
could have sworn that he was about to tell me everything.”

“Ah, he’s a man of wonderful power!” observed Lecoq.

The detective was sincere in his praise. Although the prisoner had
disappointed his plans, and had even insulted him, he could not help
admiring his shrewdness and courage. He--Lecoq--had prepared himself for
a strenuous struggle with this man, and he hoped to conquer in the end.
Nevertheless in his secret soul he felt for his adversary, admiring that
sympathy which a “foeman worthy of one’s steel” always inspires.

“What coolness, what courage!” continued the young detective. “Ah!
there’s no denying it, his system of defense--of absolute denial--is a
masterpiece. It is perfect. How well he played that difficult part of
buffoon! At times I could scarcely restrain my admiration. What is a
famous comedian beside that fellow? The greatest actors need the adjunct
of stage scenery to support the illusion, whereas this man, entirely
unaided, almost convinced me even against my reason.”

“Do you know what your very appropriate criticism proves?” inquired the
magistrate.

“I am listening, sir.”

“Ah, well! I have arrived at this conclusion--either this man is really
May, the stroller, earning his living by paying compliments, as he
says--or else he belongs to the highest rank of society, and not to the
middle classes. It is only in the lowest or in the highest ranks that
you encounter such grim energy as he has displayed, such scorn of life,
as well as such remarkable presence of mind and resolution. A vulgar
tradesman attracted to the Poivriere by some shameful passion would have
confessed it long ago.”

“But, sir, this man is surely not the buffoon, May,” replied the young
detective.

“No, certainly not,” responded M. Segmuller; “we must, therefore, decide
upon some plan of action.” He smiled kindly, and added, in a friendly
voice: “It was unnecessary to tell you that, Monsieur Lecoq. Quite
unnecessary, since to you belongs the honor of having detected this
fraud. As for myself, I confess, that if I had not been warned in
advance, I should have been the dupe of this clever artist’s talent.”

The young detective bowed; a blush of modesty tinged his cheeks, but a
gleam of pleased vanity sparkled in his eyes. What a difference between
this friendly, benevolent magistrate and M. d’Escorval, so taciturn and
haughty. This man, at least, understood, appreciated, and encouraged
him; and it was with a common theory and an equal ardor that they were
about to devote themselves to a search for the truth. Scarcely had Lecoq
allowed these thoughts to flit across his mind than he reflected that
his satisfaction was, after all, a trifle premature, and that success
was still extremely doubtful. With this chilling conclusion, presence
of mind returned. Turning toward the magistrate, he exclaimed: “You will
recollect, sir, that the Widow Chupin mentioned a son of hers, a certain
Polyte--”

“Yes.”

“Why not question him? He must know all the frequenters of the
Poivriere, and might perhaps give us valuable information regarding
Gustave, Lacheneur, and the murderer himself. As he is not in solitary
confinement, he has probably heard of his mother’s arrest; but it seems
to me impossible that he should suspect our present perplexity.”

“Ah! you are a hundred times right!” exclaimed the magistrate. “I ought
to have thought of that myself. In his position he can scarcely have
been tampered with as yet, and I’ll have him up here to-morrow morning;
I will also question his wife.”

Turning to his clerk, M. Segmuller added: “Quick, Goguet, prepare a
summons in the name of the wife of Hippolyte Chupin, and address an
order to the governor of the Depot to produce her husband!”

But night was coming on. It was already too dark to see to write, and
accordingly the clerk rang the bell for lights. Just as the messenger
who brought the lamps turned to leave the room, a rap was heard at the
door. Immediately afterward the governor of the Depot entered.

During the past twenty-four hours this worthy functionary had been
greatly perplexed concerning the mysterious prisoner he had placed
in secret cell No. 3, and he now came to the magistrate for advice
regarding him. “I come to ask,” said he, “if I am still to retain the
prisoner May in solitary confinement?”

“Yes.”

“Although I fear fresh attacks of frenzy, I dislike to confine him in
the strait-jacket again.”

“Leave him free in his cell,” replied M. Segmuller; “and tell the
keepers to watch him well, but to treat him kindly.”

By the provisions of Article 613 of the Code, accused parties are placed
in the custody of the government, but the investigating magistrate is
allowed to adopt such measures concerning them as he may deem necessary
for the interest of the prosecution.

The governor bowed assent to M. Segmuller’s instructions, and then
added: “You have doubtless succeeded in establishing the prisoner’s
identity.”

“Unfortunately, I have not.”

The governor shook his head with a knowing air. “In that case,” said he,
“my conjectures were correct. It seems to me evident that this man is
a criminal of the worst description--an old offender certainly, and one
who has the strongest interest in concealing his identity. You will find
that you have to deal with a man who has been sentenced to the galleys
for life, and who has managed to escape from Cayenne.”

“Perhaps you are mistaken.”

“Hum! I shall be greatly surprised if such should prove the case. I
must admit that my opinion in this matter is identical with that of M.
Gevrol, the most experienced and the most skilful of our inspectors. I
agree with him in thinking that young detectives are often overzealous,
and run after fantoms originated in their own brains.”

Lecoq, crimson with wrath, was about to make an angry response when M.
Segmuller motioned to him to remain silent. Then with a smile on his
face the magistrate replied to the governor. “Upon my word, my dear
friend,” he said, “the more I study this affair, the more convinced I
am of the correctness of the theory advanced by the ‘overzealous’
detective. But, after all, I am not infallible, and I shall depend upon
your counsel and assistance.”

“Oh! I have means of verifying my assertion,” interrupted the governor;
“and I hope before the end of the next twenty-four hours that our
man will have been identified, either by the police or by one of his
fellow-prisoners.”

With these words he took his leave. Scarcely had he done so than Lecoq
sprang to his feet. The young detective was furious. “You see that
Gevrol already speaks ill of me; he is jealous.”

“Ah, well! what does that matter to you? If you succeed, you will have
your revenge. If you are mistaken--then I am mistaken, too.”

Then, as it was already late, M. Segmuller confided to Lecoq’s keeping
the various articles the latter had accumulated in support of his
theory. He also placed in his hands the diamond earring, the owner of
which must be discovered; and the letter signed “Lacheneur,” which had
been found in the pocket of the spurious soldier. Having given him
full instructions, he asked him to make his appearance promptly on
the morrow, and then dismissed him, saying: “Now go; and may good luck
attend you!”




XIV

Long, narrow, and low of ceiling, having on the one side a row of
windows looking on to a small courtyard, and on the other a range of
doors, each with a number on its central panel, thus reminding one of
some corridor in a second-rate hotel, such is the Galerie d’Instruction
at the Palais de Justice whereby admittance is gained into the various
rooms occupied by the investigating magistrates. Even in the daytime,
when it is thronged with prisoners, witnesses, and guards, it is a sad
and gloomy place. But it is absolutely sinister of aspect at night-time,
when deserted, and only dimly lighted by the smoky lamp of a solitary
attendant, waiting for the departure of some magistrate whom business
has detained later than usual.

Although Lecoq was not sensitive to such influences, he made haste to
reach the staircase and thus escape the echo of his footsteps, which
sounded most drearily in the silence and darkness pervading the gallery.

Finding an open window on the floor below, he looked out to ascertain
the state of the weather. The temperature was much milder; the snow had
altogether disappeared, and the pavement was almost dry. A slight haze,
illumined by the ruddy glare of the street lamps, hung like a purple
mantle over the city. The streets below were full of animation; vehicles
were rolling rapidly to and fro, and the footways were too narrow for
the bustling crowd, which, now that the labors of the day were ended,
was hastening homeward or in search of pleasure.

The sight drew a sigh from the young detective. “And it is in this great
city,” he murmured, “in the midst of this world of people that I must
discover the traces of a person I don’t even know! Is it possible to
accomplish such a feat?”

The feeling of despondency that had momentarily surprised him was not,
however, of long duration. “Yes, it is possible,” cried an inward voice.
“Besides, it must be done; your future depends upon it. Where there’s a
will, there’s a way.” Ten seconds later he was in the street, more than
ever inflamed with hope and courage.

Unfortunately, however, man can only place organs of limited power at
the disposal of his boundless desires; and Lecoq had not taken twenty
steps along the streets before he became aware that if the spirit was
willing, the flesh was weak. His limbs trembled, and his head whirled.
Nature was asserting her rights; during the last forty-eight hours,
the young detective had taken scarcely a moment’s rest, and he had,
moreover, now passed an entire day without food.

“Am I going to be ill?” he thought, sinking on to a bench. And he
groaned inwardly on recapitulating all that he wished to do that
evening.

If he dealt only with the more important matters, must he not at once
ascertain the result of Father Absinthe’s search after the man who
had recognized one of the victims at the Morgue; test the prisoner’s
assertions regarding the box of clothes left at one of the hotels
surrounding the Northern Railway Station; and last, but not the least,
must he not procure the address of Polyte Chupin’s wife, in order to
serve her with the summons to appear before M. Segmuller?

Under the power of urgent necessity, he succeeded in triumphing over
his attack of weakness, and rose, murmuring: “I will go first to the
Prefecture and to the Morgue; then I will see.”

But he did not find Father Absinthe at the Prefecture, and no one could
give any tidings of him. He had not been there at all during the
day. Nor could any one indicate, even vaguely, the abode of the Widow
Chupin’s daughter-in-law.

On the other hand, however, Lecoq met a number of his colleagues, who
laughed and jeered at him unmercifully. “Ah! you are a shrewd fellow!”
 they said, “it seems that you have just made a wonderful discovery, and
it’s said you are going to be decorated with the Legion of Honor.”

Gevrol’s influence betrayed itself everywhere. The jealous inspector
had taken pains to inform all his colleagues and subordinates that poor
Lecoq, crazed by ambition, persisted in declaring that a low, vulgar
murderer trying to escape justice was some great personage in disguise.
However, the jeers and taunts of which Lecoq was the object had but
little effect upon him, and he consoled himself with the reflection
that, “He laughs best who laughs last.”

If he were restless and anxious as he walked along the Quai des
Orfevres, it was because he could not explain Father Absinthe’s
prolonged absence, and because he feared that Gevrol, mad with jealousy,
might attempt, in some underhand way, to frustrate his, Lecoq’s, efforts
to arrive at a solution of the mystery.

At the Morgue the young detective met with no better success than at the
Prefecture. After ringing three or four times, one of the keepers opened
the door and informed him that the bodies had not been identified, and
that the old police agent had not been seen since he went away early in
the morning.

“This is a bad beginning,” thought Lecoq. “I will go and get some
dinner--that, perhaps, will change the luck; at all events, I have
certainly earned the bottle of good wine to which I intend to treat
myself.”

It was a happy thought. A hearty meal washed down with a couple of
glasses of Bordeaux sent new courage and energy coursing through his
veins. If he still felt a trifle weary, the sensation of fatigue was at
all events greatly diminished when he left the restaurant with a cigar
between his lips.

Just at that moment he longed for Father Papillon’s trap and sturdy
steed. Fortunately, a cab was passing: he hired it, and as eight o’clock
was striking, alighted at the corner of the square in front of the
Northern Railway Station. After a brief glance round, he began his
search for the hotel where the murderer pretended to have left a box of
clothes.

It must be understood that he did not present himself in his official
capacity. Hotel proprietors fight shy of detectives, and Lecoq was aware
that if he proclaimed his calling he would probably learn nothing at
all. By brushing back his hair and turning up his coat collar, he made,
however, a very considerable alteration in his appearance; and it was
with a marked English accent that he asked the landlords and servants of
various hostelries surrounding the station for information concerning a
“foreign workman named May.”

He conducted his search with considerable address, but everywhere he
received the same reply.

“We don’t know such a person; we haven’t seen any one answering the
description you give of him.”

Any other answer would have astonished Lecoq, so strongly persuaded was
he that the prisoner had only mentioned the circumstances of a trunk
left at one of these hotels in order to give a semblance of truth to his
narrative. Nevertheless he continued his investigation. If he noted down
in his memorandum book the names of all the hotels which he visited, it
was with a view of making sure of the prisoner’s discomfiture when he
was conducted to the neighborhood and asked to prove the truth of his
story.

Eventually, Lecoq reached the Hotel de Mariembourg, at the corner of
the Rue St. Quentin. The house was of modest proportions; but seemed
respectable and well kept. Lecoq pushed open the glass door leading into
the vestibule, and entered the office--a neat, brightly lighted room,
where he found a woman standing upon a chair, her face on a level with
a large bird cage, covered with a piece of black silk. She was repeating
three or four German words with great earnestness to the inmate of the
cage, and was so engrossed in this occupation that Lecoq had to make
considerable noise before he could attract her attention.

At length she turned her head, and the young detective exclaimed: “Ah!
good evening, madame; you are much interested, I see, in teaching your
parrot to talk.”

“It isn’t a parrot,” replied the woman, who had not yet descended from
her perch; “but a starling, and I am trying to teach it to say ‘Have you
breakfasted?’ in German.”

“What! can starlings talk?”

“Yes, sir, as well as you or I,” rejoined the woman, jumping down from
the chair.

Just then the bird, as if it had understood the question, cried very
distinctly: “Camille! Where is Camille?”

But Lecoq was too preoccupied to pay any further attention to the
incident. “Madame,” he began, “I wish to speak to the proprietor of this
hotel.”

“I am the proprietor.”

“Oh! very well. I was expecting a mechanic--from Leipsic--to meet me
here in Paris. To my great surprise, he has not made his appearance; and
I came to inquire if he was stopping here. His name is May.”

“May!” repeated the hostess, thoughtfully. “May!”

“He ought to have arrived last Sunday evening.”

The woman’s face brightened. “Wait a moment,” said she. “Was this
friend of yours a middle-aged man, of medium size, of very dark
complexion--wearing a full beard, and having very bright eyes?”

Lecoq could scarcely conceal his agitation. This was an exact
description of the supposed murderer. “Yes,” he stammered, “that is a
very good portrait of the man.”

“Ah, well! he came here on Shrove Sunday, in the afternoon. He asked for
a cheap room, and I showed him one on the fifth floor. The office-boy
was not here at the time, and he insisted upon taking his trunk upstairs
himself. I offered him some refreshments; but he declined to take
anything, saying that he was in a great hurry; and he went away after
giving me ten francs as security for the rent.”

“Where is he now?” inquired the young detective.

“Dear me! that reminds me,” replied the woman. “He has never returned,
and I have been rather anxious about him. Paris is such a dangerous
place for strangers! It is true he spoke French as well as you or I;
but what of that? Yesterday evening I gave orders that the commissary of
police should be informed of the matter.”

“Yesterday--the commissary?”

“Yes. Still, I don’t know whether the boy obeyed me. I had forgotten all
about it. Allow me to ring for the boy, and ask him.”

A bucket of iced water falling upon Lecoq’s head could not have
astonished him more than did this announcement from the proprietress of
the Hotel de Mariembourg. Had the prisoner indeed told the truth? Was it
possible? Gevrol and the governor of the prison were right, then, and M.
Segmuller and he, Lecoq, were senseless fools, pursuing a fantom. These
ideas flashed rapidly through the young detective’s brain. But he had
no time for reflection. The boy who had been summoned now made his
appearance, and proved to be a big overgrown lad with frank, chubby
face.

“Fritz,” asked his mistress, “did you go to the commissary’s office?”

“Yes, madame.”

“What did he say?”

“He was not in; but I spoke to his secretary, M. Casimir, who said you
were not to worry yourself, as the man would no doubt return.”

“But he has not returned.”

The boy rejoined, with a movement of the shoulders that plainly implied:
“How can I help that?”

“You hear, sir,” said the hostess, apparently thinking the importunate
questioner would now withdraw.

Such, however, was not Lecoq’s intention, and he did not even move,
though he had need of all his self-possession to retain his English
accent. “This is very annoying,” said he, “very! I am even more anxious
and undecided than I was before, since I am not certain that this is the
man I am seeking for.”

“Unfortunately, sir, I can tell you nothing more,” calmly replied the
landlady.

Lecoq reflected for a moment, knitting his brows and biting his lips,
as if he were trying to discover some means of solving the mystery. In
point of fact, he was seeking for some adroit phrase which might lead
this woman to show him the register in which all travelers are compelled
to inscribe their full names, profession, and usual residence. At the
same time, however, it was necessary that he should not arouse her
suspicions.

“But, madame,” said he at last, “can’t you remember the name this man
gave you? Was it May? Try to recollect if that was the name--May--May!”

“Ah! I have so many things to remember. But now I think of it, and the
name must be entered in my book, which, if it would oblige you, I can
show you. It is in the drawer of my writing-table. Whatever can I have
done with my keys?”

And while the hostess, who seemed to possess about as much intelligence
as her starling, was turning the whole office upside down looking for
her keys, Lecoq scrutinized her closely. She was about forty years of
age, with an abundance of light hair, and a very fair complexion.
She was well preserved--that is to say, she was plump and healthy in
appearance; her glance was frank and unembarrassed; her voice was clear
and musical, and her manners were pleasing, and entirely free from
affectation.

“Ah!” she eventually exclaimed, “I have found those wretched keys at
last.” So saying, she opened her desk, took out the register, laid it
on the table, and began turning over the leaves. At last she found the
desired page.

“Sunday, February 20th,” said she. “Look, sir: here on the
seventh line--May--no Christian name--foreign artist--coming from
Leipsic--without papers.”

While Lecoq was examining this record with a dazed air, the woman
exclaimed: “Ah! now I can explain how it happened that I forgot the
man’s name and strange profession--‘foreign artist.’ I did not make the
entry myself.”

“Who made it, then?”

“The man himself, while I was finding ten francs to give him as change
for the louis he handed me. You can see that the writing is not at all
like that of other entries.”

Lecoq had already noted this circumstance, which seemed to furnish an
irrefutable argument in favor of the assertions made by the landlady
and the prisoner. “Are you sure,” he asked, “that this is the man’s
handwriting?”

In his anxiety he had forgotten his English accent. The woman noticed
this at once, for she drew back, and cast a suspicious glance at the
pretended foreigner. “I know what I am saying,” she said, indignantly.
“And now this is enough, isn’t it?”

Knowing that he had betrayed himself, and thoroughly ashamed of his lack
of coolness, Lecoq renounced his English accent altogether. “Excuse me,”
 he said, “if I ask one more question. Have you this man’s trunk in your
possession?”

“Certainly.”

“You would do me an immense service by showing it to me.”

“Show it to you!” exclaimed the landlady, angrily. “What do you take me
for? What do you want? and who are you?”

“You shall know in half an hour,” replied the young detective, realizing
that further persuasion would be useless.

He hastily left the room, ran to the Place de Roubaix, jumped into a
cab, and giving the driver the address of the district commissary of
police, promised him a hundred sous over and above the regular fare
if he would only make haste. As might have been expected under such
circumstances, the poor horse fairly flew over the ground.

Lecoq was fortunate enough to find the commissary at his office.
Having given his name, he was immediately ushered into the magistrate’s
presence and told his story in a few words.

“It is really true that they came to inform me of this man’s
disappearance,” said the commissary. “Casimir told me about it this
morning.”

“They--came--to inform--you--” faltered Lecoq.

“Yes, yesterday; but I have had so much to occupy my time. Now, my man,
how can I serve you?”

“Come with me, sir; compel them to show us the trunk, and send for a
locksmith to open it. Here is the authority--a search warrant given me
by the investigating magistrate to use in case of necessity. Let us lose
no time. I have a cab at the door.”

“We will start at once,” said the commissary.

The driver whipped up his horse once more, and they were soon rapidly
rolling in the direction of the Rue St. Quentin.

“Now, sir,” said the young detective, “permit me to ask if you know this
woman who keeps the Hotel de Mariembourg?”

“Yes, indeed, I know her very well. When I was first appointed to this
district, six years ago, I was a bachelor, and for a long while I took
my meals at her table d’hote. Casimir, my secretary, boards there even
now.”

“And what kind of woman is she?”

“Why, upon my word, my young friend, Madame Milner--for such is her
name--is a very respectable widow (highly esteemed by her neighbors) and
having a very prosperous business. If she remains a widow, it is only
from choice, for she is very prepossessing and has plenty of suitors.”

“Then you don’t think her capable of serving, for the sake of a good
round sum, the interests of some wealthy culprit?”

“Have you gone mad?” interrupted the commissary. “What, Madame Milner
perjure herself for the sake of money! Haven’t I just told you that she
is an honest woman, and that she is very well off! Besides, she informed
me yesterday that this man was missing, so--”

Lecoq made no reply; the driver was pulling up; they had reached their
destination.

On seeing her obstinate questioner reappear, accompanied by the
commissary, Madame Milner seemed to understand everything.

“Good heavens!” she exclaimed, “a detective! I might have guessed it!
Some crime has been committed; and now my hotel has lost its reputation
forever!”

While a messenger was despatched for a locksmith, the commissary
endeavored to reassure and console her, a task of no little difficulty,
and which he was some time in accomplishing.

At last they all went up to the missing man’s room, and Lecoq sprang
toward the trunk. Ah! there was no denying it. It had, indeed, come
from Leipsic; as the labels pasted upon it by the different railroad
companies only too plainly proved. On being opened, it was, moreover,
found to contain the various articles mentioned by the prisoner.

Lecoq was thunderstruck. When he had seen the commissary lock the trunk
and its contents up in a cupboard and take possession of the key, he
felt he could endure nothing more. He left the room with downcast head;
and stumbled like a drunken man as he went down the stairs.




XV

Mardi Gras, or Shrove Tuesday, was very gay that year; that is to say,
all places of public resort were crowded. When Lecoq left the Hotel de
Mariembourg about midnight, the streets were as full as if it had been
noonday, and the cafes were thronged with customers.

But the young detective had no heart for pleasure. He mingled with the
crowd without seemingly seeing it, and jostled against groups of people
chatting at the corners, without hearing the imprecations occasioned
by his awkwardness. Where was he going? He had no idea. He walked
aimlessly, more disconsolate and desperate than the gambler who had
staked his last hope with his last louis, and lost.

“I must yield,” he murmured; “this evidence is conclusive. My
presumptions were only chimeras; my deductions the playthings of chance!
All I can now do is to withdraw, with the least possible damage and
ridicule, from the false position I have assumed.”

Just as he reached the boulevard, however, a new idea entered his brain,
an idea of so startling a kind that he could scarcely restrain a loud
exclamation of surprise. “What a fool I am!” cried he, striking his
hand violently against his forehead. “Is it possible to be so strong in
theory, and yet so ridiculously weak in practise? Ah! I am only a child,
a mere novice, disheartened by the slightest obstacle. I meet with
a difficulty, and at once I lose all my courage. Now, let me reflect
calmly. What did I tell the judge about this murderer, whose plan of
defense so puzzles us? Did I not tell him that we had to deal with a
man of superior talent--with a man of consummate penetration and
experience--a bold, courageous fellow of imperturbable coolness, who
will do anything to insure the success of his plans? Yes; I told him
all that, and yet I give up the game in despair as soon as I meet with a
single circumstance that I can not instantly explain. It is evident
that such a prisoner would not resort to old, hackneyed, commonplace
expedients. Time, patience, and research are requisite to find a flaw in
his defense. With such a man as he is, the more appearances are against
my presumptions, and in favor of his narrative, the more certain it is
that I am right--or else logic is no longer logic.”

At this thought, Lecoq burst into a hearty laugh. “Still,” continued he,
“it would perhaps be premature to expose this theory at headquarters in
Gevrol’s presence. He would at once present me with a certificate for
admission into some lunatic asylum.”

The young detective paused. While absorbed in thought, his legs, obeying
an instinctive impulse, had brought him to his lodgings. He rang the
bell; the door opened, and he groped his way slowly up to the fourth
floor. He had reached his room, and was about to enter, when some one,
whom he could not distinguish in the dark, called out: “Is that you,
Monsieur Lecoq?”

“Yes, it’s I!” replied the young man, somewhat surprised; “but who are
you?”

“I’m Father Absinthe.”

“Oh! indeed! Well, you are welcome! I didn’t recognize your voice--will
you come in?”

They entered the room, and Lecoq lit a candle. Then the young man could
see his colleague, and, good heavens! he found him in a most pitiable
condition.

He was as dirty and as bespattered with mud as a lost dog that has been
wandering about in the rain and the mire for a week at the very least.
His overcoat bore the traces of frequent contact with damp walls; his
hat had lost its form entirely. His eyes wore an anxious look, and his
mustache drooped despondently. He spoke, moreover, so strangely that one
might have supposed his mouth was full of sand.

“Do you bring me bad news?” inquired Lecoq, after a short examination of
his companion.

“Yes, bad.”

“The people you were following escaped you, then?”

The old man nodded his head affirmatively.

“It is unfortunate--very unfortunate!” said Lecoq. “But it is useless
to distress ourselves about it. Don’t be so cast down, Father Absinthe.
To-morrow, between us, we will repair the damage.”

This friendly encouragement only increased the old man’s evident
embarrassment. He blushed, this veteran, as if he had been a schoolgirl,
and raising his hands toward heaven, he exclaimed: “Ah, you wretch!
didn’t I tell you so?”

“Why! what is the matter with you?” inquired Lecoq.

Father Absinthe made no reply. Approaching a looking-glass that hung
against the wall, he surveyed himself reproachfully and began to heap
cruel insults upon the reflection of his features.

“You old good-for-nothing!” he exclaimed. “You vile deserter! have you
no shame left? You were entrusted with a mission, were you not? And how
have you fulfilled it? You have got drunk, you old wretch, so drunk as
to have lost your wits. Ah, you shan’t escape punishment this time, for
even if M. Lecoq is indulgent, you shan’t taste another drop for a week.
Yes, you old sot, you shall suffer for this escapade.”

“Come, come,” said Lecoq, “you can sermonize by and by. Now tell me your
story.”

“Ah! I am not proud of it, believe me. However, never mind. No doubt you
received the letter in which I told you I was going to follow the young
men who seemed to recognize Gustave?”

“Yes, yes--go on!”

“Well, as soon as they entered the cafe, into which I had followed them,
they began drinking, probably to drive away their emotion. After that
they apparently felt hungry. At all events they ordered breakfast. I
followed their example. The meal, with coffee and beer afterward, took
up no little time, and indeed a couple of hours had elapsed before they
were ready to pay their bill and go. Good! I supposed they would now
return home. Not at all. They walked down the Rue Dauphin; and I saw
them enter another cafe. Five minutes later I glided in after them; and
found them already engaged in a game of billiards.”

At this point Father Absinthe hesitated; it is no easy task to recount
one’s blunders to the very person who has suffered by them.

“I seated myself at a little table,” he eventually resumed, “and asked
for a newspaper. I was reading with one eye and watching with the other,
when a respectable-looking man entered, and took a seat beside me. As
soon as he had seated himself he asked me to let him have the paper when
I had finished with it. I handed it to him, and then we began talking
about the weather. At last he proposed a game of bezique. I declined,
but we afterward compromised the matter by having a game of piquet. The
young men, you understand, were still knocking the balls about. We began
by playing for a glass of brandy each. I won. My adversary asked for
his revenge, and we played two games more. I still kept on winning.
He insisted upon another game, and again I won, and still I drank--and
drank again--”

“Go on, go on.”

“Ah! here’s the rub. After that I remember nothing--nothing either
about the man I had been playing with or the young men. It seems to me,
however, that I recollect falling asleep in the cafe, and that a long
while afterward a waiter came and woke me and told me to go. Then I
must have wandered about along the quays until I came to my senses,
and decided to go to your lodgings and wait on the stairs until you
returned.”

To Father Absinthe’s great surprise, Lecoq seemed rather thoughtful
than angry. “What do you think about this chance acquaintance of yours,
papa?” asked the young detective.

“I think he was following me while I was following the others, and that
he entered the cafe with the view of making me drunk.”

“What was he like?”

“Oh, he was a tall, stoutish man, with a broad, red face, and a flat
nose; and he was very unpretending and affable in manner.

“It was he!” exclaimed Lecoq.

“He! Who?”

“Why, the accomplice--the man whose footprints we discovered--the
pretended drunkard--a devil incarnate, who will get the best of us yet,
if we don’t keep our eyes open. Don’t you forget him, papa; and if you
ever meet him again--”

But Father Absinthe’s confession was not ended. Like most devotees, he
had reserved the worst sin for the last.

“But that’s not all,” he resumed; “and as it’s best to make a clean
breast of it, I will tell you that it seems to me this traitor talked
about the affair at the Poivriere, and that I told him all we had
discovered, and all we intended to do.”

Lecoq made such a threatening gesture that the old tippler drew back in
consternation. “You wretched man!” exclaimed the young detective, “to
betray our plans to the enemy!”

But his calmness soon returned. If at first sight the evil seemed to
be beyond remedy, on further thought it had a good side after all. It
sufficed to dispel all the doubts that had assailed Lecoq’s mind after
his visit to the Hotel de Mariembourg.

“However,” quoth our hero, “this is not the time for deliberation. I
am overcome with fatigue; take a mattress from the bed for yourself, my
friend, and let us get a little sleep.”

Lecoq was a man of considerable forethought. Hence, before going to bed
he took good care to wind up his alarm so that it might wake him at six
o’clock. “With that to warn us,” he remarked to his companion, as he
blew out the candle, “there need be no fear of our missing the coach.”

He had not, however, made allowance for his own extreme weariness or
for the soporific effect of the alcoholic fumes with which his comrade’s
breath was redolent. When six o’clock struck at the church of St.
Eustache, the young detective’s alarm resounded faithfully enough, with
a loud and protracted whir. Shrill and sonorous as was the sound, it
failed, however, to break the heavy sleep of the two detectives. They
would indeed, in all probability, have continued slumbering for several
hours longer, if at half-past seven a sturdy fist had not begun to
rap loudly at the door. With one bound Lecoq was out of bed, amazed
at seeing the bright sunlight, and furious at the futility of his
precautions.

“Come in!” he cried to his early visitor. He had no enemies to fear, and
could, without danger, sleep with his door unlocked.

In response to his call, Father Papillon’s shrewd face peered into the
room.

“Ah! it is my worthy coachman!” exclaimed Lecoq. “Is there anything
new?”

“Excuse me, but it’s the old affair that brings me here,” replied our
eccentric friend the cabman. “You know--the thirty francs those wretched
women paid me. Really, I shan’t sleep in peace till you have worked off
the amount by using my vehicle. Our drive yesterday lasted two hours and
a half, which, according to the regular fare, would be worth a hundred
sous; so you see I’ve still more than twelve hours at your disposal.”

“That is all nonsense, my friend!”

“Possibly, but I am responsible for it, and if you won’t use my cab,
I’ve sworn to spend those twelve hours waiting outside your door. So now
make up your mind.” He gazed at Lecoq beseechingly, and it was evident
that a refusal would wound him keenly.

“Very well,” replied Lecoq, “I will take you for the morning, only I
ought to warn you that we are starting on a long journey.”

“Oh, Cocotte’s legs may be relied upon.”

“My companion and myself have business in your own neighborhood. It is
absolutely necessary for us to find the Widow Chupin’s daughter-in-law;
and I hope we shall be able to obtain her address from the police
commissary of the district where the Poivriere is situated.”

“Very well, we will go wherever you wish; I am at your orders.”

A few moments later they were on their way.

Papillon’s features wore an air of self-satisfied pride as, sitting
erect on his box, he cracked his whip, and encouraged the nimble
Cocotte. The vehicle could not have got over the ground more rapidly if
its driver had been promised a hundred sous’ gratuity.

Father Absinthe alone was sad. He had been forgiven by Lecoq, but he
could not forget that he, an old police agent, had been duped as easily
as if he had been some ignorant provincial. The thought was humiliating,
and then in addition he had been fool enough to reveal the secret plans
of the prosecution! He knew but too well that this act of folly had
doubled the difficulties of Lecoq’s task.

The long drive in Father Papillon’s cab was not a fruitless one. The
secretary of the commissary of police for the thirteenth arrondissement
informed Lecoq that Polyte Chupin’s wife lived with her child, in the
suburbs, in the Rue de la Butte-aux-Cailles. He could not indicate
the precise number, but he described the house and gave them some
information concerning its occupants.

The Widow Chupin’s daughter-in-law, a native of Auvergne, had been
bitterly punished for preferring a rakish Parisian ragamuffin to one of
the grimy charcoal-burners of the Puy de Dome. She was hardly more than
twelve years of age when she first came to Paris and obtained employment
in a large factory. After ten years’ privation and constant toil, she
had managed to amass, sou by sou, the sum of three thousand francs. Then
her evil genius threw Polyte Chupin across her path. She fell in love
with this dissipated, selfish rascal; and he married her for the sake of
her little hoard.

As long as the money lasted, that is, for some three or four months,
matters went on pleasantly enough. But as soon as the last franc had
been spent, Polyte left his wife, and complacently resumed his former
life of idleness, thieving, and debauchery. When at times he returned
home, it was merely with the view of robbing his wife of what little
money she might have saved in the mean while; and periodically she
uncomplainingly allowed him to despoil her of the last penny of her
earnings.

Horrible to relate, this unworthy rascal even tried to trade on her good
looks. Here, however, he met with a strenuous resistance--a resistance
which excited not merely his own ire, but also the hatred of the
villain’s mother--that old hag, the Widow Chupin. The result was that
Polyte’s wife was subjected to such incessant cruelty and persecution
that one night she was forced to fly with only the rags that covered
her. The Chupins--mother and son--believed, perhaps, that starvation
would effect what their horrible threats and insidious counsel had
failed to accomplish. Their shameful expectations were not, however,
gratified.

In mentioning these facts to Lecoq, the commissary’s secretary added
that they had become widely known, and that the unfortunate creature’s
force of character had won for her general respect. Among those she
frequented, moreover, she was known by the nickname of “Toinon the
Virtuous”--a rather vulgar but, at all events, sincere tribute to her
worth.

Grateful for this information, Lecoq returned to the cab. The Rue de la
Butte-aux-Cailles, whither Papillon was now directed to drive, proved to
be very unlike the Boulevard Malesherbes, and one brief glance sufficed
to show that opulence had not here fixed its abode. Luck seemed for
the moment to have turned in Lecoq’s favor. At all events, when he and
Father Absinthe alighted at the corner of the street, it so happened
that the very first person the young detective questioned concerning the
virtuous Toinon was well acquainted with her whereabouts. The house
in which she resided was pointed out, and Lecoq was instructed to go
upstairs to the top floor, and knock at the door in front of him. With
such precise directions the two detectives speedily reached Madame
Polyte Chupin’s abode.

This proved to be a cold and gloomy attic of medium size, windowless,
but provided with a small skylight. A straw pallet, a broken table,
two chairs, and a few plain kitchen utensils constituted the sole
appointments of this miserable garret. But in spite of the occupant’s
evident poverty, everything was neat and clean, and to use a forcible
expression that fell from Father Absinthe, one could have eaten off the
floor.

The two detectives entered, and found a woman busily engaged in making
a heavy linen sack. She was seated in the centre of the room, directly
under the skylight, so that the sun’s rays might fall upon her work. At
the sight of two strangers, she half rose from her chair, surprised,
and perhaps a little frightened; but when Lecoq had explained that they
desired a few moments’ conversation with her, she gave up her own seat,
and drawing the second chair from a corner, invited both detectives to
sit down. Lecoq complied, but Father Absinthe declared that he preferred
to remain standing.

With a single glance Lecoq took an inventory of the humble abode,
and, so to speak, appraised the woman. She was short, stout, and of
commonplace appearance. Her forehead was extremely low, being crowned by
a forest of coarse, black hair; while the expression of her large, black
eyes, set very close together, recalled the look of patient resignation
one so often detects in ill-treated and neglected animals. Possibly, in
former days, she might have possessed that fleeting attraction called
the _beaute du diable_; but now she looked almost as old as her wretched
mother-in-law. Sorrow and privation, excessive toil and ill-treatment,
had imparted to her face a livid hue, reddening her eyes and stamping
deep furrows round about her temples. Still, there was an attribute of
native honesty about her which even the foul atmosphere in which she had
been compelled to live had not sufficed to taint.

Her little boy furnished a striking contrast. He was pale and puny; his
eyes gleamed with a phosphorescent brilliancy; and his hair was of a
faded flaxen tint. One little circumstance attracted both detectives’
attention. If the mother was attired in an old, thin, faded calico
dress, the child was warmly clad in stout woolen material.

“Madame, you have doubtless heard of a dreadful crime, committed in your
mother-in-law’s establishment,” began Lecoq in a soft voice.

“Alas! yes, sir,” replied Toinon the Virtuous, quickly adding: “But my
husband could not have been implicated in it, since he is in prison.”

Did not this objection, forestalling, as it were, suspicion, betray the
most horrible apprehensions?

“Yes, I am aware of that,” replied Lecoq. “Polyte was arrested a
fortnight ago--”

“Yes, and very unjustly, sir,” replied the neglected wife. “He was led
astray by his companions, wicked, desperate men. He is so weak when he
has taken a glass of wine that they can do whatever they like with him.
If he were only left to himself he would not harm a child. You have only
to look at him--”

As she spoke, the virtuous Toinon turned her red and swollen eyes to
a miserable photograph hanging against the wall. This blotchy smudge
portrayed an exceedingly ugly, dissipated-looking young man, afflicted
with a terrible squint, and whose repulsive mouth was partially
concealed by a faint mustache. This rake of the barrieres was Polyte
Chupin. And yet despite his unprepossessing aspect there was no
mistaking the fact that this unfortunate woman loved him--had always
loved him; besides, he was her husband.

A moment’s silence followed her indication of the portrait--an act which
clearly revealed how deeply she worshiped her persecutor; and during
this pause the attic door slowly and softly opened. Not of itself,
however, for suddenly a man’s head peered in. The intruder, whoever he
was, instantly withdrew, uttering as he did so a low exclamation. The
door was swiftly closed again; the key--which had been left on the
outside--grated in the lock, and the occupants of the garret could hear
hurried steps descending the stairs.

Lecoq was sitting with his back to the door, and could not, therefore,
see the intruder’s face. Quickly as he had turned, he had failed to see
who it was: and yet he was far from being surprised at the incident.
Intuition explained its meaning.

“That must have been the accomplice!” he cried.

Thanks to his position, Father Absinthe had seen the man’s face.
“Yes,” said he, “yes, it was the same man who made me drink with him
yesterday.”

With a bound, both detectives threw themselves against the door,
exhausting their strength in vain attempts to open it. It resisted all
their efforts, for it was of solid oak, having been purchased by the
landlord from some public building in process of demolition, and it was,
moreover, furnished with a strong and massive fastening.

“Help us!” cried Father Absinthe to the woman, who stood petrified with
astonishment; “give us a bar, a piece of iron, a nail--anything!”

The younger man was making frantic efforts to push back the bolt, or
to force the lock from the wood. He was wild with rage. At last, having
succeeded in forcing the door open, they dashed out in pursuit of their
mysterious adversary. On reaching the street, they eagerly questioned
the bystanders. Having described the man as best they could, they found
two persons who had seen him enter the house of Toinon the Virtuous, and
a third who had seen him as he left. Some children who were playing in
the middle of the street added that he had run off in the direction of
the Rue du Moulin-des-Pres as fast as his legs could carry him. It was
in this street, near the corner of the Rue de la Butte-aux-Cailles, that
Lecoq had left old Papillon waiting with the cab.

“Let us hasten there!” proposed Father Absinthe; “perhaps Papillon can
give us some information.”

But Lecoq shook his head despondently. He would go no further. “It would
be of no use,” he said. “He had sufficient presence of mind to turn
the key in the lock, and that saved him. He is at least ten minutes in
advance of us, and we should never overtake him.”

Father Absinthe could not restrain his anger. He looked upon this
mysterious accomplice who had so cruelly duped him as a personal enemy,
and he would willingly have given a month’s pay to be able to lay his
hand on his shoulder. Lecoq was quite as angry as his subordinate, and
his vanity was likewise wounded; he felt, however, that coolness and
deliberation were necessary.

“Yes,” said he thoughtfully, “he’s a shrewd and daring fellow--a perfect
demon. He doesn’t remain idle. If we are working, he’s at work too. No
matter what side I turn, I find him on the defensive. He foiled you,
papa, in your effort to obtain a clue concerning Gustave’s identity; and
he made me appear a fool in arranging that little comedy at the Hotel de
Mariembourg. His diligence has been wonderful. He has hitherto been in
advance of us everywhere, and this fact explains the failures that have
attended all my efforts. Here we arrive before him. But if he came here,
it was because he scented danger. Hence, we may hope. Now let us get
back and question Polyte’s wife.”

Alas! poor Toinon the Virtuous did not understand the affair at all. She
had remained upstairs, holding her child by the hand, and leaning over
the baluster; her mind in great perplexity and her eyes and ears on the
alert. As soon as she perceived the two detectives coming up the stairs
again, she hastened down to meet them. “In the name of heaven, what does
this all mean?” she asked. “Whatever has happened?”

But Lecoq was not the man to tell his business on a landing, with
inquisitive ears all around him, and before he answered Toinon he made
her go up into her own garret, and securely close the door.

“We started in pursuit of a man who is implicated in the murders at the
Poivriere,” he said; “one who came here hoping to find you alone, who
was frightened at seeing us.”

“A murderer!” faltered Toinon, with clasped hands. “What could he want
of me?”

“Who knows? It is very probable that he is one of your husband’s
friends.”

“Oh! sir.”

“Why, did you not tell me just now that Polyte had some very undesirable
acquaintances? But don’t be alarmed; this does not compromise him in the
least. Besides, you can very easily clear him of all suspicion.”

“How? In what way? Oh, tell me at once.”

“Merely by answering me frankly, and by assisting me to find the guilty
party. Now, among your husband’s friends, don’t you know any who might
be capable of such a deed? Give me the names of his acquaintances.”

The poor woman’s hesitation was evident; undoubtedly she had been
present at many sinister cabals, and had been threatened with terrible
punishment if she dared to disclose the plans formed by Polyte or his
associates.

“You have nothing to fear,” said Lecoq, encouragingly, “and I promise
you no one shall ever know that you have told me a word. Very probably
you can tell me nothing more than I know already. I have heard a great
deal about your former life, and the brutality with which Polyte and his
mother have treated you.”

“My husband has never treated me brutally,” said the young woman,
indignantly; “besides, that matter would only concern myself.”

“And your mother-in-law?”

“She is, perhaps, a trifle quick-tempered; but in reality she has a good
heart.”

“Then, if you were so happy at the Widow Chupin’s house, why did you fly
from it?”

Toinon the Virtuous turned scarlet to the very roots of her hair. “I
left for other reasons,” she replied. “There were always a great many
drunken men about the house; and, sometimes, when I was alone, some of
them tried to carry their pleasantry too far. You may say that I have a
solid fist of my own, and that I am quite capable of protecting myself.
That’s true. But while I was away one day some fellows were wicked
enough to make this child drink to such an excess that when I came home
I found him as stiff and cold as if he were dead. It was necessary to
fetch a doctor or else--”

She suddenly paused; her eyes dilated. From red she turned livid, and in
a hoarse, unnatural voice, she cried: “Toto! wretched child!”

Lecoq looked behind him, and shuddered. He understood everything. This
child--not yet five years old--had stolen up behind him, and, ferreting
in the pockets of his overcoat, had rifled them of their contents.

“Ah, well--yes!” exclaimed the unfortunate mother, bursting into tears.
“That’s how it was. Directly the child was out of my sight, they used to
take him into town. They took him into the crowded streets, and taught
him to pick people’s pockets, and bring them everything he could lay his
hands on. If the child was detected they were angry with him and beat
him; and if he succeeded they gave him a sou to buy some sweets, and
kept what he had taken.”

The luckless Toinon hid her face in her hands, and sobbed in an almost
unintelligible voice: “Ah, I did not wish my little one to be a thief.”

But what this poor creature did not tell was that the man who had led
the child out into the streets, to teach him to steal, was his own
father, and her husband--the ruffian, Polyte Chupin. The two detectives
plainly understood, however, that such was the case, and the father’s
crime was so horrible, and the woman’s grief so great, that, familiar as
they were with all the phases of crime, their very hearts were touched.
Lecoq’s main thought, however, was to shorten this painful scene. The
poor mother’s emotion was a sufficient guarantee of her sincerity.

“Listen,” said he, with affected harshness. “Two questions only,
and then I will leave you. Was there a man named Gustave among the
frequenters of the Poivriere?”

“No, sir, I’m quite sure there wasn’t.”

“Very well. But Lacheneur--you must know Lacheneur!”

“Yes, sir; I know him.”

The young police agent could not repress an exclamation of delight. “At
last,” thought he, “I have a clue that may lead me to the truth. What
kind of man is he?” he asked with intense anxiety.

“Oh! he is not at all like the other men who come to drink at my
mother-in-law’s shop. I have only seen him once; but I remember him
perfectly. It was on a Sunday. He was in a cab. He stopped at the corner
of the waste ground and spoke to Polyte. When he went away, my husband
said to me: ‘Do you see that old man there? He will make all our
fortunes.’ I thought him a very respectable-looking gentleman--”

“That’s enough,” interrupted Lecoq. “Now it is necessary for you to
tell the investigating magistrate all you know about him. I have a cab
downstairs. Take your child with you, if you like; but make haste; come,
come quickly!”




XVI

The extreme uncertainty of the result was another attraction for M.
Segmuller’s investigating mind. Given the magnitude of the difficulties
that were to be overcome, he rightly considered that if his efforts
proved successful, he would have achieved a really wonderful victory.
And, assisted by such a man as Lecoq, who had a positive genius for his
calling, and in whom he recognized a most valuable auxiliary, he really
felt confident of ultimate success.

Even on returning home after the fatiguing labors of the day he did not
think of freeing himself from the burden of responsibility in relation
to the business he had on hand, or of driving away care until the
morrow. He dined in haste, and as soon as he had swallowed his coffee
began to study the case with renewed ardor. He had brought from his
office a copy of the prisoner’s narrative, which he attentively perused,
not once or twice, but several times, seeking for some weak point that
might be attacked with a probability of success. He analyzed every
answer, and weighed one expression after another, striving, as he did
so, to find some flaw through which he might slip a question calculated
to shatter the structure of defense. He worked thus, far into the night,
and yet he was on his legs again at an early hour in the morning. By
eight o’clock he was not merely dressed and shaved, he had not merely
taken his matutinal chocolate and arranged his papers, but he was
actually on his way to the Palais de Justice. He had quite forgotten
that his own impatience was not shared by others.

In point of fact, the Palais de Justice was scarcely awake when he
arrived there. The doors had barely opened. The attendants were busy
sweeping and dusting; or changing their ordinary garments for their
official costumes. Some of them standing in the windows of the long
dressing room were shaking and brushing the judges’ and advocates’
gowns; while in the great hall several clerks stood in a group, chaffing
each other while waiting for the arrival of the head registrar and the
opening of the investigation offices.

M. Segmuller thought that he had better begin by consulting the public
prosecutor, but he discovered that this functionary had not yet arrived.
Angry and impatient, he proceeded to his own office; and with his eyes
fixed on the clock, growled at the slowness of the minute hand. Just
after nine o’clock, Goguet, the smiling clerk, put in an appearance and
speedily learned the kind of humor his master was in.

“Ah, you’ve come at last,” gruffly ejaculated M. Segmuller, momentarily
oblivious of the fact that he himself scarcely ever arrived before ten,
and that a quarter-past nine was certainly early for his clerk.

Goguet’s curiosity had indeed prompted him to hurry to the Palais;
still, although well aware that he did not deserve a reprimand, he
endeavored to mumble an excuse--an excuse cut short by M. Segmuller
in such unusually harsh tones that for once in a way Goguet’s habitual
smile faded from his face. “It’s evident,” thought he, “that the wind’s
blowing from a bad quarter this morning,” with which reflection
he philosophically put on his black sleeves and going to his table
pretended to be absorbed in the task of mending his pens and preparing
his paper.

In the mean while, M. Segmuller who was usually calmness personified,
and dignity par excellence, paced restlessly to and fro. At times he
would sit down and then suddenly spring to his feet again, gesticulating
impatiently as he did so. Indeed, he seemed unable to remain quiet for a
moment.

“The prosecution is evidently making no headway,” thought the clerk.
“May’s prospects are encouraging.” Owing to the magistrate’s harsh
reception the idea delighted him; and, indeed, letting his rancor have
the upper hand, Goguet actually offered up a prayer that the prisoner
might get the better of the fight.

From half-past nine till ten o’clock M. Segmuller rang for his messenger
at least five times, and each time he asked him the same questions: “Are
you sure that M. Lecoq has not been here this morning? Inquire! If he
has not been here he must certainly have sent some one, or else have
written to me.”

Each time the astonished doorkeeper replied: “No one has been here, and
there is no letter for you.”

Five identical negative answers to the same inquiries only increased the
magistrate’s wrath and impatience. “It is inconceivable!” he exclaimed.
“Here I am upon coals of fire, and that man dares to keep me waiting.
Where can he be?”

At last he ordered a messenger to go and see if he could not find Lecoq
somewhere in the neighborhood; perhaps in some restaurant or cafe. “At
all events, he must be found and brought back immediately,” said he.

When the man had started, M. Segmuller began to recover his composure.
“We must not lose valuable time,” he said to his clerk. “I was to
examine the widow Chupin’s son. I had better do so now. Go and tell them
to bring him to me. Lecoq left the order at the prison.”

In less than a quarter of an hour Polyte entered the room. From head to
foot, from his lofty silk cap to his gaudy colored carpet slippers,
he was indeed the original of the portrait upon which poor Toinon the
Virtuous had lavished such loving glances. And yet the photograph was
flattering. The lens had failed to convey the expression of low cunning
that distinguished the man’s features, the impudence of his leering
smile, and the mingled cowardice and ferocity of his eyes, which never
looked another person in the face. Nor could the portrait depict the
unwholesome, livid pallor of his skin, the restless blinking of his
eyelids, and the constant movement of his thin lips as he drew them
tightly over his short, sharp teeth. There was no mistaking his nature;
one glance and he was estimated at his worth.

When he had answered the preliminary questions, telling the magistrate
that he was thirty years of age, and that he had been born in Paris, he
assumed a pretentious attitude and waited to see what else was coming.

But before proceeding with the real matter in hand, M. Segmuller wished
to relieve the complacent scoundrel of some of his insulting assurance.
Accordingly, he reminded Polyte, in forcible terms, that his sentence
in the affair in which he was now implicated would depend very much upon
his behavior and answers during the present examination.

Polyte listened with a nonchalant and even ironical air. In fact, this
indirect threat scarcely touched him. Having previously made inquiries
he had ascertained that he could not be condemned to more than six
months’ imprisonment for the offense for which he had been arrested; and
what did a month more or less matter to him?

The magistrate, who read this thought in Polyte’s eyes, cut his preamble
short. “Justice,” said he, “now requires some information from you
concerning the frequenters of your mother’s establishment.”

“There are a great many of them, sir,” answered Polyte in a harsh voice.

“Do you know one of them named Gustave?”

“No, sir.”

To insist would probably awaken suspicion in Polyte’s mind; accordingly,
M. Segmuller continued: “You must, however, remember Lacheneur?”

“Lacheneur? No, this is the first time I’ve heard that name.”

“Take care. The police have means of finding out a great many things.”

The scapegrace did not flinch. “I am telling the truth, sir,” he
retorted. “What interest could I possibly have in deceiving you?”

Scarcely had he finished speaking than the door suddenly opened and
Toinon the Virtuous entered the room, carrying her child in her arms.
On perceiving her husband, she uttered a joyful exclamation, and sprang
toward him. But Polyte, stepping back, gave her such a threatening
glance that she remained rooted to the spot.

“It must be an enemy who pretends that I know any one named Lacheneur!”
 cried the barriere bully. “I should like to kill the person who uttered
such a falsehood. Yes, kill him; I will never forgive it.”

The messenger whom M. Segmuller had instructed to go in search of Lecoq
was not at all displeased with the errand; for it enabled him to leave
his post and take a pleasant little stroll through the neighborhood. He
first of all proceeded to the Prefecture of Police, going the longest
way round as a matter of course, but, on reaching his destination, he
could find no one who had seen the young detective.

Accordingly, M. Segmuller’s envoy retraced his steps, and leisurely
sauntered through the restaurants, cafes, and wine shops installed in
the vicinity of the Palais de Justice, and dependent on the customers
it brought them. Being of a conscientious turn of mind, he entered
each establishment in succession and meeting now and again various
acquaintances, he felt compelled to proffer and accept numerous glasses
of the favorite morning beverage--white wine. Turn which way he would,
however, loiter as long as he might, there were still no signs of Lecoq.
He was returning in haste, a trifle uneasy on account of the length
of his absence, when he perceived a cab pull up in front of the Palais
gateway. A second glance, and oh, great good fortune, he saw Lecoq,
Father Absinthe, and the virtuous Toinon alight from this very vehicle.
His peace of mind at once returned; and it was in a very important and
somewhat husky tone that he delivered the order for Lecoq to follow him
without a minute’s delay. “M. Segmuller has asked for you a number of
times,” said he, “He has been extremely impatient, and he is in a very
bad humor, so you may expect to have your head snapped off in the most
expeditious manner.”

Lecoq smiled as he went up the stairs. Was he not bringing with him the
most potent of justifications? He thought of the agreeable surprise he
had in store for the magistrate, and fancied he could picture the sudden
brightening of that functionary’s gloomy face.

And yet, fate so willed it that the doorkeeper’s message and his urgent
appeal that Lecoq should not loiter on the way, produced the most
unfortunate results. Believing that M. Segmuller was anxiously waiting
for him, Lecoq saw nothing wrong in opening the door of the magistrate’s
room without previously knocking; and being anxious to justify his
absence, he yielded, moreover, to the impulse that led him to push
forward the poor woman whose testimony might prove so decisive. When he
saw, however, that the magistrate was not alone, and when he recognized
Polyte Chupin--the original of the photograph--in the man M. Segmuller
was examining, his stupefaction became intense. He instantly perceived
his mistake and understood its consequences.

There was only one thing to be done. He must prevent any exchange of
words between the two. Accordingly, springing toward Toinon and seizing
her roughly by the arm, he ordered her to leave the room at once. But
the poor creature was quite overcome, and trembled like a leaf. Her
eyes were fixed upon her unworthy husband, and the happiness she felt at
seeing him again shone plainly in her anxious gaze. Just for one second;
and then she caught his withering glance and heard his words of menace.
Terror-stricken, she staggered back, and then Lecoq seized her around
the waist, and, lifting her with his strong arms, carried her out into
the passage. The whole scene had been so brief that M. Segmuller was
still forming the order for Toinon to be removed from the room, when he
found the door closed again, and himself and Goguet alone with Polyte.

“Ah, ah!” thought the smiling clerk, in a flutter of delight, “this is
something new.” But as these little diversions never made him forget his
duties, he leaned toward the magistrate and asked: “Shall I take down
the last words the witness uttered?”

“Certainly,” replied M. Segmuller, “and word for word, if you please.”

He paused; the door opened again, this time to admit the magistrate’s
messenger, who timidly, and with a rather guilty air, handed his master
a note, and then withdrew. This note, scribbled in pencil by Lecoq on a
leaf torn from his memorandum book, gave the magistrate the name of
the woman who had just entered his room, and recapitulated briefly but
clearly the information obtained in the Rue de la Butte-aux-Cailles.

“That young fellow thinks of everything!” murmured M. Segmuller. The
meaning of the scene that had just occurred was now explained to him. He
understood everything.

He bitterly regretted this unfortunate meeting; at the same time casting
the blame on his own impatience and lack of caution, which, as soon as
the messenger had started in search of Lecoq, had induced him to summon
Polyte Chupin. Although he could not conceal from himself the enormous
influence this seemingly trivial incident might have, still he would not
allow himself to be cast down, but prepared to resume his examination of
Polyte Chupin in hopes of yet obtaining the information he desired.

“Let us proceed,” he said to Polyte, who had not moved since his
wife had been taken from the room, being to all appearances sublimely
indifferent to everything passing around him. To the magistrate’s
proposal he carelessly nodded assent.

“Was that your wife who came in just now?” asked M. Segmuller.

“Yes.”

“She wished to embrace you, and you repulsed her.”

“I didn’t repulse her.”

“You kept her at a distance at all events. If you had a spark of
affection in your nature, you would at least have looked at your child,
which she held out to you. Why did you behave in that manner?”

“It wasn’t the time for sentiment.”

“You are not telling the truth. You simply desired to attract her
attention, to influence her evidence.”

“I--I influence her evidence! I don’t understand you.”

“But for that supposition, your words would have been meaningless?”

“What words?”

The magistrate turned to his clerk: “Goguet,” said he, “read the last
remark you took down.”

In a monotonous voice, the smiling clerk repeated: “I should like to
kill the person who dared to say that I knew Lacheneur.”

“Well, then!” insisted M. Segmuller, “what did you mean by that?”

“It’s very easy to understand, sir.”

M. Segmuller rose. “Don’t prevaricate any longer,” he said. “You
certainly ordered your wife not to say anything about Lacheneur. That’s
evident. Why did you do so? What are you afraid of her telling us?
Do you suppose the police are ignorant of your acquaintance with
Lacheneur--of your conversation with him when he came in a cab to the
corner of the waste ground near your mother’s wine-shop; and of the
hopes of fortune you based upon his promises? Be guided by me; confess
everything, while there is yet time; and abandon the present course
which may lead you into serious danger. One may be an accomplice in more
ways than one.”

As these words fell on Polyte’s ears, it was evident his impudence and
indifference had received a severe shock. He seemed confounded, and
hung his head as if thoroughly abashed. Still, he preserved an obstinate
silence; and the magistrate finding that this last thrust had failed to
produce any effect, gave up the fight in despair. He rang the bell, and
ordered the guard to conduct the witness back to prison, and to take
every precaution to prevent him seeing his wife again.

When Polyte had departed, Lecoq reentered the room. “Ah, sir,” said he,
despondently, “to think that I didn’t draw out of this woman everything
she knew, when I might have done so easily. But I thought you would be
waiting for me, and made haste to bring her here. I thought I was acting
for the best--”

“Never mind, the misfortune can be repaired.”

“No, sir, no. Since she has seen her husband, it is quite impossible
to get her to speak. She loves that rascal intensely, and he has a
wonderful influence over her. You heard what he said. He threatened
her with death if she breathed a word about Lacheneur, and she is so
terrified that there is no hope of making her speak.”

Lecoq’s apprehension was based on fact, as M, Segmuller himself
perceived the instant Toinon the Virtuous again set foot in his office.
The poor creature seemed nearly heartbroken, and it was evident she
would have given her life to retract the words that had escaped her when
first questioned by Lecoq. Polyte’s threat had aroused the most sinister
apprehensions in her mind. Not understanding his connection with
the affair, she asked herself if her testimony might not prove his
death-warrant. Accordingly, she answered all M. Segmuller’s questions
with “no” or “I don’t know”; and retracted everything she had previously
stated to Lecoq. She swore that she had been misunderstood, that her
words had been misconstrued; and vowed on her mother’s memory, that she
had never heard the name of Lacheneur before. At last, she burst into
wild, despairing sobs, and pressed her frightened child against her
breast.

What could be done to overcome this foolish obstinacy, as blind and
unreasoning as a brute’s? M. Segmuller hesitated. “You may retire, my
good woman,” said he kindly, after a moment’s pause, “but remember that
your strange silence injures your husband far more than anything you
could say.”

She left the room--or rather she rushed wildly from it as though only
too eager to escape--and the magistrate and the detective exchanged
glances of dismay and consternation.

“I said so before,” thought Goguet, “the prisoner knows what he’s about.
I would be willing to bet a hundred to one in his favor.”

A French investigating magistrate is possessed of almost unlimited
powers. No one can hamper him, no one can give him orders. The entire
police force is at his disposal. One word from him and twenty agents, or
a hundred if need be, search Paris, ransack France, or explore Europe.
If there be any one whom he believes able to throw light upon an obscure
point, he simply sends an order to that person to appear before him, and
the man must come even if he lives a hundred leagues away.

Such is the magistrate, such are his powers. On the other hand, the
prisoner charged with a crime, but as yet un-convicted, is confined,
unless his offense be of a trivial description, in what is called a
“secret cell.” He is, so to say, cut off from the number of the living.
He knows nothing of what may be going on in the world outside. He can
not tell what witnesses may have been called, or what they may have
said, and in his uncertainty he asks himself again and again how far the
prosecution has been able to establish the charges against him.

Such is the prisoner’s position, and yet despite the fact that the
two adversaries are so unequally armed, the man in the secret cell not
unfrequently wins the victory. If he is sure that he has left behind
him no proof of his having committed the crime; if he has no guilty
antecedents to be afraid of, he can--impregnable in a defense of
absolute denial--brave all the attacks of justice.

Such was, at this moment, the situation of May, the mysterious murderer;
as both M. Segmuller and Lecoq were forced to admit, with mingled grief
and anger. They had hoped to arrive at a solution of the problem by
examining Polyte Chupin and his wife, and they had been disappointed;
for the prisoner’s identity remained as problematical as ever.

“And yet,” exclaimed the magistrate impatiently, “these people know
something about this matter, and if they would only speak--”

“But they won’t.”

“What motive is it that keeps them silent? This is what we must
discover. Who will tell us the price that has been promised Polyte
Chupin for his silence? What recompense can he count upon? It must be a
great one, for he is braving real danger!”

Lecoq did not immediately reply to the magistrate’s successive queries,
but it was easy to see from his knit brows that his mind was hard at
work. “You ask me, sir,” he eventually remarked, “what reward has
been promised Chupin? I ask on my part who can have promised him this
reward?”

“Who has promised it? Why, plainly the accomplice who has beaten us on
every point.”

“Yes,” rejoined Lecoq, “I suppose it must have been he. It certainly
looks like his handiwork--now, what artifice can he have used? We know
how he managed to have an interview with the Widow Chupin, but how has
he succeeded in getting at Polyte, who is in prison, closely watched?”

The young detective’s insinuation, vague as it was, did not escape M.
Segmuller. “What do you mean?” asked the latter, with an air of mingled
surprise and indignation. “You can’t suppose that one of the keepers has
been bribed?”

Lecoq shook his head, in a somewhat equivocal manner. “I mean nothing,”
 he replied, “I don’t suspect any one. All I want is information. Has
Chupin been forewarned or not?”

“Yes, of course he has.”

“Then if that point is admitted it can only be explained in two ways.
Either there are informers in the prison, or else Chupin has been
allowed to see some visitor.”

These suppositions evidently worried M. Segmuller, who for a moment
seemed to hesitate between the two opinions; then, suddenly making
up his mind, he rose from his chair, took up his hat, and said: “This
matter must be cleared up. Come with me, Monsieur Lecoq.”

A couple of minutes later, the magistrate and the detective had reached
the Depot, which is connected with the Palais de Justice by a narrow
passage, especially reserved for official use. The prisoners’ morning
rations had just been served to them, and the governor was walking up
and down the courtyard, in the company of Inspector Gevrol. As soon as
he perceived M. Segmuller he hastened toward him and asked if he had not
come about the prisoner May.

As the magistrate nodded assent, the governor at once added: “Well I was
only just now telling Inspector Gevrol that I was very well satisfied
with May’s behavior. It has not only been quite unnecessary to place
him in the strait-waistcoat again, but his mood seems to have changed
entirely. He eats with a good appetite; he is as gay as a lark, and he
constantly laughs and jests with his keeper.”

Gevrol had pricked up his ears when he heard himself named by the
governor, and considering this mention to be a sufficient introduction,
he thought there would be no impropriety in his listening to the
conversation. Accordingly, he approached the others, and noted with
some satisfaction the troubled glances which Lecoq and the magistrate
exchanged.

M. Segmuller was plainly perplexed. May’s gay manner to which the
governor of the Depot alluded might perhaps have been assumed for the
purpose of sustaining his character as a jester and buffoon, it might be
due to a certainty of defeating the judicial inquiry, or, who knows? the
prisoner had perhaps received some favorable news from outside.

With Lecoq’s last words still ringing in his ears, it is no wonder that
the magistrate should have dwelt on this last supposition. “Are you
quite sure,” he asked, “that no communication from outside can reach the
inmates of the secret cells?”

The governor of the Depot was cut to the quick by M. Segmuller’s implied
doubt. What! were his subordinates suspected? Was his own professional
honesty impugned? He could not help lifting his hands to heaven in mute
protest against such an unjust charge.

“Am I sure?” he exclaimed. “Then you can never have visited the secret
cells. You have no idea, then, of their situation; you are unacquainted
with the triple bolts that secure the doors; the grating that shuts out
the sunlight, to say nothing of the guard who walks beneath the windows
day and night. Why, a bird couldn’t even reach the prisoners in those
cells.”

Such a description was bound to reassure the most skeptical mind, and M.
Segmuller breathed again: “Now that I am easy on that score,” said he,
“I should like some information about another prisoner--a fellow named
Chupin, who isn’t in the secret cells. I want to know if any visitor
came for him yesterday.”

“I must speak to the registrar,” replied the governor, “before I can
answer you with certainty. Wait a moment though, here comes a man who
can perhaps tell us. He is usually on guard at the entrance. Here,
Ferraud, this way!”

The man to whom the governor called hastened to obey the summons.

“Do you know whether any one asked to see the prisoner Chupin
yesterday?”

“Yes, sir, I went to fetch Chupin to the parlor myself.”

“And who was his visitor?” eagerly asked Lecoq, “wasn’t he a tall man;
very red in the face--”

“Excuse me, sir, the visitor was a lady--his aunt, at least so Chupin
told me.”

Neither M. Segmuller nor Lecoq could restrain an exclamation of
surprise. “What was she like?” they both asked at the same time.

“She was short,” replied the attendant, “with a very fair complexion and
light hair; she seemed to be a very respectable woman.”

“It must have been one of the female fugitives who escaped from the
Widow Chupin’s hovel,” exclaimed Lecoq.

Gevrol, hitherto an attentive listener, burst into a loud laugh. “Still
that Russian princess,” said he.

Neither the magistrate nor the young detective relished this
unseasonable jest. “You forget yourself, sir,” said M. Segmuller
severely. “You forget that the sneers you address to your comrade also
apply to me!”

The General saw that he had gone too far; and while glancing hatefully
at Lecoq, he mumbled an apology to the magistrate. The latter did not
apparently hear him, for, bowing to the governor, he motioned Lecoq to
follow him away.

“Run to the Prefecture of Police,” he said as soon as they were out of
hearing, “and ascertain how and under what pretext this woman obtained
permission to see Polyte Chupin.”




XVII

On his way back to his office, M. Segmuller mentally reviewed the
position of affairs; and came to the conclusion that as he had failed
to take the citadel of defense by storm, he must resign himself to a
regular protracted siege. He was exceedingly annoyed at the constant
failures that had attended all Lecoq’s efforts; for time was on the
wing, and he knew that in a criminal investigation delay only increased
the uncertainty of success. The more promptly a crime is followed by
judicial action the easier it is to find the culprit, and prove his
guilt. The longer investigation is delayed the more difficult it becomes
to adduce conclusive evidence.

In the present instance there were various matters that M. Segmuller
might at once attend to. With which should he begin? Ought he not to
confront May, the Widow Chupin, and Polyte with the bodies of their
victims? Such horrible meetings have at times the most momentous
results, and more than one murderer when unsuspectedly brought into the
presence of his victim’s lifeless corpse has changed color and lost his
assurance.

Then there were other witnesses whom M. Segmuller might examine.
Papillon, the cab-driver; the concierge of the house in the Rue de
Bourgogne--where the two women flying from the Poivriere had momentarily
taken refuge; as well as a certain Madame Milner, landlady of the Hotel
de Mariembourg. In addition, it would also be advisable to summon, with
the least possible delay, some of the people residing in the vicinity of
the Poivriere; together with some of Polyte’s habitual companions, and
the landlord of the Rainbow, where the victims and the murderer had
apparently passed the evening of the crime. Of course, there was no
reason to expect any great revelations from any of these witnesses,
still they might know something, they might have an opinion to express,
and in the present darkness one single ray of light, however faint,
might mean salvation.

Obeying the magistrate’s orders, Goguet, the smiling clerk, had just
finished drawing up at least a dozen summonses, when Lecoq returned from
the Prefecture. M. Segmuller at once asked him the result of his errand.

“Ah, sir,” replied the young detective, “I have a fresh proof of that
mysterious accomplice’s skill. The permit that was used yesterday to see
young Chupin was in the name of his mother’s sister, a woman named
Rose Pitard. A visiting card was given her more than a week ago, in
compliance with a request indorsed by the commissary of police of her
district.”

The magistrate’s surprise was so intense that it imparted to his face
an almost ludicrous expression. “Is this aunt also in the plot?” he
murmured.

“I don’t think so,” replied Lecoq, shaking his head. “At all events, it
wasn’t she who went to the prison parlor yesterday. The clerks at the
Prefecture remember the widow’s sister very well, and gave me a full
description of her. She’s a woman over five feet high, with a very dark
complexion; and very wrinkled and weatherbeaten about the face. She’s
quite sixty years old; whereas, yesterday’s visitor was short and fair,
and not more than forty-five.”

“If that’s the case,” interrupted M. Segmuller, “this visitor must be
one of our fugitives.”

“I don’t think so.”

“Who do you suppose she was, then?”

“Why, the landlady of the Hotel de Mariembourg--that clever woman who
succeeded so well in deceiving me. But she had better take care! There
are means of verifying my suspicions.”

The magistrate scarcely heard Lecoq’s last words, so enraged was he at
the inconceivable audacity and devotion displayed by so many people:
all of whom were apparently willing to run the greatest risks so long as
they could only assure the murderer’s incognito.

“But how could the accomplice have known of the existence of this
permit?” he asked after a pause.

“Oh, nothing could be easier, sir,” replied Lecoq. “When the Widow
Chupin and the accomplice had that interview at the station-house near
the Barriere d’Italie, they both realized the necessity of warning
Polyte. While trying to devise some means of getting to him, the old
woman remembered her sister’s visiting card, and the man made some
excuse to borrow it.”

“Yes, such must be the case,” said M. Segmuller, approvingly. “It will
be necessary to ascertain, however--”

“And I will ascertain,” interrupted Lecoq, with a resolute air, “if you
will only intrust the matter to me, sir. If you will authorize me I
will have two spies on the watch before to-night, one in the Rue de
la Butte-aux-Cailles, and the other at the door of the Hotel de
Mariembourg. If the accomplice ventured to visit Toinon or Madame Milner
he would be arrested; and then we should have our turn!”

However, there was no time to waste in vain words and idle boasting.
Lecoq therefore checked himself, and took up his hat preparatory to
departure. “Now,” said he, “I must ask you, sir, for my liberty; if
you have any orders, you will find a trusty messenger in the corridor,
Father Absinthe, one of my colleagues. I want to find out something
about Lacheneur’s letter and the diamond earring.”

“Go, then,” replied M. Segmuller, “and good luck to you!”

Good luck! Yes, indeed, Lecoq looked for it. If up to the present moment
he had taken his successive defeats good-humoredly, it was because he
believed that he had a talisman in his pocket which was bound to insure
ultimate victory.

“I shall be very stupid if I can’t discover the owner of such a valuable
jewel,” he soliloquized, referring to the diamond earring. “And when
I find the owner I shall at the same time discover our mysterious
prisoner’s identity.”

The first step to be taken was to ascertain whom the earring had been
bought from. It would naturally be a tedious process to go from jeweler
to jeweler and ask: “Do you know this jewel, was it set by you, and if
so whom did you sell it to?” But fortunately Lecoq was acquainted with
a man whose knowledge of the trade might at once throw light on the
matter. This individual was an old Hollander, named Van Numen, who as a
connoisseur in precious stones, was probably without his rival in Paris.
He was employed by the Prefecture of Police as an expert in all such
matters. He was considered rich. Despite his shabby appearance, he was
rightly considered rich, and, in point of fact, he was indeed far more
wealthy than people generally supposed. Diamonds were his especial
passion, and he always had several in his pocket, in a little box which
he would pull out and open at least a dozen times an hour, just as a
snuff-taker continually produces his snuffbox.

This worthy man greeted Lecoq very affably. He put on his glasses,
examined the jewel with a grimace of satisfaction, and, in the tone of
an oracle, remarked: “That stone is worth eight thousand francs, and it
was set by Doisty, in the Rue de la Paix.”

Twenty minutes later Lecoq entered this well-known jeweler’s
establishment. Van Numen had not been mistaken. Doisty immediately
recognized the earring, which had, indeed, come from his shop. But whom
had he sold it to? He could not recollect, for it had passed out of his
hands three or four years before.

“Wait a moment though,” said he, “I will just ask my wife, who has a
wonderful memory.”

Madame Doisty truly deserved this eulogium. A single glance at the jewel
enabled her to say that she had seen this earring before, and that the
pair had been purchased from them by the Marchioness d’Arlange.

“You must recollect,” she added, turning to her husband, “that the
Marchioness only gave us nine thousand francs on account, and that we
had all the trouble in the world to make her pay the balance.”

Her husband did remember this circumstance; and in recording his
recollection, he exchanged a significant glance with his wife.

“Now,” said the detective, “I should like to have this marchioness’s
address.”

“She lives in the Faubourg St. Germain,” replied Madame Doisty, “near
the Esplanade des Invalides.”

Lecoq had refrained from any sign of satisfaction while he was in the
jeweler’s presence. But directly he had left the shop he evinced such
delirious joy that the passers-by asked themselves in amazement if
he were not mad. He did not walk, but fairly danced over the stones,
gesticulating in the most ridiculous fashion as he addressed this
triumphant monologue to the empty air: “At last,” said he, “this affair
emerges from the mystery that has enshrouded it. At last I reach the
veritable actors in the drama, the exalted personages whose existence
I had suspected. Ah! Gevrol, my illustrious General! you talked about
a Russian princess, but you will be obliged to content yourself with a
simple marchioness.”

But the vertigo that had seized the young detective gradually
disappeared. His good sense reasserted itself, and, looking calmly at
the situation, he felt that he should need all his presence of mind,
penetration, and sagacity to bring the expedition to a successful
finish. What course should he pursue, on entering the marchioness’s
presence, in order to draw from her a full confession and to obtain full
particulars of the murder, as well as the murderer’s name!

“It will be best to threaten her, to frighten her into confession,”
 he soliloquized. “If I give her time for reflection, I shall learn
nothing.”

He paused in his cogitations, for he had reached the residence of the
Marchioness d’Arlange--a charming mansion with a courtyard in front and
garden in the rear. Before entering, he deemed it advisable to obtain
some information concerning the inmates.

“It is here, then,” he murmured, “that I am to find the solution of the
enigma! Here, behind these embroidered curtains, dwells the frightened
fugitive of the other night. What agony of fear must torture her since
she has discovered the loss of her earring!”

For more than an hour, standing under a neighbor’s _porte cochere_,
Lecoq remained watching the house. He would have liked to see the
face of any one; but the time passed by and not even a shadow could
be detected behind the curtain; not even a servant passed across the
courtyard. At last, losing patience, the young detective determined to
make inquiries in the neighborhood, for he could not take a decisive
step without obtaining some knowledge of the people he was to encounter.
While wondering where he could obtain the information he required, he
perceived, on the opposite side of the street, the keeper of a wine-shop
smoking on his doorstep.

At once approaching and pretending that he had forgotten an address,
Lecoq politely asked for the house where Marchioness d’Arlange resided.
Without a word, and without condescending to take his pipe from his
mouth, the man pointed to the mansion which Lecoq had previously
watched.

There was a way, however, to make him more communicative, namely, to
enter the shop, call for something to drink, and invite the landlord to
drink as well. This was what Lecoq did, and the sight of two well-filled
glasses unbound, as by enchantment, the man’s hitherto silent tongue.
The young detective could not have found a better person to question,
for this same individual had been established in the neighborhood for
ten years, and enjoyed among the servants of the aristocratic families
here residing a certain amount of confidence.

“I pity you if you are going to the marchioness’s house to collect a
bill,” he remarked to Lecoq. “You will have plenty of time to learn the
way here before you see your money. You will only be another of the many
creditors who never let her bell alone.”

“The deuce! Is she as poor as that?”

“Poor! Why, every one knows that she has a comfortable income, without
counting this house. But when one spends double one’s income every year,
you know--”

The landlord stopped short, to call Lecoq’s attention to two ladies who
were passing along the street, one of them, a woman of forty, dressed in
black; the other, a girl half-way through her teens. “There,” quoth the
wine-seller, “goes the marchioness’s granddaughter, Mademoiselle Claire,
with her governess, Mademoiselle Smith.”

Lecoq’s head whirled. “Her granddaughter!” he stammered.

“Yes--the daughter of her deceased son, if you prefer it.”

“How old is the marchioness, then?”

“At least sixty: but one would never suspect it. She is one of those
persons who live a hundred years. And what an old wretch she is too.
She would think no more of knocking me over the head than I would of
emptying this glass of wine--”

“Excuse me,” interrupted Lecoq, “but does she live alone in that great
house?”

“Yes--that is--with her granddaughter, the governess, and two servants.
But what is the matter with you?”

This last question was not uncalled for; for Lecoq had turned deadly
white. The magic edifice of his hopes had crumbled beneath the weight of
this man’s words as completely as if it were some frail house of
cards erected by a child. He had only sufficient strength to murmur:
“Nothing--nothing at all.”

Then, as he could endure this torture of uncertainty no longer, he went
toward the marchioness’s house and rang the bell. The servant who came
to open the door examined him attentively, and then announced that
Madame d’Arlange was in the country. He evidently fancied that Lecoq was
a creditor.

But the young detective insisted so adroitly, giving the lackey to
understand so explicitly that he did not come to collect money, and
speaking so earnestly of urgent business, that the servant finally
admitted him to the hall, saying that he would go and see if madame had
really gone out.

Fortunately for Lecoq, she happened to be at home, and an instant
afterward the valet returned requesting the young detective to
follow him. After passing through a large and magnificently furnished
drawing-room, they reached a charming boudoir, hung with rose-colored
curtains, where, sitting by the fireside, in a large easy-chair, Lecoq
found an old woman, tall, bony, and terrible of aspect, her face loaded
with paint, and her person covered with ornaments. The aged coquette
was Madame, the Marchioness, who, for the time being, was engaged in
knitting a strip of green wool. She turned toward her visitor just
enough to show him the rouge on one cheek, and then, as he seemed rather
frightened--a fact flattering to her vanity--she spoke in an affable
tone. “Ah, well young man,” said she, “what brings you here?”

In point of fact, Lecoq was not frightened, but he was intensely
disappointed to find that Madame d’Arlange could not possibly be one of
the women who had escaped from the Widow Chupin’s hovel on the night of
the murder. There was nothing about her appearance that corresponded in
the least degree with the descriptions given by Papillon.

Remembering the small footprints left in the snow by the two fugitives,
the young detective glanced, moreover, at the marchioness’s feet, just
perceivable beneath her skirt, and his disappointment reached its climax
when he found that they were truly colossal in size.

“Well, are you dumb?” inquired the old lady, raising her voice.

Without making a direct reply, Lecoq produced the precious earring, and,
placing it upon the table beside the marchioness, remarked: “I bring you
this jewel, madame, which I have found, and which, I am told, belongs to
you.”

Madame d’Arlange laid down her knitting and proceeded to examine the
earring. “It is true,” she said, after a moment, “that this ornament
formerly belonged to me. It was a fancy I had, about four years ago, and
it cost me dear--at least twenty thousand francs. Ah! Doisty, the man
who sold me those diamonds, must make a handsome income. But I had a
granddaughter to educate and pressing need of money compelled me to sell
them.”

“To whom?” asked Lecoq, eagerly.

“Eh?” exclaimed the old lady, evidently shocked at his audacity, “you
are very inquisitive upon my word!”

“Excuse me, madame, but I am anxious to find the owner of this valuable
ornament.”

Madame d’Arlange regarded her visitor with an air of mingled curiosity
and surprise. “Such honesty!” said she. “Oh, oh! And of course you don’t
hope for a sou by way of reward--”

“Madame!”

“Good, good! There is not the least need for you to turn as red as a
poppy, young man. I sold these diamonds to a great Austrian lady--the
Baroness de Watchau.”

“And where does this lady reside?”

“At the Pere la Chaise, probably, since she died about a year ago. Ah!
these women of the present day--an extra waltz, or the merest draft, and
it’s all over with them! In my time, after each gallop, we girls used
to swallow a tumbler of sweetened wine, and sit down between two open
doors. And we did very well, as you see.”

“But, madame,” insisted Lecoq, “the Baroness de Watchau must have left
some one behind her--a husband, or children--”

“No one but a brother, who holds a court position at Vienna: and who
could not leave even to attend the funeral. He sent orders that all
his sister’s personal property should be sold--not even excepting her
wardrobe--and the money sent to him.”

Lecoq could not repress an exclamation of disappointment. “How
unfortunate!” he murmured.

“Why?” asked the old lady. “Under these circumstances, the diamond will
probably remain in your hands, and I am rejoiced that it should be so.
It will be a fitting reward for your honesty.”

Madame d’Arlange was naturally not aware that her remark implied the
most exquisite torture for Lecoq. Ah! if it should be as she said, if
he should never find the lady who had lost this costly jewel! Smarting
under the marchioness’s unintended irony, he would have liked to
apostrophize her in angry terms; but it could not be, for it was
advisable if not absolutely necessary that he should conceal his true
identity. Accordingly, he contrived to smile, and even stammered an
acknowledgment of Madame d’Arlange’s good wishes. Then, as if he had no
more to expect, he made her a low bow and withdrew.

This new misfortune well-nigh overwhelmed him. One by one all the
threads upon which he had relied to guide him out of this intricate
labyrinth were breaking in his hands. In the present instance he
could scarcely be the dupe of some fresh comedy, for if the murderer’s
accomplice had taken Doisty, the jeweler, into his confidence he would
have instructed him to say that the earring had never come from his
establishment, and that he could not consequently tell whom it had been
sold to. On the contrary, however, Doisty and his wife had readily given
Madame d’Arlange’s name, and all the circumstances pointed in favor of
their sincerity. Then, again, there was good reason to believe in
the veracity of the marchioness’s assertions. They were sufficiently
authenticated by a significant glance which Lecoq had detected between
the jeweler and his wife. The meaning of this glance could not be
doubted. It implied plainly that both husband and wife were of opinion
that in buying these earrings the marchioness engaged in one of those
little speculations which are more common than many people might suppose
among ladies moving in high-class society. Being in urgent want of ready
money, she had bought on credit at a high price to sell for cash at a
loss.

As Lecoq was anxious to investigate the matter as far as possible,
he returned to Doisty’s establishment, and, by a plausible pretext,
succeeded in gaining a sight of the books in which the jeweler
recorded his transactions. He soon found the sale of the earrings duly
recorded--specified by Madame Doisty at the date--both in the day-book
and the ledger. Madame d’Arlange first paid 9,000 francs on account and
the balance of the purchase money (an equivalent sum) had been received
in instalments at long intervals subsequently. Now, if it had been easy
for Madame Milner to make a false entry in her traveler’s registry at
the Hotel de Mariembourg, it was absurd to suppose that the jeweler
had falsified all his accounts for four years. Hence, the facts were
indisputable; and yet, the young detective was not satisfied.

He hurried to the Faubourg Saint Honore, to the house formerly occupied
by the Baroness de Watchau, and there found a good-natured concierge,
who at once informed him that after the Baroness’s death her furniture
and personal effects had been taken to the great auction mart in the Rue
Drouot; the sale being conducted by M. Petit, the eminent auctioneer.

Without losing a minute, Lecoq hastened to this individual’s office.
M. Petit remembered the Watchau sale very well; it had made quite a
sensation at the time, and on searching among his papers he soon found
a long catalogue of the various articles sold. Several lots of jewelry
were mentioned, with the sums paid, and the names of the purchasers; but
there was not the slightest allusion to these particular earrings. When
Lecoq produced the diamond he had in his pocket, the auctioneer could
not remember that he had ever seen it; though of course this was no
evidence to the contrary, for, as he himself remarked,--so many articles
passed through his hands! However, this much he could declare upon oath;
the baroness’s brother, her only heir, had preserved nothing--not so
much as a pin’s worth of his sister’s effects: although he had been in a
great hurry to receive the proceeds, which amounted to the pleasant sum
of one hundred and sixty-seven thousand five hundred and thirty francs,
all expenses deducted.

“Everything this lady possessed was sold?” inquired Lecoq.

“Everything.”

“And what is the name of this brother of hers?”

“Watchau, also. The baroness had probably married one of her relatives.
Until last year her brother occupied a very prominent diplomatic
position. I think he now resides at Berlin.”

Certainly this information would not seem to indicate that the
auctioneer had been tampered with; and yet Lecoq was not satisfied. “It
is very strange,” he thought, as he walked toward his lodgings, “that
whichever side I turn, in this affair, I find mention of Germany. The
murderer comes from Leipsic, Madame Milner must be a Bavarian, and now
here is an Austrian baroness.”

It was too late to make any further inquiries that evening, and Lecoq
went to bed; but the next morning, at an early hour, he resumed his
investigations with fresh ardor. There now seemed only one remaining
clue to success: the letter signed “Lacheneur,” which had been found
in the pocket of the murdered soldier. This letter, judging from the
half-effaced heading at the top of the note-paper, must have been
written in some cafe on the Boulevard Beaumarchais. To discover which
precise cafe would be mere child’s play; and indeed the fourth landlord
to whom Lecoq exhibited the letter recognized the paper as his. But
neither he, nor his wife, nor the young lady at the counter, nor the
waiters, nor any of the customers present at the time, had ever once
heard mention made of this singular name--Lacheneur.

And now what was Lecoq to do? Was the case utterly hopeless? Not yet.
Had not the spurious soldier declared that this Lacheneur was an old
comedian? Seizing upon this frail clue, as a drowning man clutches at
the merest fragment of the floating wreck, Lecoq turned his steps in
another direction, and hurried from theatre to theatre, asking every
one, from doorkeeper to manager: “Don’t you know an actor named
Lacheneur?”

Alas! one and all gave a negative reply, at times indulging in some
rough joke at the oddity of the name. And when any one asked the young
detective what the man he was seeking was like, what could he reply?
His answer was necessarily limited to the virtuous Toinon’s phrase: “I
thought him a very respectable-looking gentleman.” This was not a very
graphic description, however, and, besides, it was rather doubtful what
a woman like Polyte Chupin’s wife might mean by the word “respectable.”
 Did she apply it to the man’s age, to his personal aspect, or to his
apparent fortune.

Sometimes those whom Lecoq questioned would ask what parts this comedian
of his was in the habit of playing; and then the young detective could
make no reply whatever. He kept for himself the harassing thought
that the role now being performed by the unknown Lacheneur was driving
him--Lecoq--wild with despair.

Eventually our hero had recourse to a method of investigation which,
strange to say, the police seldom employ, save in extreme cases,
although it is at once sensible and simple, and generally fraught
with success. It consists in examining all the hotel and lodging-house
registers, in which the landlords are compelled to record the names of
their tenants, even should the latter merely sojourn under their roofs
for a single night.

Rising long before daybreak and going to bed late at night, Lecoq spent
all his time in visiting the countless hotels and furnished lodgings in
Paris. But still and ever his search was vain. He never once came across
the name of Lacheneur; and at last he began to ask himself if such
a name really existed, or if it were not some pseudonym invented
for convenience. He had not found it even in Didot’s directory, the
so-called “Almanach Boitin,” where one finds all the most singular and
absurd names in France--those which are formed of the most fantastic
mingling of syllables.

Still, nothing could daunt him or turn him from the almost impossible
task he had undertaken, and his obstinate perseverance well-nigh
developed into monomania. He was no longer subject to occasional
outbursts of anger, quickly repressed; but lived in a state of constant
exasperation, which soon impaired the clearness of his mind. No more
theories, or ingenious deductions, no more subtle reasoning. He pursued
his search without method and without order--much as Father Absinthe
might have done when under the influence of alcohol. Perhaps he had come
to rely less upon his own shrewdness than upon chance to reveal to him
the substance of the mystery, of which he had as yet only detected the
shadow.




XVIII

When a heavy stone is thrown into a lake a considerable commotion
ensues, the water spouts and seethes and bubbles and frequently a tall
jet leaps into the air. But all this agitation only lasts for a moment;
the bubbling subsides as the circles of the passing whirlpool grow
larger and larger; the surface regains at last its customary smoothness;
and soon no trace remains of the passage of the stone, now buried in the
depths below.

So it is with the events of our daily life, however momentous they may
appear at the hour of their occurrence. It seems as if their impressions
would last for years; but no, they speedily sink into the depths of the
past, and time obliterates their passage--just as the water of the
lake closes over and hides the stone, for an instant the cause of such
commotion. Thus it was that at the end of a fortnight the frightful
crime committed in the Widow Chupin’s drinking-den, the triple murder
which had made all Paris shudder, which had furnished the material for
so many newspaper articles, and the topic for such indignant comments,
was completely forgotten. Indeed, had the tragedy at the Poivriere
occurred in the times of Charlemagne, it could not have passed more
thoroughly out of people’s minds. It was remembered only in three
places, at the Depot, at the Prefecture de Police, and at the Palais de
Justice.

M. Segmuller’s repeated efforts had proved as unsuccessful as Lecoq’s.
Skilful questioning, ingenious insinuations, forcible threats, and
seductive promises had proved powerless to overcome the dogged spirit
of absolute denial which persistently animated, not merely the prisoner
May, but also the Widow Chupin, her son Polyte, Toinon the Virtuous, and
Madame Milner. The evidence of these various witnesses showed plainly
enough that they were all in league with the mysterious accomplice; but
what did this knowledge avail? Their attitude never varied! And, even
if at times their looks gave the lie to their denials, one could always
read in their eyes an unshaken determination to conceal the truth.

There were moments when the magistrate, overpowered by a sense of
the insufficiency of the purely moral weapons at his disposal, almost
regretted that the Inquisition was suppressed. Yes, in presence of the
lies that were told him, lies so impudent that they were almost insults,
he no longer wondered at the judicial cruelties of the Middle Ages,
or at the use of the muscle-breaking rack, the flesh-burning, red-hot
pincers, and other horrible instruments, which, by the physical torture
they inflicted, forced the most obstinate culprit to confess. The
prisoner May’s manner was virtually unaltered; and far from showing any
signs of weakness, his assurance had, if anything, increased, as though
he were confident of ultimate victory and as though he had in some way
learned that the prosecution had failed to make the slightest progress.

On one occasion, when summoned before M. Segmuller, he ventured to
remark in a tone of covert irony: “Why do you keep me confined so
long in a secret cell? Am I never to be set at liberty or sent to the
assizes. Am I to suffer much longer on account of your fantastic idea
that I am some great personage in disguise?”

“I shall keep you until you have confessed,” was M. Segmuller’s answer.

“Confessed what?”

“Oh! you know very well.”

The prisoner shrugged his shoulders at these last words, and then in a
tone of mingled despondency and mockery retorted: “In that case there is
no hope of my ever leaving this cursed prison!”

It was probably this conviction that induced him to make all seeming
preparations for an indefinite stay. He applied for and obtained a
portion of the contents of the trunk found at the Hotel de Mariembourg,
and evinced great joy when the various knickknacks and articles of
clothing were handed over to him. Thanks to the money found upon his
person when arrested, and deposited with the prison registrar, he was,
moreover, able to procure many little luxuries, which are never denied
to unconvicted prisoners, no matter what may be the charges against
them, for they have a right to be considered as innocent until a jury
has decided to the contrary. To while away the time, May next asked for
a volume of Beranger’s songs, and his request being granted, he spent
most of the day in learning several of the ditties by heart, singing
them in a loud voice and with considerable taste. This fancy having
excited some comment, he pretended that he was cultivating a talent
which might be useful to him when he was set at liberty. For he had no
doubt of his acquittal; at least, so he declared; and if he were anxious
about the date of his trial, he did not show the slightest apprehension
concerning its result.

He was never despondent save when he spoke of his profession. To all
appearance he pined for the stage, and, in fact, he almost wept when he
recalled the fantastic, many-colored costumes, clad in which he had once
appeared before crowded audiences--audiences that had been convulsed
with laughter by his sallies of wit, delivered between bursts of noisy
music. He seemed to have become altogether a better fellow; more frank,
communicative, and submissive. He eagerly embraced every opportunity
to babble about his past, and over and over again did he recount the
adventures of the roving life he had led while in the employ of M.
Simpson, the showman. He had, of course, traveled a great deal; and
he remembered everything he had seen; possessing, moreover, an
inexhaustible fund of amusing stories, with which he entertained his
custodians. His manner and his words were so natural that head keepers
and subordinate turnkeys alike were quite willing to give credit to his
assertions.

The governor of the Depot alone remained unconvinced. He had declared
that this pretended buffoon must be some dangerous criminal who had
escaped from Cayenne, and who for this reason was determined to conceal
his antecedents. Such being this functionary’s opinion, he tried every
means to substantiate it. Accordingly, during an entire fortnight,
May was submitted to the scrutiny of innumerable members of the police
force, to whom were added all the more notable private detectives of the
capital. No one recognized him, however, and although his photograph was
sent to all the prisons and police stations of the empire, not one of
the officials could recognize his features.

Other circumstances occurred, each of which had its influence, and one
and all of them speaking in the prisoner’s favor. For instance, the
second bureau of the Prefecture de Police found positive traces of the
existence of a strolling artist, named Tringlot, who was probably the
man referred to in May’s story. This Tringlot had been dead several
years. Then again, inquiries made in Germany revealed the fact that a
certain M. Simpson was very well known in that country, where he had
achieved great celebrity as a circus manager.

In presence of this information and the negative result of the scrutiny
to which May had been subjected, the governor of the Depot abandoned
his views and openly confessed that he had been mistaken. “The prisoner,
May,” he wrote to the magistrate, “is really and truly what he pretends
to be. There can be no further doubt on the subject.” This message, it
may be added, was sent at Gevrol’s instigation.

So thus it was that M. Segmuller and Lecoq alone remained of their
opinion. This opinion was at least worthy of consideration, as they
alone knew all the details of the investigation which had been conducted
with such strict secrecy; and yet this fact was of little import. It
is not merely unpleasant, but often extremely dangerous to struggle on
against all the world, and unfortunately for truth and logic one man’s
opinion, correct though it may be, is nothing in the balance of daily
life against the faulty views of a thousand adversaries.

The “May affair” had soon become notorious among the members of the
police force; and whenever Lecoq appeared at the Prefecture he had to
brave his colleagues’ sarcastic pleasantry. Nor did M. Segmuller escape
scot free; for more than one fellow magistrate, meeting him on the
stairs or in the corridor, inquired, with a smile, what he was doing
with his Casper Hauser, his man in the Iron Mask, in a word, with his
mysterious mountebank. When thus assailed, both M. Segmuller and Lecoq
could scarcely restrain those movements of angry impatience which come
naturally to a person who feels certain he is in the right and yet can
not prove it.

“Ah, me!” sometimes exclaimed the magistrate, “why did D’Escorval break
his leg? Had it not been for that cursed mishap, he would have been
obliged to endure all these perplexities, and I--I should be enjoying
myself like other people.”

“And I thought myself so shrewd!” murmured the young detective by his
side.

Little by little anxiety did its work. Magistrate and detective both
lost their appetites and looked haggard; and yet the idea of yielding
never once occurred to them. Although of very different natures,
they were both determined to persevere in the task they had set
themselves--that of solving this tantalizing enigma. Lecoq, indeed,
had resolved to renounce all other claims upon his time, and to devote
himself entirely to the study of the case. “Henceforth,” he said to M.
Segmuller, “I also will constitute myself a prisoner; and although the
suspected murderer will be unable to see me, I shall not lose sight of
him!”

It so happened that there was a loft between the cell occupied by May
and the roof of the prison, a loft of such diminutive proportions that
a man of average height could not stand upright in it. This loft had
neither window nor skylight, and the gloom would have been intense,
had not a few faint sun-rays struggled through the interstices of
some ill-adjusted tiles. In this unattractive garret Lecoq established
himself one fine morning, just at the hour when May was taking his daily
walk in the courtyard of the prison accompanied by a couple of keepers.
Under these circumstances there was no fear of Lecoq’s movements
attracting the prisoner’s notice or suspicion. The garret had a paved
floor, and first of all the young detective removed one of the stones
with a pickax he had brought for the purpose. Beneath this stone he
found a timber beam, through which he next proceeded to bore a hole of
funnel shape, large at the top and gradually dwindling until on piercing
the ceiling of the cell it was no more than two-thirds of an inch in
diameter. Prior to commencing his operations, Lecoq had visited the
prisoner’s quarters and had skilfully chosen the place of the projected
aperture, so that the stains and graining of the beam would hide it from
the view of any one below. He was yet at work when the governor of the
Depot and his rival Gevrol appeared upon the threshold of the loft.

“So this is to be your observatory, Monsieur Lecoq!” remarked Gevrol,
with a sneering laugh.

“Yes, sir.”

“You will not be very comfortable here.”

“I shall be less uncomfortable than you suppose; I have brought a large
blanket with me, and I shall stretch myself out on the floor and manage
to sleep here.”

“So that, night and day, you will have your eye on the prisoner?”

“Yes, night and day.”

“Without giving yourself time to eat or drink?” inquired Gevrol.

“Excuse me! Father Absinthe will bring me my meals, execute any errand I
may have, and relieve me at times if necessary.”

The jealous General laughed; but his laugh, loud as it was, was yet a
trifle constrained. “Well, I pity you,” he said.

“Very possibly.”

“Do you know what you will look like, with your eye glued to that hole?”

“Like what? Tell me, we needn’t stand on ceremony.”

“Ah, well! You will look just like one of those silly naturalists who
put all sorts of little insects under a magnifying glass, and spend
their lives in watching them.”

Lecoq had finished his work; and rose from his kneeling position. “You
couldn’t have found a better comparison, General,” said he. “I owe my
idea to those very naturalists you speak about so slightingly. By dint
of studying those little creatures--as you say--under a microscope,
these patient, gifted men discover the habits and instincts of the
insect world. Very well, then. What they can do with an insect, I will
do with a man!”

“Oh, ho!” said the governor of the prison, considerably astonished.

“Yes; that’s my plan,” continued Lecoq. “I want to learn this prisoner’s
secret; and I will do so. That I’ve sworn; and success must be mine,
for, however strong his courage may be, he will have his moments of
weakness, and then I shall be present at them. I shall be present if
ever his will fails him, if, believing himself alone, he lets his mask
fall, or forgets his part for an instant, if an indiscreet word escapes
him in his sleep, if his despair elicits a groan, a gesture, or a
look--I shall be there to take note of it.” The tone of resolution
with which the young detective spoke made a deep impression upon the
governor’s mind. For an instant he was a believer in Lecoq’s theory; and
he was impressed by the strangeness of this conflict between a prisoner,
determined to preserve the secret of his identity, and the agent for the
prosecution, equally determined to wrest it from him. “Upon my word, my
boy, you are not wanting in courage and energy,” said he.

“Misdirected as it may be,” growled Gevrol, who, although he spoke very
slowly and deliberately, was in his secret soul by no means convinced
of what he said. Faith is contagious, and he was troubled in spite of
himself by Lecoq’s imperturbable assurance. What if this debutant in
the profession should be right, and he, Gevrol, the oracle of the
Prefecture, wrong! What shame and ridicule would be his portion, then!
But once again he inwardly swore that this inexperienced youngster could
be no match for an old veteran like himself, and then added aloud: “The
prefect of police must have more money than he knows what to do with, to
pay two men for such a nonsensical job as this.”

Lecoq disdained to reply to this slighting remark. For more than a
fortnight the General had profited of every opportunity to make himself
as disagreeable as possible, and the young detective feared he would be
unable to control his temper if the discussion continued. It would be
better to remain silent, and to work and wait for success. To succeed
would be revenge enough! Moreover, he was impatient to see these
unwelcome visitors depart; believing, perhaps, that Gevrol was quite
capable of attracting the prisoner’s attention by some unusual sound.

As soon as they went away, Lecoq hastily spread his blanket over the
stones and stretched himself out upon it in such a position that he
could alternately apply his eye and his ear to the aperture. In this
position he had an admirable view of the cell below. He could see the
door, the bed, the table, and the chair; only the small space near the
window and the window itself were beyond his range of observation. He
had scarcely completed his survey, when he heard the bolts rattle: the
prisoner was returning from his walk. He seemed in excellent spirits,
and was just completing what was, undoubtedly, a very interesting story,
since the keeper who accompanied him lingered for a moment to hear the
finish. Lecoq was delighted with the success of his experiment. He
could hear as easily as he could see. Each syllable reached his ear
distinctly, and he had not lost a single word of the recital, which was
amusing, though rather coarse.

The turnkey soon left the cell; the bolts rattled once more, and the
key grated in the lock. After walking once or twice across his cell, May
took up his volume of Beranger and for an hour or more seemed completely
engrossed in its contents. Finally, he threw himself down upon his bed.
Here he remained until meal-time in the evening, when he rose and ate
with an excellent appetite. He next resumed the study of his book, and
did not go to bed until the lights were extinguished.

Lecoq knew well enough that during the night his eyes would not serve
him, but he trusted that his ears might prove of use, hoping that some
telltale word might escape the prisoner’s lips during his restless
slumber. In this expectation he was disappointed. May tossed to and fro
upon his pallet; he sighed, and one might have thought he was sobbing,
but not a syllable escaped his lips. He remained in bed until very late
the next morning; but on hearing the bell sound the hour of breakfast,
eleven o’clock, he sprang from his couch with a bound, and after
capering about his cell for a few moments, began to sing, in a loud and
cheerful voice, the old ditty:

     “Diogene!
     Sous ton manteau, libre et content,
     Je ris, je bois, sans gene--”

The prisoner did not stop singing until a keeper entered his cell
carrying his breakfast. The day now beginning differed in no respect
from the one that had preceded it, neither did the night. The same might
be said of the next day, and of those which followed. To sing, to eat,
to sleep, to attend to his hands and nails--such was the life led by
this so-called buffoon. His manner, which never varied, was that of a
naturally cheerful man terribly bored.

Such was the perfection of his acting that, after six days and nights
of constant surveillance, Lecoq had detected nothing decisive, nor
even surprising. And yet he did not despair. He had noticed that every
morning, while the employees of the prison were busy distributing the
prisoner’s food, May invariably began to sing the same ditty.

“Evidently this song is a signal,” thought Lecoq. “What can be going on
there by the window I can’t see? I must know to-morrow.”

Accordingly on the following morning he arranged that May should be
taken on his walk at half-past ten o’clock, and he then insisted that
the governor should accompany him to the prisoner’s cell. That worthy
functionary was not very well pleased with the change in the usual order
of things. “What do you wish to show me?” he asked. “What is there so
very curious to see?”

“Perhaps nothing,” replied Lecoq, “but perhaps something of great
importance.”

Eleven o’clock sounding soon after, he began singing the prisoner’s
song, and he had scarcely finished the second line, when a bit of bread,
no larger than a bullet, adroitly thrown through the window, dropped at
his feet.

A thunderbolt falling in May’s cell would not have terrified the
governor as much as did this inoffensive projectile. He stood in silent
dismay; his mouth wide open, his eyes starting from their sockets, as
if he distrusted the evidence of his own senses. What a disgrace! An
instant before he would have staked his life upon the inviolability of
the secret cells; and now he beheld his prison dishonored.

“A communication! a communication!” he repeated, with a horrified air.

Quick as lightning, Lecoq picked up the missile. “Ah,” murmured he, “I
guessed that this man was in communication with his friends.”

The young detective’s evident delight changed the governor’s stupor into
fury. “Ah! my prisoners are writing!” he exclaimed, wild with passion.
“My warders are acting as postmen! By my faith, this matter shall be
looked into.”

So saying, he was about to rush to the door when Lecoq stopped him.
“What are you going to do, sir?” he asked.

“I am going to call all the employees of this prison together, and
inform them that there is a traitor among them, and that I must know who
he is, as I wish to make an example of him. And if, in twenty-four hours
from now, the culprit has not been discovered, every man connected with
this prison shall be removed.”

Again he started to leave the room, and Lecoq, this time, had almost to
use force to detain him. “Be calm, sir; be calm,” he entreated.

“I will punish--”

“Yes, yes--I understand that--but wait until you have regained your
self-possession. It is quite possible that the guilty party may be one
of the prisoners who assist in the distribution of food every morning.”

“What does that matter?”

“Excuse me, but it matters a great deal. If you noise this discovery
abroad, we shall never discover the truth. The traitor will not be fool
enough to confess his guilt. We must be silent and wait. We will keep a
close watch and detect the culprit in the very act.”

These objections were so sensible that the governor yielded. “So be it,”
 he sighed, “I will try and be patient. But let me see the missive that
was enclosed in this bit of bread.”

Lecoq could not consent to this proposal. “I warned M. Segmuller,” said
he, “that there would probably be something new this morning; and he
will be waiting for me in his office. We must only examine the letter in
his presence.”

This remark was so correct that the governor assented; and they at once
started for the Palais de Justice. On their way, Lecoq endeavored to
convince his companion that it was wrong to deplore a circumstance
which might be of incalculable benefit to the prosecution. “It was an
illusion,” said he, “to imagine that the governor of a prison could be
more cunning than the prisoners entrusted to him. A prisoner is almost
always a match in ingenuity for his custodians.”

The young detective had not finished speaking when they reached
the magistrate’s office. Scarcely had Lecoq opened the door than M.
Segmuller and his clerk rose from their seats. They both read important
intelligence in our hero’s troubled face. “What is it?” eagerly asked
the magistrate. Lecoq’s sole response was to lay the pellet of bread
upon M. Segmuller’s desk. In an instant the magistrate had opened it,
extracting from the centre a tiny slip of the thinnest tissue paper.
This he unfolded, and smoothed upon the palm of his hand. As soon as
he glanced at it, his brow contracted. “Ah! this note is written in
cipher,” he exclaimed, with a disappointed air.

“We must not lose patience,” said Lecoq quietly. He took the slip of
paper from the magistrate and read the numbers inscribed upon it. They
ran as follows: “235, 15, 3, 8, 25, 2, 16, 208, 5, 360, 4, 36, 19, 7,
14, 118, 84, 23, 9, 40, 11, 99.”

“And so we shall learn nothing from this note,” murmured the governor.

“Why not?” the smiling clerk ventured to remark. “There is no system of
cipher which can not be read with a little skill and patience; there are
some people who make it their business.”

“You are right,” said Lecoq, approvingly. “And I, myself, once had the
knack of it.”

“What!” exclaimed the magistrate; “do you hope to find the key to this
cipher?”

“With time, yes.”

Lecoq was about to place the paper in his breast-pocket, when the
magistrate begged him to examine it a little further. He did so; and
after a while his face suddenly brightened. Striking his forehead with
his open palm, he cried: “I’ve found it!”

An exclamation of incredulous surprise simultaneously escaped the
magistrate, the governor, and the clerk.

“At least I think so,” added Lecoq, more cautiously. “If I am not
mistaken, the prisoner and his accomplice have adopted a very simple
system called the double book-cipher. The correspondents first agree
upon some particular book; and both obtain a copy of the same edition.
When one desires to communicate with the other, he opens the book
haphazard, and begins by writing the number of the page. Then he must
find on the same page the words that will express his thoughts. If the
first word he wishes to write is the twentieth on the page, he places
number 20 after the number of the page; then he begins to count one,
two, three, and so on, until he finds the next word he wishes to use.
If this word happens to be the sixth, he writes the figure 6, and he
continues so on till he has finished his letter. You see, now, how
the correspondent who receives the note must begin. He finds the page
indicated, and then each figure represents a word.”

“Nothing could be clearer,” said the magistrate, approvingly.

“If this note,” pursued Lecoq, “had been exchanged between two persons
at liberty, it would be folly to attempt its translation. This simple
system is the only one which has completely baffled inquisitive efforts,
simply because there is no way of ascertaining the book agreed upon.
But in this instance such is not the case; May is a prisoner, and he has
only one book in his possession, ‘The Songs of Beranger.’ Let this book
be sent for--”

The governor of the Depot was actually enthusiastic. “I will run and
fetch it myself,” he interrupted.

But Lecoq, with a gesture, detained him. “Above all, sir,” said he,
“take care that May doesn’t discover his book has been tampered with.
If he has returned from his promenade, make some excuse to have him sent
out of his cell again; and don’t allow him to return there while we are
using his book.”

“Oh, trust me!” replied the governor, hastily leaving the room.

Less than a quarter of an hour afterward he returned, carrying in
triumph a little volume in 32mo. With a trembling hand Lecoq turned to
page 235, and began to count. The fifteenth word on the page was
‘I’; the third afterward, ‘have’; the eighth following, ‘told’; the
twenty-fifth, ‘her’; the second, ‘your’; the sixteenth, ‘wishes.’ Hence,
the meaning of those six numbers was: “I have told her your wishes.”

The three persons who had witnessed this display of shrewdness could not
restrain their admiration. “Bravo! Lecoq,” exclaimed the magistrate. “I
will no longer bet a hundred to one on May,” thought the smiling clerk.

But Lecoq was still busily engaged in deciphering the missive, and soon,
in a voice trembling with gratified vanity, he read the entire note
aloud. It ran as follows: “I have told her your wishes; she submits. Our
safety is assured; we are waiting your orders to act. Hope! Courage!”




XIX

Yet what a disappointment it produced after the fever of anxiety and
expectation that had seized hold of everybody present. This strange
epistle furnished no clue whatever to the mystery; and the ray of hope
that had sparkled for an instant in M. Segmuller’s eyes speedily faded
away. As for the versatile Goguet he returned with increased conviction
to his former opinion, that the prisoner had the advantage over his
accusers.

“How unfortunate,” remarked the governor of the Depot, with a shade
of sarcasm in his voice, “that so much trouble, and such marvelous
penetration, should be wasted!”

“So you think, sir, that I have wasted my time!” rejoined Lecoq in a
tone of angry banter, a scarlet flush mantling at the same time over his
features. “Such is not my opinion. This scrap of paper undeniably proves
that if any one has been mistaken as regards the prisoner’s identity, it
is certainly not I.”

“Very well,” was the reply. “M. Gevrol and myself may have been
mistaken: no one is infallible. But have you learned anything more than
you knew before? Have you made any progress?”

“Why, yes. Now that people know the prisoner is not what he pretends to
be, instead of annoying and hampering me, perhaps they will assist us to
discover who he really is.”

Lecoq’s tone, and his allusion to the difficulties he had encountered,
cut the governor to the quick. The knowledge that the reproof was not
altogether undeserved increased his resentment and determined him to
bring this discussion with an inferior to an abrupt close. “You are
right,” said he, sarcastically. “This May must be a very great and
illustrious personage. Only, my dear Monsieur Lecoq (for there is an
only), do me the favor to explain how such an important personage could
disappear, and the police not be advised of it? A man of rank, such
as you suppose this prisoner to be, usually has a family, friends,
relatives, proteges, and numerous connections; and yet not a single
person has made any inquiry during the three weeks that this fellow May
has been under my charge! Come, admit you never thought of that.”

The governor had just advanced the only serious objection that could be
found to the theory adopted by the prosecution. He was wrong, however,
in supposing that Lecoq had failed to foresee it; for it had never once
been out of the young detective’s mind; and he had racked his brain
again and again to find some satisfactory explanation. At the present
moment he would undoubtedly have made some angry retort to the
governor’s sneering criticism, as people are wont to do when their
antagonists discover the weak spot in their armor, had not M. Segmuller
opportunely intervened.

“All these recriminations do no good,” he remarked, calmly; “we can make
no progress while they continue. It would be much wiser to decide upon
the course that is now to be pursued.”

Thus reminded of the present situation of affairs, the young detective
smiled; all his rancor was forgotten. “There is, I think, but one course
to pursue,” he replied in a modest tone; “and I believe it will
be successful by reason of its simplicity. We must substitute a
communication of our own composition for this one. That will not be
at all difficult, since I have the key to the cipher. I shall only
be obliged to purchase a similar volume of Beranger’s songs; and May,
believing that he is addressing his accomplice, will reply in all
sincerity--will reveal everything perhaps--”

“Excuse me!” interrupted the governor, “but how will you obtain
possession of his reply?”

“Ah! you ask me too much. I know the way in which his letters have
reached him. For the rest, I will watch and find a way--never fear!”

Goguet, the smiling clerk, could not conceal an approving grin. If he
had happened to have ten francs in his pocket just then he would have
risked them all on Lecoq without a moment’s hesitation.

“First,” resumed the young detective, “I will replace this missive by
one of my own composition. To-morrow, at breakfast time, if the prisoner
gives the signal, Father Absinthe shall throw the morsel of bread
enclosing my note through the window while I watch the effect through
the hole in the ceiling of the cell.”

Lecoq was so delighted with this plan of his that he at once rang the
bell, and when the magistrate’s messenger appeared, he gave him half a
franc and requested him to go at once and purchase some of the thinnest
tissue paper. When this had been procured, Lecoq took his seat at the
clerk’s desk, and, provided with the volume of Beranger’s songs, began
to compose a fresh note, copying as closely as possible the forms of the
figures used by the unknown correspondent. The task did not occupy him
more than ten minutes, for, fearing lest he might commit some blunder,
he reproduced most of the words of the original letter, giving them,
however, an entirely different meaning.

When completed, his note read as follows: “I have told her your wishes;
she does not submit. Our safety is threatened. We are awaiting your
orders. I tremble.”

Having acquainted the magistrate with the purport of the note, Lecoq
next rolled up the paper, and enclosing it in the fragment of bread,
remarked: “To-morrow we shall learn something new.”

To-morrow! The twenty-four hours that separated the young man from the
decisive moment he looked forward to seemed as it were a century; and he
resorted to every possible expedient to hasten the passing of the time.
At length, after giving precise instructions to Father Absinthe, he
retired to his loft for the night. The hours seemed interminable, and
such was his nervous excitement that he found it quite impossible to
sleep. On rising at daybreak he discovered that the prisoner was already
awake. May was sitting on the foot of his bed, apparently plunged in
thought. Suddenly he sprang to his feet and paced restlessly to and
fro. He was evidently in an unusually agitated frame of mind: for he
gesticulated wildly, and at intervals repeated: “What misery! My God!
what misery!”

“Ah! my fine fellow,” thought Lecoq, “you are anxious about the daily
letter you failed to receive yesterday. Patience, patience! One of my
writing will soon arrive.”

At last the young detective heard the stir usually preceding the
distribution of the food. People were running to and fro, sabots clicked
noisily in the corridors, and the keepers could be heard engaged in loud
conversation. By and by the prison bell began to toll. It was eleven
o’clock, and soon afterward the prisoner commenced to sing his favorite
song:

“Diogene! Sous ton manteau, libre et content--”

Before he commenced the third line the slight sound caused by the
fragment of bread as it fell upon the stone floor caused him to pause
abruptly.

Lecoq, at the opening in the ceiling above, was holding his breath
and watching with both eyes. He did not miss one of the prisoner’s
movements--not so much as the quiver of an eyelid. May looked first at
the window, and then all round the cell, as if it were impossible for
him to explain the arrival of this projectile. It was not until some
little time had elapsed that he decided to pick it up. He held it in
the hollow of his hand, and examined it with apparent curiosity. His
features expressed intense surprise, and any one would have sworn that
he was innocent of all complicity. Soon a smile gathered round his lips,
and after a slight shrug of the shoulders, which might be interpreted,
“Am I a fool?” he hastily broke the pellet in half. The sight of the
paper which it contained seemed to amaze him.

“What does all this mean?” wondered Lecoq.

The prisoner had opened the note, and was examining with knitted brows
the figures which were apparently destitute of all meaning to him. Then,
suddenly rushing to the door of his cell, and hammering upon it with
clenched fists, he cried at the top of his voice: “Here! keeper! here!”

“What do you want?” shouted a turnkey, whose footsteps Lecoq could hear
hastening along the adjoining passage.

“I wish to speak to the magistrate.”

“Very well. He shall be informed.”

“Immediately, if you please. I have a revelation to make.”

“He shall be sent for immediately.”

Lecoq waited to hear no more. He tore down the narrow staircase leading
from the loft, and rushed to the Palais de Justice to acquaint M.
Segmuller with what had happened.

“What can all this mean?” he wondered as he darted over the pavement.
“Are we indeed approaching a denouement? This much is certain, the
prisoner was not deceived by my note. He could only decipher it with
the aid of his volume of Beranger, and he did not even touch the book;
plainly, then, he hasn’t read the letter.”

M. Segmuller was no less amazed than the young detective. They both
hastened to the prison, followed by the smiling clerk, who was the
magistrate’s inevitable shadow. On their way they encountered the
governor of the Depot, arriving all in a flutter, having been greatly
excited by that important word “revelation.” The worthy official
undoubtedly wished to express an opinion, but the magistrate checked him
by the abrupt remark, “I know all about it, and I am coming.”

When they had reached the narrow corridor leading to the secret cells,
Lecoq passed on in advance of the rest of the party. He said to himself
that by stealing upon the prisoner unawares he might possibly find him
engaged in surreptitiously reading the note. In any case, he would have
an opportunity to glance at the interior of the cell. May was seated
beside the table, his head resting on his hands. At the grating of the
bolt, drawn by the governor himself, the prisoner rose to his feet,
smoothed his hair, and remained standing in a respectful attitude,
apparently waiting for the visitors to address him.

“Did you send for me?” inquired the magistrate.

“Yes, sir.”

“You have, I understand, some revelation to make to me.”

“I have something of importance to tell you.”

“Very well! these gentlemen will retire.”

M. Segmuller had already turned to Lecoq and the governor to request
them to withdraw, when the prisoner motioned him not to do so.

“It is not necessary,” said May, “I am, on the contrary, very well
pleased to speak before these gentlemen.”

“Speak, then.”

May did not wait for the injunction to be repeated. Throwing his
chest forward, and his head back as had been his wont throughout his
examinations, whenever he wished to make an oratorical display, he
began as follows: “It shall be for you to say, gentlemen, whether I’m an
honest man or not. The profession matters little. One may, perhaps, act
as the clown of a traveling show, and yet be an honest man--a man of
honor.”

“Oh, spare us your reflections!”

“Very well, sir, that suits me exactly. To be brief, then here is a
little paper which was thrown into my cell a few minutes ago. There are
some numbers on it which may mean something; but I have examined them,
and they are quite Greek to me.”

He paused, and then handing Lecoq’s missive to the magistrate, quietly
added: “It was rolled up in a bit of bread.”

This declaration was so unexpected, that it struck all the officials
dumb with surprise, but the prisoner, without seeming to notice the
effect he had produced, placidly continued: “I suppose the person who
threw it, made a mistake in the window. I know very well that it’s
a mean piece of business to denounce a companion in prison. It’s a
cowardly act and one may get into trouble by doing so; still, a
fellow must be prudent when he’s charged with murder as I am, and with
something very unpleasant, perhaps, in store for him.”

A terribly significant gesture of severing the head from the body
left no doubt whatever as to what May meant by the “something very
unpleasant.”

“And yet I am innocent,” continued May, in a sorrowful, reproachful
tone.

The magistrate had by this time recovered the full possession of his
faculties. Fixing his eyes upon the prisoner and concentrating in one
magnetic glance all his power of will, he slowly exclaimed: “You speak
falsely! It was for you that this note was intended.”

“For me! Then I must be the greatest of fools, or why should I have sent
for you to show it you? For me? In that case, why didn’t I keep it? Who
knew, who could know that I had received it?”

These words were uttered with such a marvelous semblance of honesty,
May’s gaze was frank and open, his voice rang so true, and his reasoning
was so specious, that all the governor’s doubts returned.

“And what if I could prove that you are uttering a falsehood?” insisted
M. Segmuller. “What if I could prove it--here and now?”

“You would have to lie to do so! Oh! pardon! Excuse me; I mean--”

But the magistrate was not in a frame of mind to stickle for nicety
of expression. He motioned May to be silent; and, turning to Lecoq,
exclaimed: “Show the prisoner that you have discovered the key to his
secret correspondence.”

A sudden change passed over May’s features. “Ah! it is this agent of
police who says the letter was for me,” he remarked in an altered tone.
“The same agent who asserts that I am a grand seigneur.” Then, looking
disdainfully at Lecoq, he added: “Under these circumstances there’s no
hope for me. When the police are absolutely determined that a man shall
be found guilty, they contrive to prove his guilt; everybody knows that.
And when a prisoner receives no letters, an agent, who wishes to show
that he is corresponding knows well enough how to write to him.”

May’s features wore such an expression of marked contempt that Lecoq
could scarcely refrain from making an angry reply. He restrained his
impulse, however, in obedience to a warning gesture from the magistrate,
and taking from the table the volume of Beranger’s songs, he endeavored
to prove to the prisoner that each number in the note which he had shown
M. Segmuller corresponded with a word on the page indicated, and
that these various words formed several intelligible phrases. This
overpowering evidence did not seem to trouble May in the least. After
expressing the same admiration for this novel system of correspondence
that a child would show for a new toy, he declared his belief that no
one could equal the police in such machinations.

What could have been done in the face of such obstinacy? M. Segmuller
did not even attempt to argue the point, but quietly retired, followed
by his companions. Until they reached the governor’s office, he did not
utter a word; then, sinking down into an armchair, he exclaimed: “We
must confess ourselves beaten. This man will always remain what he
is--an inexplicable enigma.”

“But what is the meaning of the comedy he has just played? I do not
understand it at all,” remarked the governor.

“Why,” replied Lecoq, “don’t you see that he wished to persuade the
magistrate that the first note, the one that fell into the cell while
you and I were there yesterday, had been written by me in a mad desire
to prove the truth of my theory at any cost? It was a hazardous project;
but the importance of the result to be gained must have emboldened him
to attempt it. Had he succeeded, I should have been disgraced; and he
would have remained May--the stroller, without any further doubt as to
his identity. But how could he know that I had discovered his secret
correspondence, and that I was watching him from the loft overhead? That
will probably never be explained.”

The governor and the young detective exchanged glances of mutual
distrust. “Eh! eh!” thought the former, “yes, indeed, that note which
fell into the cell while I was there the other day might after all have
been this crafty fellow’s work. His Father Absinthe may have served him
in the first instance just as he did subsequently.”

While these reflections were flitting through the governor’s mind, Lecoq
suspiciously remarked to himself: “Who knows but what this fool of
a governor confided everything to Gevrol? If he did so, the General,
jealous as he is, would not have scrupled to play one such a damaging
trick.”

His thoughts had gone no further when Goguet, the smiling clerk, boldly
broke the silence with the trite remark: “What a pity such a clever
comedy didn’t succeed.”

These words startled the magistrate from his reverie. “Yes, a shameful
farce,” said he, “and one I would never have authorized, had I not been
blinded by a mad longing to arrive at the truth. Such tricks only bring
the sacred majesty of justice into contempt!”

At these bitter words, Lecoq turned white with anger. This was the
second affront within an hour. The prisoner had first insulted him, and
now it was the magistrate’s turn. “I am defeated,” thought he. “I must
confess it. Fate is against me! Ah! if I had only succeeded!”

Disappointment alone had impelled M. Segmuller to utter these harsh
words; they were both cruel and unjust, and the magistrate soon
regretted them, and did everything in his power to drive them from
Lecoq’s recollection. They met every day after this unfortunate
incident; and every morning, when the young detective came to give an
account of his investigations, they had a long conference together. For
Lecoq still continued his efforts; still labored on with an obstinacy
intensified by constant sneers; still pursued his investigations with
that cold and determined zeal which keeps one’s faculties on the alert
for years.

The magistrate, however, was utterly discouraged. “We must abandon this
attempt,” said he. “All the means of detection have been exhausted.
I give it up. The prisoner will go to the Assizes, to be acquitted or
condemned under the name of May. I will trouble myself no more about the
matter.”

He said this, but the anxiety and disappointment caused by defeat,
sneering criticism, and perplexity, as to the best course to be pursued,
so affected his health that he became really ill--so ill that he had to
take to his bed.

He had been confined to his room for a week or so, when one morning
Lecoq called to inquire after him.

“You see, my good fellow,” quoth M. Segmuller, despondently, “that this
mysterious murderer is fatal to us magistrates. Ah! he is too much for
us; he will preserve the secret of his identity.”

“Possibly,” replied Lecoq. “At all events, there is now but one way left
to discover his secret; we must allow him to escape--and then track him
to his lair.”

This expedient, although at first sight a very startling one, was not of
Lecoq’s own invention, nor was it by any means novel. At all times, in
cases of necessity, have the police closed their eyes and opened the
prison doors for the release of suspected criminals. And not a few,
dazzled by liberty and ignorant of being watched, have foolishly
betrayed themselves. All prisoners are not like the Marquis de
Lavalette, protected by royal connivance; and one might enumerate
many individuals who have been released, only to be rearrested after
confessing their guilt to police spies or auxiliaries who have won their
confidence.

Naturally, however, it is but seldom, and only in special cases, and as
a last resort, that such a plan is adopted. Moreover, the authorities
only consent to it when they hope to derive some important advantage,
such as the capture of a whole band of criminals. For instance,
the police perhaps arrest one of a band. Now, despite his criminal
propensities the captured culprit often has a certain sense of honor--we
all know that there is honor among thieves--which prompts him to refuse
all information concerning his accomplices. In such a case what is to be
done? Is he to be sent to the Assizes by himself, tried and convicted,
while his comrades escape scot free? No; it is best to set him at
liberty. The prison doors are opened, and he is told that he is free.
But each after step he takes in the streets outside is dogged by skilful
detectives; and soon, at the very moment when he is boasting of his good
luck and audacity to the comrades he has rejoined, the whole gang find
themselves caught in the snare.

M. Segmuller knew all this, and much more, and yet, on hearing Lecoq’s
proposition, he made an angry gesture and exclaimed: “Are you mad?”

“I think not, sir.”

“At all events your scheme is a most foolish one!”

“Why so, sir? You will recollect the famous murder of the Chaboiseaus.
The police soon succeeded in capturing the guilty parties; but a robbery
of a hundred and sixty thousand francs in bank-notes and coin had been
committed at the same time, and this large sum of money couldn’t be
found. The murderers obstinately refused to say where they had concealed
it; for, of course, it would prove a fortune for them, if they ever
escaped the gallows. In the mean while, however, the children of the
victims were ruined. Now, M. Patrigent, the magistrate who investigated
the affair, was the first to convince the authorities that it would be
best to set one of the murderers at liberty. His advice was followed;
and three days later the culprit was surprised unearthing the money from
among a bed of mushrooms. Now, I believe that our prisoner--”

“Enough!” interrupted M. Segmuller. “I wish to hear no more on the
matter. I have, it seems to me, forbidden you to broach the subject.”

The young detective hung his head with a hypocritical air of submission.
But all the while he watched the magistrate out of the corner of his eye
and noted his agitation. “I can afford to be silent,” he thought; “he
will return to the subject of his own accord.”

And in fact M. Segmuller did return to it only a moment afterward.
“Suppose this man were released from prison,” said he, “what would you
do?”

“What would I do, sir! I would follow him like grim death; I would not
once let him out of my sight; I would be his shadow.”

“And do you suppose he wouldn’t discover this surveillance?”

“I should take my precautions.”

“But he would recognize you at a single glance.”

“No, sir, he wouldn’t, for I should disguise myself. A detective who
can’t equal the most skilful actor in the matter of make-up is no
better than an ordinary policeman. I have only practised at it for a
twelvemonth, but I can easily make myself look old or young, dark or
light, or assume the manner of a man of the world, or of some frightful
ruffian of the barrieres.”

“I wasn’t aware that you possessed this talent, Monsieur Lecoq.”

“Oh! I’m very far from the perfection I hope to arrive at; though I may
venture to say that in three days from now I could call on you and talk
with you for half an hour without being recognized.”

M. Segmuller made no rejoinder; and it was evident to Lecoq that the
magistrate had offered this objection rather in the hope of its being
overruled, than with the wish to see it prevail.

“I think, my poor fellow,” he at length observed, “that you are
strangely deceived. We have both been equally anxious to penetrate
the mystery that enshrouds this strange man. We have both admired
his wonderful acuteness--for his sagacity is wonderful; so marvelous,
indeed, that it exceeds the limits of imagination. Do you believe that
a man of his penetration would betray himself like an ordinary prisoner?
He will understand at once, if he is set at liberty, that his freedom is
only given him so that we may surprise his secret.”

“I don’t deceive myself, sir. May will guess the truth of course. I’m
quite aware of that.”

“Very well. Then, what would be the use of attempting what you propose?”

“I have come to this conclusion,” replied Lecoq, “May will find himself
strangely embarrassed, even when he’s set free. He won’t have a sou
in his pocket; we know he has no trade, so what will he do to earn a
living? He may struggle along for a while; but he won’t be willing to
suffer long. Man must have food and shelter, and when he finds himself
without a roof over his head, without even a crust of bread to break, he
will remember that he is rich. Won’t he then try to recover possession
of his property? Yes, certainly he will. He will try to obtain money,
endeavor to communicate with his friends, and I shall wait till that
moment arrives. Months may elapse, before, seeing no signs of my
surveillance, he may venture on some decisive step; and then I will
spring forward with a warrant for his arrest in my hand.”

“And what if he should leave Paris? What if he should go abroad?”

“Oh, I will follow him. One of my aunts has left me a little land in the
provinces worth about twelve thousand francs. I will sell it, and spend
the last sou, if necessary, so long as I only have my revenge. This man
has outwitted me as if I were a child, and I must have my turn.”

“And what if he should slip through your fingers?”

Lecoq laughed like a man that was sure of himself. “Let him try,” he
exclaimed; “I will answer for him with my life.”

“Your idea is not a bad one,” said M. Segmuller, eventually. “But
you must understand that law and justice will take no part in such
intrigues. All I can promise you is my tacit approval. Go, therefore, to
the Prefecture; see your superiors--”

With a really despairing gesture, the young man interrupted M.
Segmuller. “What good would it do for me to make such a proposition?”
 he exclaimed. “They would not only refuse my request, but they would
dismiss me on the spot, if my name is not already erased from the roll.”

“What, dismissed, after conducting this case so well?”

“Ah, sir, unfortunately every one is not of that opinion. Tongues have
been wagging busily during your illness. Somehow or other, my enemies
have heard of the last scene we had with May; and impudently declare
that it was I who imagined all the romantic details of this affair,
being eager for advancement. They pretend that the only reasons to doubt
the prisoner’s identity are those I have invented myself. To hear them
talk at the Depot, one might suppose that I invented the scene in the
Widow Chupin’s cabin; imagined the accomplices; suborned the witnesses;
manufactured the articles of conviction; wrote the first note in
cipher as well as the second; duped Father Absinthe, and mystified the
governor.”

“The deuce!” exclaimed M. Segmuller; “in that case, what do they think
of me?”

The wily detective’s face assumed an expression of intense
embarrassment.

“Ah! sir,” he replied with a great show of reluctance, “they pretend
that you have allowed yourself to be deceived by me, and that you
haven’t weighed at their proper worth the proofs I’ve furnished.”

A fleeting flush mantled over M. Segmuller’s forehead. “In a word,” said
he, “they think I’m your dupe--and a fool besides.”

The recollection of certain sarcastic smiles he had often detected on
the faces of colleagues and subordinates alike, the memory of
numerous covert allusions to Casper Hauser, and the Man with the
Iron Mask--allusions which had stung him to the quick--induced him to
hesitate no longer.

“Very well! I will aid you, Monsieur Lecoq,” he exclaimed. “I should
like you to triumph over your enemies. I will get up at once and
accompany you to the Palais de Justice. I will see the public prosecutor
myself; I will speak to him, and plead your case for you.”

Lecoq’s joy was intense. Never, no never, had he dared to hope for such
assistance. Ah! after this he would willingly go through fire on M.
Segmuller’s behalf. And yet, despite his inward exultation, he had
sufficient control over his feelings to preserve a sober face. This
victory must be concealed under penalty of forfeiting the benefits that
might accrue from it. Certainly, the young detective had said nothing
that was untrue; but there are different ways of presenting the truth,
and he had, perhaps, exaggerated a trifle in order to excite the
magistrate’s rancor, and win his needful assistance.

“I suppose,” remarked M. Segmuller, who was now quite calm again--no
outward sign of wounded vanity being perceptible--“I suppose you
have decided what stratagem must be employed to lull the prisoner’s
suspicions if he is permitted to escape.”

“I must confess I haven’t given it a thought,” replied Lecoq. “Besides,
what good would any such stratagem do? He knows too well that he is
the object of suspicion not to remain on the alert. Still, there is one
precaution which I believe absolutely necessary, indispensable indeed,
if we wish to be successful.”

“What precaution do you mean?” inquired the magistrate.

“Well, sir, I think an order should be given to have May transferred to
another prison. It doesn’t in the least matter which; you can select the
one you please.”

“Why should we do that?”

“Because, during the few days preceding his release, it is absolutely
necessary he should hold no communication with his friends outside, and
that he should be unable to warn his accomplice.”

“Then you think he’s badly guarded where he is?” inquired M. Segmuller
with seeming amazement.

“No, sir, I did not say that. I am satisfied that since the affair
of the cipher note the governor’s vigilance has been unimpeachable.
However, news from outside certainly reaches the suspected murderer
at the Depot; we have had material evidence--full proof of that--and
besides--”

The young detective paused in evident embarrassment. He plainly had some
idea in his head to which he feared to give expression.

“And besides?” repeated the magistrate.

“Ah, well, sir! I will be perfectly frank with you. I find that Gevrol
enjoys too much liberty at the Depot; he is perfectly at home there, he
comes and goes as he likes, and no one ever thinks of asking what he is
doing, where he is going, or what he wants. No pass is necessary for his
admission, and he can influence the governor just as he likes. Now, to
tell the truth, I distrust Gevrol.”

“Oh! Monsieur Lecoq!”

“Yes, I know very well that it’s a bold accusation, but a man is not
master of his presentiments: so there it is, I distrust Gevrol. Did
the prisoner know that I was watching him from the loft, and that I had
discovered his secret correspondence, was he ignorant of it? To my mind
he evidently knew everything, as the last scene we had with him proves.”

“I must say that’s my own opinion,” interrupted M. Segmuller.

“But how could he have known it?” resumed Lecoq. “He could not have
discovered it by himself. I endured tortures for a while in the hope of
solving the problem. But all my trouble was wasted. Now the supposition
of Gevrol’s intervention would explain everything.”

M. Segmuller had turned pale with anger. “Ah! if I could really believe
that!” he exclaimed; “if I were sure of it! Have you any proofs?”

The young man shook his head. “No,” said he, “I haven’t; but even if my
hands were full of proofs I should not dare to show them. I should
ruin my future. Ah, if ever I succeed, I must expect many such acts of
treachery. There is hatred and rivalry in every profession. And, mark
this, sir--I don’t doubt Gevrol’s honesty. If a hundred thousand francs
were counted out upon the table and offered to him, he wouldn’t even try
to release a prisoner. But he would rob justice of a dozen criminals in
the mere hope of injuring me, jealous as he is, and fearing lest I might
obtain advancement.”

How many things these simple words explained. Did they not give the key
to many and many an enigma which justice has failed to solve, simply on
account of the jealousy and rivalry that animate the detective force?
Thus thought M. Segmuller, but he had no time for further reflection.

“That will do,” said he, “go into the drawing-room for a moment. I will
dress and join you there. I will send for a cab: for we must make haste
if I am to see the public prosecutor to-day.”

Less than a quarter of an hour afterward M. Segmuller, who usually spent
considerable time over his toilet, was dressed and ready to start. He
and Lecoq were just getting into the cab that had been summoned when a
footman in a stylish livery was seen approaching.

“Ah! Jean,” exclaimed the magistrate, “how’s your master?”

“Improving, sir,” was the reply. “He sent me to ask how you were, and to
inquire how that affair was progressing?”

“There has been no change since I last wrote to him. Give him my
compliments, and tell him that I am out again.”

The servant bowed. Lecoq took a seat beside the magistrate and the cab
started off.

“That fellow is one of D’Escorval’s servants,” remarked M. Segmuller.
“He’s richer than I, and can well afford to keep a footman.”

“D’Escorval’s,” ejaculated Lecoq, “the magistrate who--”

“Precisely. He sent his man to me two or three days ago to ascertain
what we were doing with our mysterious May.”

“Then M. d’Escorval is interested in the case?”

“Prodigiously! I conclude it is because he opened the prosecution, and
because the case rightfully belongs to him. Perhaps he regrets that
it passed out of his hands, and thinks that he could have managed the
investigation better himself. We would have done better with it if we
could. I would give a good deal to see him in my place.”

But this change would not have been at all to Lecoq’s taste. “Ah,”
 thought he, “such a fellow as D’Escorval would never have shown me such
confidence as M. Segmuller.” He had, indeed, good reason to congratulate
himself: for that very day M. Segmuller, who was a man of his word,
a man who never rested until he had carried his plan into execution,
actually induced the authorities to allow May to be set at liberty; and
the details of this measure only remained to be decided upon. As regards
the proposed transfer of the suspected murderer to another prison, this
was immediately carried into effect, and May was removed to Mazas, where
Lecoq had no fear of Gevrol’s interference.

That same afternoon, moreover, the Widow Chupin received her conditional
release. There was no difficulty as regards her son, Polyte. He had, in
the mean time, been brought before the correctional court on a charge
of theft; and, to his great astonishment, had heard himself sentenced to
thirteen months’ imprisonment. After this, M. Segmuller had nothing
to do but to wait, and this was the easier as the advent of the Easter
holidays gave him an opportunity to seek a little rest and recreation
with his family in the provinces.

On the day he returned to Paris--the last of the recess, and by chance
a Sunday--he was sitting alone in his library when his cook came to
tell him that there was a man in the vestibule who had been sent from
a neighboring register office to take the place of a servant he had
recently dismissed. The newcomer was ushered into the magistrate’s
presence and proved to be a man of forty or thereabouts, very red in
the face and with carroty hair and whiskers. He was, moreover, strongly
inclined to corpulence, and was clad in clumsy, ill-fitting garments.
In a complacent tone, and with a strong Norman accent, he informed
the magistrate that during the past twenty years he had been in the
employment of various literary men, as well as of a physician, and
notary; that he was familiar with the duties that would be required
of him at the Palais de Justice, and that he knew how to dust papers
without disarranging them. In short, he produced such a favorable
impression that, although M. Segmuller reserved twenty-four hours in
which to make further inquiries, he drew a twenty-franc piece from his
pocket on the spot and tendered it to the Norman valet as the first
instalment of his wages.

But instead of pocketing the proffered coin, the man, with a sudden
change of voice and attitude, burst into a hearty laugh, exclaiming: “Do
you think, sir, that May will recognize me?”

“Monsieur Lecoq!” cried the astonished magistrate.

“The same, sir; and I have come to tell you that if you are ready to
release May, all my arrangements are now completed.”




XX

When one of the investigating magistrates of the Tribunal of the Seine
wishes to examine a person confined in one of the Paris prisons,
he sends by his messenger to the governor of that particular jail a
so-called “order of extraction,” a concise, imperative formula, which
reads as follows: “The keeper of ---- prison will give into the custody
of the bearer of this order the prisoner known as ----, in order that
he may be brought before us in our cabinet at the Palais de Justice.” No
more, no less, a signature, a seal, and everybody is bound to obey.

But from the moment of receiving this order until the prisoner is
again incarcerated, the governor of the prison is relieved of all
responsibility. Whatever may happen, his hands are clear. Minute
precautions are taken, however, so that a prisoner may not escape during
his journey from the prison to the Palais. He is carefully locked up in
a compartment of one of the lugubrious vehicles that may be often
seen waiting on the Quai de l’Horloge, or in the courtyard of the
Sainte-Chapelle. This van conveys him to the Palais, and while he is
awaiting examination, he is immured in one of the cells of the gloomy
jail, familiarly known as “la Souriciere” or the “mouse-trap.” On
entering and leaving the van the prisoner is surrounded by guards; and
on the road, in addition to the mounted troopers who always accompany
these vehicles, there are prison warders or linesmen of the Garde de
Paris installed in the passage between the compartments of the van
and seated on the box with the driver. Hence, the boldest criminals
ordinarily realize the impossibility of escaping from this ambulatory
prison.

Indeed, statistics record only thirty attempts at escape in a period
of ten years. Of these thirty attempts, twenty-five were ridiculous
failures; four were discovered before their authors had conceived
any serious hope of success: and only one man actually succeeded in
alighting from the vehicle, and even he had not taken fifty steps before
he was recaptured.

Lecoq was well acquainted with all these facts, and in preparing
everything for May’s escape, his only fear was lest the murderer might
decline to profit of the opportunity. Hence, it was necessary to offer
every possible inducement for flight. The plan the young detective had
eventually decided on consisted in sending an order to Mazas for May to
be despatched to the Palais de Justice. He could be placed in one of the
prison vans, and at the moment of starting the door of his compartment
would not be perfectly secured. When the van reached the Palais
de Justice and discharged its load of criminals at the door of the
“mouse-trap” May would purposely be forgotten and left in the vehicle,
while the latter waited on the Quai de l’Horloge until the hour of
returning to Mazas. It was scarcely possible that the prisoner would
fail to embrace this apparently favorable opportunity to make his
escape.

Everything was, therefore, prepared and arranged according to Lecoq’s
directions on the Monday following the close of the Easter holidays; the
requisite “order of extraction” being entrusted to an intelligent man
with the most minute instructions.

Now, although the van in which May would journey was not to be expected
at the Palais de Justice before noon, it so happened that at nine
o’clock that same morning a queer-looking “loafer” having the aspect
of an overgrown, overaged “gamin de Paris” might have been seen hanging
about the Prefecture de Police. He wore a tattered black woolen blouse
and a pair of wide, ill-fitting trousers, fastened about his waist by
a leather strap. His boots betrayed a familiar acquaintance with the
puddles of the barrieres, and his cap was shabby and dirty, though, on
the other hand, his necktie, a pretentious silk scarf of flaming hue,
was evidently quite fresh from some haberdasher’s shop. No doubt it was
a present from his sweetheart.

This uncomely being had the unhealthy complexion, hollow eyes, slouching
mien, and straggling beard common to his tribe. His yellow hair, cut
closely at the back of the head, as if to save the trouble of brushing,
was long in front and at the sides; being plastered down over his
forehead and advancing above his ears in extravagant corkscrew ringlets.

What with his attire, his affected jaunty step, his alternate raising of
either shoulder, and his way of holding his cigarette and of ejecting a
stream of saliva from between his teeth, Polyte Chupin, had he been
at liberty, would undoubtedly have proffered a paw, and greeted this
barriere beauty as a “pal.”

It was the 14th of April; the weather was lovely, and, on the horizon,
the youthful foliage of the chestnut trees in the Tuileries gardens
stood out against a bright blue sky. The “ethereal mildness” of “gentle
spring” seemed to have a positive charm for the tattered “loafer” who
lazily loitered in the sunlight, dividing his attention between the
passers-by and some men who were hauling sand from the banks of the
Seine. Occasionally, however, he crossed the roadway, and, strange
to say, exchanged a few remarks with a neatly dressed, long-bearded
gentleman, who wore gold-rimmed spectacles over his nose and drab
silk gloves on his hands. This individual exhibited all the outward
characteristics of eminent respectability, and seemed to take a
remarkable interest in the contents of an optician’s shop window.

Every now and then a policeman or an agent of the detective corps
passed by on his way to the Prefecture, and the elderly gentleman or
the “loafer” would at times run after these officials to ask for some
trifling information. The person addressed replied and passed on; and
then the “loafer” and the gentleman would join each other and laughingly
exclaim: “Good!--there’s another who doesn’t recognize us.”

And in truth the pair had just cause for exultation, good reason to be
proud, for of some twelve or fifteen comrades they accosted, not one
recognized the two detectives, Lecoq and Father Absinthe. For the
“loafer” was none other than our hero, and the gentleman of such eminent
respectability his faithful lieutenant.

“Ah!” quoth the latter with admiration, “I am not surprised they don’t
recognize me, since I can’t recognize myself. No one but you, Monsieur
Lecoq, could have so transformed me.”

Unfortunately for Lecoq’s vanity, the good fellow spoke at a moment
when the time for idle conversation had passed. The prison van was just
crossing the bridge at a brisk trot.

“Attention!” exclaimed the young detective, “there comes our friend!
Quick!--to your post; remember my directions, and keep your eyes open!”

Near them, on the quay, was a large pile of timber, behind which Father
Absinthe immediately concealed himself, while Lecoq, seizing a spade
that was lying idle, hurried to a little distance and began digging in
the sand. They did well to make haste. The van came onward and turned
the corner. It passed the two detectives, and with a noisy clang rolled
under the heavy arch leading to “la Souriciere.” May was inside, as
Lecoq assured himself on recognizing the keeper sitting beside the
driver.

The van remained in the courtyard for more than a quarter of an hour.
When it reappeared, the driver had left his perch and the quay opposite
the Palais de Justice, threw a covering over his horses, lighted his
pipe, and quietly walked away. The moment for action was now swiftly
approaching.

For a few minutes the anxiety of the two watchers amounted to actual
agony; nothing stirred--nothing moved. But at last the door of the van
was opened with infinite caution, and a pale, frightened face became
visible. It was the face of May. The prisoner cast a rapid glance around
him. No one was in sight. Then as swiftly and as stealthily as a cat he
sprang to the ground, noiselessly closed the door of the vehicle, and
walked quietly toward the bridge.

Lecoq breathed again. He had been asking himself if some trifling
circumstance could have been forgotten or neglected, thus disarranging
all his plans. He had been wondering if this strange man would refuse
the dangerous liberty which had been offered him. But he had been
anxious without cause. May had fled; not thoughtlessly, but with
premeditation.

From the moment when he was left alone, apparently forgotten, in the
insecurely locked compartment, until he opened the door and glanced
around him, sufficient time had elapsed for a man of his intellect and
discernment to analyze and calculate all the chances of so grave a step.
Hence, if he had stepped into the snare laid for him, it must be with
a full knowledge of the risks he had to run. He and Lecoq were alone
together, free in the streets of Paris, armed with mutual distrust,
equally obliged to resort to strategy, and forced to hide from each
other. Lecoq, it is true, had an auxiliary--Father Absinthe. But who
could say that May would not be aided by his redoubtable accomplice?
Hence, it was a veritable duel, the result of which depended entirely
upon the courage, skill, and coolness of the antagonists.

All these thoughts flashed through the young detective’s brain with the
quickness of lightning. Throwing down his spade, and running toward a
sergeant de ville, who was just coming out of the Palais de Justice,
he gave him a letter which was ready in his pocket. “Take this to M.
Segmuller at once; it is a matter of importance,” said he.

The policeman attempted to question this “loafer” who was in
correspondence with the magistrates; but Lecoq had already darted off on
the prisoner’s trail.

May had covered but a short distance. He was sauntering along with his
hands in his pockets; his head high in the air, his manner composed and
full of assurance. Had he reflected that it would be dangerous to run
while so near the prison from which he had just escaped? Or was he of
opinion that as an opportunity of flight had been willingly furnished
him, there was no danger of immediate rearrest? This was a point Lecoq
could not decide. At all events, May showed no signs of quickening his
pace even after crossing the bridge; and it was with the same tranquil
manner that he next crossed the Quai aux Fleurs and turned into the Rue
de la Cite.

Nothing in his bearing or appearance proclaimed him to be an escaped
prisoner. Since his trunk--that famous trunk which he pretended to have
left at the Hotel de Mariembourg--had been returned to him, he had been
well supplied with clothing: and he never failed, when summoned before
the magistrate, to array himself in his best apparel. The garments he
wore that day were black cloth, and their cut, combined with his manner,
gave him the appearance of a working man of the better class taking a
holiday.

His tread, hitherto firm and decided, suddenly became uncertain when,
after crossing the Seine, he reached the Rue St. Jacques. He walked more
slowly, frequently hesitated, and glanced continually at the shops on
either side of the way.

“Evidently he is seeking something,” thought Lecoq: “but what?”

It was not long before he ascertained. Seeing a second-hand-clothes shop
close by, May entered in evident haste. Lecoq at once stationed himself
under a gateway on the opposite side of the street, and pretended to be
busily engaged lighting a cigarette. The criminal being momentarily out
of sight, Father Absinthe thought he could approach without danger.

“Ah, well,” said he, “there’s our man changing his fine clothes for
coarser garments. He will ask for the difference in money; and they will
give it him. You told me this morning: ‘May without a sou’--that’s the
trump card in our game!”

“Nonsense! Before we begin to lament, let us wait and see what happens.
It is not likely that shopkeeper will give him any money. He won’t buy
clothing of the first passer-by.”

Father Absinthe withdrew to a little distance. He distrusted these
reasons, but not Lecoq who gave them.

In the mean while, in his secret soul, Lecoq was cursing himself.
Another blunder, thought he, another weapon left in the hands of the
enemy. How was it that he, who fancied himself so shrewd, had not
foreseen this emergency? Calmness of mind returned, however, a moment
afterward when he saw May emerge from the shop attired as when he
entered it. Luck had for once been in the young detective’s favor.

May actually staggered when he stepped out on the pavement. His bitter
disappointment could be read in his countenance, which disclosed the
anguish of a drowning man who sees the frail plank which was his only
hope of salvation snatched from his grasp by the ruthless waves.

What could have taken place? This Lecoq must know without a moment’s
delay. He gave a peculiar whistle, to warn his companion that he
momentarily abandoned the pursuit of him; and having received a similar
signal in response, he entered the shop. The owner was still standing
behind the counter. Lecoq wasted no time in parleying. He merely showed
his card to acquaint the man with his profession, and curtly asked:
“What did the fellow want who was just in here?”

The shopkeeper seemed embarrassed. “It’s a long story,” he stammered.

“Then tell it!” said Lecoq, surprised at the man’s hesitation.

“Oh, it’s very simple. About twelve days ago a man entered my shop with
a bundle under his arm. He claimed to be a countryman of mine.”

“Are you an Alsatian?”

“Yes, sir. Well, I went with this man to the wine-shop at the corner,
where he ordered a bottle of good wine; and while we drank together, he
asked me if I would consent to keep the package he had with him until
one of his cousins came to claim it. To prevent any mistake, this cousin
was to say certain words--a countersign, as it were. I refused, shortly
and decidedly, for the very month before I had got into trouble and had
been charged with receiving stolen goods, all by obliging a person in
this way. Well, you never saw a man so vexed and so surprised. What made
me all the more determined in my refusal was that he offered me a good
round sum in payment for my trouble. This only increased my suspicion,
and I persisted in my refusal.”

The shopkeeper paused to take breath; but Lecoq was on fire with
impatience. “And what then?” he insisted.

“Well, he paid for the wine and went away. I had forgotten all about the
matter until that man came in here just now, and after asking me if I
hadn’t a package for him, which had been left by one of his cousins,
began to say some peculiar words--the countersign, no doubt. When I
replied that I had nothing at all he turned as white as his shirt; and
I thought he was going to faint. All my suspicions came back to me. So
when he afterward proposed that I should buy his clothes, I told him I
couldn’t think of it.”

All this was plain enough to Lecoq. “And this cousin who was here a
fortnight ago, what was he like?” asked he.

“He was a tall, rather corpulent man, with a ruddy complexion, and white
whiskers. Ah! I should recognize him in an instant!”

“The accomplice!” exclaimed Lecoq.

“What did you say?”

“Nothing that would interest you. Thank you. I am in a hurry. You will
see me again; good morning.”

Lecoq had not remained five minutes in the shop: and yet, when he
emerged, May and Father Absinthe were nowhere in sight. Still, the young
detective was not at all uneasy on that score. In making arrangements
with his old colleague for this pursuit Lecoq had foreseen such a
situation, and it had been agreed that if one of them were obliged to
remain behind, the other, who was closely following May, should from
time to time make chalk marks on the walls, shutters, and facings of the
shops, so as to indicate the route, and enable his companion to rejoin
him. Hence, in order to know which way to go, Lecoq had only to glance
at the buildings around him. The task was neither long nor
difficult, for on the front of the third shop beyond that of the
second-hand-clothes dealer a superb dash of the crayon instructed him to
turn into the Rue Saint-Jacques.

On he rushed in that direction, his mind busy at work with the incident
that had just occurred. What a terrible warning that old-clothes
dealer’s declaration had been! Ah! that mysterious accomplice was a
man of foresight. He had even done his utmost to insure his comrade’s
salvation in the event of his being allowed to escape. What did the
package the shopkeeper had spoken of contain? Clothes, no doubt.
Everything necessary for a complete disguise--money, papers, a forged
passport most likely.

While these thoughts were rushing through Lecoq’s mind, he had reached
the Rue Soufflot, where he paused for an instant to learn his way
from the walls. This was the work of a second. A long chalk mark on a
watchmaker’s shop pointed to the Boulevard Saint-Michel, whither the
young detective at once directed his steps. “The accomplice,” said he to
himself, resuming his meditation, “didn’t succeed with that old-clothes
dealer; but he isn’t a man to be disheartened by one rebuff. He has
certainly taken other measures. How shall I divine what they are in
order to defeat them?”

The supposed murderer had crossed the Boulevard Saint-Michel, and had
then taken to the Rue Monsieur-le-Prince, as Father Absinthe’s dashes of
the crayon proclaimed with many eloquent flourishes.

“One circumstance reassures me,” the young detective murmured, “May’s
going to this shop, and his consternation on finding that there was
nothing for him there. The accomplice had informed him of his plans, but
had not been able to inform him of their failure. Hence, from this hour,
the prisoner is left to his own resources. The chain that bound him to
his accomplice is broken; there is no longer an understanding between
them. Everything depends now upon keeping them apart. Yes, everything
lies in that!”

Ah! how Lecoq rejoiced that he had succeeded in having May transferred
to another prison; for he was convinced that the accomplice had warned
May of the attempt he was going to make with the old-clothes dealer on
the very evening before May’s removal to Mazas. Hence, it had not
been possible to acquaint him with the failure of this scheme or the
substitution of another.

Still following the chalk marks, Lecoq now reached the Odeon theatre.
Here were fresh signs, and what was more, Father Absinthe could
be perceived under the colonnade, standing in front of one of the
book-stalls, and apparently engrossed in the contemplation of a print.

Assuming the nonchalant manner of the loafer whose garb he wore, Lecoq
took his stand beside his colleague. “Where is he?” asked the young
detective.

“There,” replied his companion, with a slight movement of his head in
the direction of the steps.

The fugitive was, indeed, seated on one of the steps at the side of
the theatre, his elbows resting on his knees and his face hidden in his
hands, as if he felt the necessity of concealing the expression of his
face from the passers-by. Undoubtedly, at that moment, he gave himself
up for lost. Alone in the midst of Paris, without a penny, what was to
become of him? He knew beyond the shadow of a doubt that he was being
watched; that his steps were being dogged, that the first attempt he
made to inform his accomplice of his whereabouts would cost him his
secret--the secret which he plainly held as more precious than life
itself, and which, by immense sacrifices, he had so far been able to
preserve.

Having for some short time contemplated in silence this unfortunate man
whom after all he could but esteem and admire, Lecoq turned to his old
companion: “What did he do on the way?” he asked.

“He went into the shops of five dealers in second-hand clothing without
success. Then he addressed a man who was passing with a lot of old
rubbish on his shoulder: but the man wouldn’t even answer him.”

Lecoq nodded his head thoughtfully. “The moral of this is, that there’s
a vast difference between theory and practise,” he remarked. “Here’s a
fellow who has made some most discerning men believe that he’s only
a poor devil, a low buffoon. Well, now he’s free; and this so-called
Bohemian doesn’t even know how to go to work to sell the clothes on
his back. The comedian who could play his part so well on the stage has
disappeared; while the man remains--the man who has always been rich,
and knows nothing of the vicissitudes of life.”

The young detective suddenly ceased moralizing, for May had risen from
his seat. Lecoq was only ten yards distant, and could see that his face
was pallid. His attitude expressed profound dejection and one could read
his indecision in his eyes. Perhaps he was wondering if it would not
be best to return and place himself again in the hands of his jailers,
since he was without the resources upon which he had depended.

After a little, however, he shook off the torpor that had for a time
overpowered him; his eyes brightened, and, with a gesture of defiance,
he left the steps, crossed the open square and walked down the Rue de
l’Ancienne-Comedie. He strode onward now with the brisk, determined step
of a man who has a definite aim in view.

“Who knows where he is going now?” murmured Father Absinthe, as he
trotted along by Lecoq’s side.

“I do,” replied the young detective. “And the proof is, that I am going
to leave you, and run on in advance, to prepare for his reception. I
may be mistaken, however, and as we must be prepared for any emergency,
leave me the chalk-marks as you go along. If our man doesn’t come to
the Hotel de Mariembourg, as I think he will, I shall come back here to
start in pursuit of you again.”

Just then an empty cab chanced to be passing, and Lecoq hastily got into
it, telling the driver to take him to the Northern Railway Station by
the shortest route and as quickly as possible. As time was precious, he
handed the cabman his fare while on the road, and then began to search
his pocket-book, among the various documents confided to him by M.
Segmuller, for a particular paper he would now require.

Scarcely had the cab stopped at the Place de Roubaix than the young
detective alighted and ran toward the Hotel de Mariembourg, where, as
on the occasion of his first visit, he found Madame Milner standing on a
chair in front of her birdcage, obstinately trying to teach her starling
German, while the bird with equal obstinacy repeated: “Camille! where is
Camille?”

On perceiving the individual of questionable mien who had presumed
to cross her threshold, the pretty widow did not deign to change her
position.

“What do you want?” she asked in a curt, sharp voice.

“I am the nephew of a messenger at the Palais de Justice,” replied Lecoq
with an awkward bow, in perfect keeping with his attire. “On going to
see my uncle this morning, I found him laid up with rheumatism; and he
asked me to bring you this paper in his stead. It is a summons for you
to appear at once before the investigating magistrate.”

This reply induced Madame Milner to abandon her perch. “Very well,” she
replied after glancing at the summons; “give me time to throw a shawl
over my shoulder, and I’ll start.”

Lecoq withdrew with another awkward bow; but he had not reached the
street before a significant grimace betrayed his inward satisfaction.
She had duped him once, and now he had repaid her. On looking round him
he perceived a half-built house at the corner of the Rue St. Quentin,
and being momentarily in want of a hiding-place he concluded that he
had best conceal himself there. The pretty widow had only asked for
sufficient time to slip on a shawl before starting; but then it
so happened that she was rather particular as to her personal
appearance--and such a plump, attractive little body as herself, having
an eye perhaps to renewed wedlock, could not possibly be expected to
tie her bonnet strings in less than a quarter of an hour. Hence, Lecoq’s
sojourn behind the scaffolding of the half-built house proved rather
longer than he had expected, and at the thought that May might arrive at
any moment he fairly trembled with anxiety. How much was he in advance
of the fugitive? Half an hour, perhaps! And he had accomplished only
half his task.

At last, however, the coquettish landlady made her appearance as radiant
as a spring morning. She probably wished to make up for the time she had
spent over her toilet, for as she turned the corner she began to run.
Lecoq waited till she was out of sight, and then bounding from his place
of concealment, he burst into the Hotel de Mariembourg like a bombshell.

Fritz, the Bavarian lad, must have been warned that the house was to be
left in his sole charge for some hours; for having comfortably installed
himself in his mistress’s own particular armchair, with his legs resting
on another one, he had already commenced to fall asleep.

“Wake up!” shouted Lecoq; “wake up!”

At the sound of this voice, which rang like a trumpet blast, Fritz
sprang to his feet, frightened half out of his wits.

“You see that I am an agent of the Prefecture of Police,” said the
visitor, showing his card. “Now, if you wish to avoid all sorts of
disagreeable things, the least of which will be a sojourn in prison, you
must obey me.”

The boy trembled in every limb. “Yes, mein Herr--Monsieur, I mean--I
will obey you,” he stammered. “But what am I to do?”

“Oh, very little. A man is coming here in a moment: you will know him by
his black clothes and his long beard. You must answer him word for word
as I tell you. And remember, if you make any mistake, you will suffer
for it.”

“You may rely upon me, sir,” replied Fritz. “I have an excellent
memory.”

The prospect of imprisonment had terrified him into abject submission.
He spoke the truth; he would have been willing to say or do anything
just then. Lecoq profited by this disposition; and then clearly and
concisely gave the lad his instructions. “And now,” added he, “I must
see and hear you. Where can I hide myself?”

Fritz pointed to a glass door. “In the dark room there, sir. By leaving
the door ajar you can hear and you can see everything through the
glass.”

Without another word Lecoq darted into the room in question. Not a
moment too soon, however, for the bell of the outer door announced the
arrival of a visitor. It was May. “I wish to speak to the landlady,” he
said.

“What landlady?” replied the lad.

“The person who received me when I came here six weeks ago--”

“Oh, I understand,” interrupted Fritz; “it’s Madame Milner you want to
see; but you have come too late; she sold the house about a month ago,
and has gone back to Alsace.”

May stamped his foot and uttered a terrible oath. “I have come to claim
something from her,” he insisted.

“Do you want me to call her successor?”

Concealed behind the glass door, Lecoq could not help admiring Fritz,
who was uttering these glaring falsehoods with that air of perfect
candor which gives the Germans such a vast advantage over the Latin
races, who seem to be lying even when they are telling the truth.

“Her successor would order me off,” exclaimed May. “I came to reclaim
the money I paid for a room I never occupied.”

“Such money is never refunded.”

May uttered some incoherent threat, in which such words as “downright
robbery” and “justice” could be distinguished, and then abruptly walked
back into the street, slamming the door behind him.

“Well! did I answer properly?” asked Fritz triumphantly as Lecoq emerged
from his hiding-place.

“Yes, perfectly,” replied the detective. And then pushing aside the boy,
who was standing in his way, he dashed after May.

A vague fear almost suffocated him. It had struck him that the fugitive
had not been either surprised or deeply affected by the news he
had heard. He had come to the hotel depending upon Madame Milner’s
assistance, and the news of this woman’s departure would naturally have
alarmed him, for was she not the mysterious accomplice’s confidential
friend? Had May, then, guessed the trick that had been played upon him?
And if so, how?

Lecoq’s good sense told him plainly that the fugitive must have been
put on his guard, and on rejoining Father Absinthe, he immediately
exclaimed: “May spoke to some one on his way to the hotel.”

“Why, how could you know that?” exclaimed the worthy man, greatly
astonished.

“Ah! I was sure of it! Who did he speak to?”

“To a very pretty woman, upon my word!--fair and plump as a partridge!”

“Ah! fate is against us!” exclaimed Lecoq with an oath. “I run on in
advance to Madame Milner’s house, so that May shan’t see her. I invent
an excuse to send her out of the hotel, and yet they meet each other.”

Father Absinthe gave a despairing gesture. “Ah! if I had known!” he
murmured; “but you did not tell me to prevent May from speaking to the
passers-by.”

“Never mind, my old friend,” said Lecoq, consolingly; “it couldn’t have
been helped.”

While this conversation was going on, the fugitive had reached the
Faubourg Montmartre, and his pursuers were obliged to hasten forward and
get closer to their man, so that they might not lose him in the crowd.

“Now,” resumed Lecoq when they had overtaken him, “give me the
particulars. Where did they meet?”

“In the Rue Saint-Quentin.”

“Which saw the other first?”

“May.”

“What did the woman say? Did you hear any cry of surprise?”

“I heard nothing, for I was quite fifty yards off; but by the woman’s
manner I could see she was stupefied.”

Ah! if Lecoq could have witnessed the scene, what valuable deductions he
might have drawn from it. “Did they talk for a long time?” he asked.

“For less than a quarter of an hour.”

“Do you know whether Madame Milner gave May money or not?”

“I can’t say. They gesticulated like mad--so violently, indeed, that I
thought they were quarreling.”

“They knew they were being watched, and were endeavoring to divert
suspicion.”

“If they would only arrest this woman and question her,” suggested
Father Absinthe.

“What good would it do? Hasn’t M. Segmuller examined and cross-examined
her a dozen times without drawing anything from her! Ah! she’s a cunning
one. She would declare that May met her and insisted that she should
refund the ten francs he paid her for his room. We must do our best,
however. If the accomplice has not been warned already, he will soon
be told; so we must try to keep the two men apart. What ruse they will
employ, I can’t divine. But I know that it will be nothing hackneyed.”

Lecoq’s presumptions made Father Absinthe nervous. “The surest way,
perhaps,” ventured the latter, “would be to lock him up again!”

“No!” replied the young detective. “I want his secret, and I’ll have it.
What will be said of us if we two allow this man to escape us? He can’t
be visible and invisible by turns, like the devil. We’ll see what he is
going to do now that he’s got some money and a plan--for he has both at
the present moment. I would stake my right hand upon it.”

At that same instant, as if May intended to convince Lecoq of the truth
of his suspicion, he entered a tobacconist’s shop and emerged an instant
afterward with a cigar in his mouth.




XXI

So the landlady of the Hotel de Mariembourg had given May money. There
could be no further doubt on that point after the purchase of this
cigar. But had they agreed upon any plan? Had they had sufficient time
to decide on the method that May was to employ with the view of baffling
his pursuit?

It would seem so, since the fugitive’s manner had now changed in more
respects than one. If hitherto he had seemed to care little for the
danger of pursuit and capture, at present he was evidently uneasy and
agitated. After walking so long in the full sunlight, with his head
high in the air, he now slunk along in the shadow of the houses, hiding
himself as much as possible.

“It is evident that his fears have increased in proportion with his
hopes,” said Lecoq to his companion. “He was quite unnerved when we
saw him at the Odeon, and the merest trifle would have decided him to
surrender; now, however, he thinks he has a chance to escape with his
secret.”

The fugitive was following the boulevards, but suddenly he turned into
a side street and made his way toward the Temple, where, soon afterward,
Father Absinthe and Lecoq found him conversing with one of those
importunate dealers in cast-off garments who consider every passer-by
their lawful prey. The vender and May were evidently debating a question
of price; but the latter was plainly no skilful bargainer, for with a
somewhat disappointed air he soon gave up the discussion and entered the
shop.

“Ah, so now he has some coin he has determined on a costume,” remarked
Lecoq. “Isn’t that always an escaped prisoner’s first impulse?”

Soon afterward May emerged into the street. His appearance was decidedly
changed, for he wore a pair of dark blue linen trousers, of the type
French “navvies” habitually affect, and a loosely fitting coat of rough
woolen material. A gay silk ‘kerchief was knotted about his throat, and
a black silk cap was set on one side of his head. Thus attired, he was
scarcely more prepossessing in appearance than Lecoq, and one would have
hesitated before deciding which of the two it would be preferable to
meet at night on a deserted highway.

May seemed very well pleased with his transformation, and was evidently
more at ease in his new attire. On leaving the shop, however, he glanced
suspiciously around him, as if to ascertain which of the passers-by were
watching his movements. He had not parted with his broadcloth suit, but
was carrying it under his arm, wrapped up in a handkerchief. The only
thing he had left behind him was his tall chimney-pot hat.

Lecoq would have liked to enter the shop and make some inquiries, but he
felt that it would be imprudent to do so, for May had settled his cap
on his head with a gesture that left no doubt as to his intentions. A
second later he turned into the Rue du Temple, and now the chase began
in earnest; for the fugitive proved as swift and agile as a stag, and
it was no small task to keep him well in sight. He had no doubt lived in
England and Germany, since he spoke the language of these countries like
a native; but one thing was certain--he knew Paris as thoroughly as the
most expert Parisian.

This was shown by the way in which he dashed into the Rue des
Gravelliers, and by the precision of his course through the many winding
streets that lie between the Rue du Temple and the Rue Beaubourg. He
seemed to know this quarter of the capital by heart; as well, indeed,
as if he had spent half his life there. He knew all the wine-shops
communicating with two streets--all the byways, passages, and tortuous
alleys. Twice he almost escaped his pursuers, and once his salvation
hung upon a thread. If he had remained in an obscure corner, where he
was completely hidden, only an instant longer, the two detectives would
have passed him by and his safety would have been assured.

The pursuit presented immense difficulties. Night was coming on, and
with it that light fog which almost invariably accompanies a spring
sunset. Soon the street-lamps glimmered luridly in the mist, and then
it required a keen eyesight indeed to see even for a moderate distance.
And, to add to this drawback, the streets were now thronged with workmen
returning home after their daily toil, and with housewives intent on
purchasing provisions for the evening meal, while round about each
dwelling there congregated its numerous denizens swarming like bees
around a hive. May, however, took advantage of every opportunity to
mislead the persons who might be following him. Groups collected
around some cheap-jack’s stall, street accidents, a block of
vehicles--everything was utilized by him with such marvelous presence of
mind that he often glided through the crowd without leaving any sign of
his passage.

At last he left the neighborhood of the Rue des Gravelliers and made for
a broader street. Reaching the Boulevard de Sebastopol, he turned to the
left, and took a fresh start. He darted on with marvelous rapidity, with
his elbows pressed close to his body--husbanding his breath and timing
his steps with the precision of a dancing-master. Never pausing, and
without once turning his head, he ever hurried on. And it was at the
same regular but rapid pace that he covered the Boulevard de Sebastopol,
crossed the Place du Chatelet, and proceeded to mount the Boulevard
Saint-Michel.

Here he suddenly halted before a cab-stand. He spoke to one of the
drivers, opened the door of his vehicle, and jumped in. The cab started
off at a rapid pace. But May was not inside. He had merely passed
through the vehicle, getting out at the other door, and just as the
driver was departing for an imaginary destination May slipped into an
adjacent cab which left the stand at a gallop. Perhaps, after so many
ruses, after such formidable efforts, after this last stratagem--perhaps
May believed that he was free.

He was mistaken. Behind the cab which bore him onward, and while he
leaned back against the cushions to rest, a man was running; and this
man was Lecoq. Poor Father Absinthe had fallen by the way. In front of
the Palais de Justice he paused, exhausted and breathless, and Lecoq had
little hope of seeing him again, since he had all he could do to keep
his man in sight without stopping to make the chalk-marks agreed upon.

May had instructed his driver to take him to the Place d’Italie:
requesting him, moreover, to stop exactly in the middle of the square.
This was about a hundred paces from the police station in which he
had been temporarily confined with the Widow Chupin. When the vehicle
halted, he sprang to the ground and cast a rapid glance around him, as
if looking for some dreaded shadow. He could see nothing, however, for
although surprised by the sudden stoppage, Lecoq had yet had time to
fling himself flat on his stomach under the body of the cab, regardless
of all danger of being crushed by the wheels. May was apparently
reassured. He paid the cabman and then retraced his course toward the
Rue Mouffetard.

With a bound, Lecoq was on his feet again, and started after the
fugitive as eagerly as a ravenous dog might follow a bone. He had
reached the shadow cast by the large trees in the outer boulevards when
a faint whistle resounded in his ears. “Father Absinthe!” he exclaimed
in a tone of delighted surprise.

“The same,” replied the old detective, “and quite rested, thanks to a
passing cabman who picked me up and brought me here--”

“Oh, enough!” interrupted Lecoq. “Let us keep our eyes open.”

May was now walking quite leisurely. He stopped first before one and
then before another of the numerous wine-shops and eating-houses that
abound in this neighborhood. He was apparently looking for some one or
something, which of the two Lecoq could not, of course, divine. However,
after peering through the glass doors of three of these establishments
and then turning away, the fugitive at last entered the fourth. The two
detectives, who were enabled to obtain a good view of the shop inside,
saw the supposed murderer cross the room and seat himself at a table
where a man of unusually stalwart build, ruddy-faced and gray-whiskered,
was already seated.

“The accomplice!” murmured Father Absinthe.

Was this really the redoubtable accomplice? Under other circumstances
Lecoq would have hesitated to place dependence on a vague similarity in
personal appearance; but here probabilities were so strongly in favor
of Father Absinthe’s assertion that the young detective at once admitted
its truth. Was not this meeting the logical sequence of May and Madame
Milner’s chance interview a few hours before?

“May,” thought Lecoq, “began by taking all the money Madame Milner had
about her, and then instructed her to tell his accomplice to come and
wait for him in some cheap restaurant near here. If he hesitated and
looked inside the different establishments, it was only because he
hadn’t been able to specify any particular one. Now, if they don’t throw
aside the mask, it will be because May is not sure he has eluded pursuit
and because the accomplice fears that Madame Milner may have been
followed.”

The accomplice, if this new personage was really the accomplice, had
resorted to a disguise not unlike that which May and Lecoq had both
adopted. He wore a dirty blue blouse and a hideous old slouch hat,
which was well-nigh in tatters. He had, in fact, rather exaggerated his
make-up, for his sinister physiognomy attracted especial attention even
beside the depraved and ferocious faces of the other customers in
the shop. For this low eating-house was a regular den of thieves and
cut-throats. Among those present there were not four workmen really
worthy of that name. The others occupied in eating and drinking there
were all more or less familiar with prison life. The least to be dreaded
were the barriere loafers, easily recognized by their glazed caps and
their loosely-knotted neckerchiefs. The majority of the company appeared
to consist of this class.

And yet May, that man who was so strongly suspected of belonging to the
highest social sphere, seemed to be perfectly at home. He called for the
regular “ordinary” and a “chopine” of wine, and then, after gulping down
his soup, bolted great pieces of beef, pausing every now and then to
wipe his mouth on the back of his sleeve. But was he conversing with his
neighbor? This it was impossible to discern through the glass door, all
obscured by smoke and steam.

“I must go in,” said Lecoq, resolutely. “I must get a place near them,
and listen.”

“Don’t think of such a thing,” said Father Absinthe. “What if they
recognized you?”

“They won’t recognize me.”

“If they do, they’ll kill you.”

Lecoq made a careless gesture.

“I certainly think that they wouldn’t hesitate to rid themselves of me
at any cost. But, nonsense! A detective who is afraid to risk his life
is no better than a low spy. Why! you never saw even Gevrol flinch.”

Perhaps Father Absinthe had wished to ascertain if his companion’s
courage was equal to his shrewdness and sagacity. If such were the case
he was satisfied on this score now.

“You, my friend, will remain here to follow them if they leave
hurriedly,” resumed Lecoq, who in the mean while had already turned the
handle of the door. Entering with a careless air and taking a seat at a
table near that occupied by the fugitive and the man in the slouch hat,
he called for a plate of meat and a “chopine” of wine in a guttural
voice.

The fugitive and the ruffian opposite him were talking, but like
strangers who had met by chance, and not at all after the fashion of
friends who have met at a rendezvous. They spoke in the jargon of their
pretended rank in life, not that puerile slang met with in romances
descriptive of low life, but that obscene, vulgar dialect which it is
impossible to render, so changeable and diverse is the signification of
its words.

“What wonderful actors!” thought Lecoq; “what perfection! what method!
How I should be deceived if I were not absolutely certain!”

For the moment the man in the slouch hat was giving a detailed account
of the different prisons in France. He described the governors of the
principal houses of detention; explained the divergencies of discipline
in different establishments; and recounted that the food at Poissy was
ten times better than that at Fontevrault.

Lecoq, having finished his repast, ordered a small glass of brandy, and,
leaning his back against the wall and closing his eyes, pretended to
fall asleep. His ears were wide open, however, and he carefully listened
to the conversation.

Soon May began talking in his turn; and he narrated his story exactly as
he had related it to the magistrate, from the murder up to his
escape, without forgetting to mention the suspicions attached to his
identity--suspicions which afforded him great amusement, he said. He
added that he would be perfectly happy if he had money enough to take
him back to Germany; but unfortunately he only had a few sous and didn’t
know where or how to procure any more. He had not even succeeded in
selling some clothing which belonged to him, and which he had with him
in a bundle.

At these words the man in the tattered felt hat declared that he had too
good a heart to leave a comrade in such embarrassment. He knew, in the
very same street, an obliging dealer in such articles, and he offered to
take May to his place at once. May’s only response was to rise, saying:
“Let us start.” And they did start, with Lecoq at their heels.

They walked rapidly on until passing the Rue Fer-a-Moulin, when they
turned into a narrow, dimly lighted alley, and entered a dingy dwelling.

“Run and ask the concierge if there are not two doors by which any one
can leave this house,” said Lecoq, addressing Father Absinthe.

The latter instantly obeyed. He learned, however, that the house had
only one street door, and accordingly the two detectives waited. “We are
discovered!” murmured Lecoq. “I am sure of it. May must have recognized
me, or the boy at the Hotel de Mariembourg has described me to the
accomplice.”

Father Absinthe made no response, for just then the two men came out of
the house. May was jingling some coins in his hand, and seemed to be
in a very bad temper. “What infernal rascals these receivers are!” he
grumbled.

However, although he had only received a small sum for his clothing, he
probably felt that his companion’s kindness deserved some reward; for
immediately afterward he proposed they should take a drink together,
and with that object in view they entered a wine-shop close by. They
remained here for more than an hour, drinking together; and only left
this establishment to enter one a hundred paces distant. Turned out
by the landlord, who was anxious to shut up, the two friends now took
refuge in the next one they found open. Here again they were soon turned
out and then they hurried to another boozing-den--and yet again to
a fifth. And so, after drinking innumerable bottles of wine, they
contrived to reach the Place Saint-Michel at about one o’clock in
the morning. Here, however, they found nothing to drink; for all the
wine-shops were closed.

The two men then held a consultation together, and, after a short
discussion, they walked arm-in-arm toward the Faubourg Saint-Germain,
like a pair of friends. The liquor they had imbibed was seemingly
producing its effect, for they often staggered in their walk, and talked
not merely loudly but both at the same time. In spite of the
danger, Lecoq advanced near enough to catch some fragments of their
conversation; and the words “a good stroke,” and “money enough to
satisfy one,” reached his ears.

Father Absinthe’s confidence wavered. “All this will end badly,” he
murmured.

“Don’t be alarmed,” replied his friend. “I frankly confess that I don’t
understand the maneuvres of these wily confederates, but what does
that matter after all; now the two men are together, I feel sure of
success--sure. If one runs away, the other will remain, and Gevrol shall
soon see which is right, he or I.”

Meanwhile the two drunkards had slackened their pace. By the manner
in which they examined the magnificent mansions of the Faubourg
Saint-German, one might have suspected them of the very worst
intentions. In the Rue de Varrennes, at only a few steps from the Rue
de la Chaise, they suddenly paused before a wall of moderate height
surrounding an immense garden. The man in the slouch hat now did the
talking, and explained to May--as the detectives could tell by his
gestures--that the mansion to which the garden belonged had its front
entrance in the Rue de Grenelle.

“Bah!” growled Lecoq, “how much further will they carry this nonsense?”

They carried it farther than the young detective had ever imagined. May
suddenly sprang on to his companion’s shoulders, and raised himself to
a level with the summit of the wall. An instant afterward a heavy thud
might have been heard. He had let himself drop into the garden. The man
in the slouch hat remained in the street to watch.

The enigmatical fugitive had accomplished this strange, inconceivable
design so swiftly that Lecoq had neither the time nor the desire to
oppose him. His amazement at this unexpected misfortune was so great
that for, an instant he could neither think nor move. But he quickly
regained his self-possession, and at once decided what was to be done.
With a sure eye he measured the distance separating him from May’s
accomplice, and with three bounds he was upon him. The man in the
slouched hat attempted to shout, but an iron hand stifled the cry in
his throat. He tried to escape, and to beat off his assailant, but a
vigorous kick stretched him on the ground as if he had been a child.
Before he had time to think of further resistance he was bound, gagged,
and carried, half-suffocated, to the corner of the Rue de la Chaise. No
sound had been heard; not a word, not an ejaculation, not even a noise
of shuffling--nothing. Any suspicious sound might have reached May, on
the other side of the wall, and warned him of what was going on.

“How strange,” murmured Father Absinthe, too much amazed to lend a
helping hand to his younger colleague. “How strange! Who would have
supposed--”

“Enough! enough!” interrupted Lecoq, in that harsh, imperious voice,
which imminent peril always gives to energetic men. “Enough!--we will
talk to-morrow. I must run away for a minute, and you will remain here.
If May shows himself, capture him; don’t allow him to escape.”

“I understand; but what is to be done with the man who is lying there?”

“Leave him where he is. I have bound him securely, so there is nothing
to fear. When the night-police pass, we will give him into charge--”

He paused and listened. A short way down the street, heavy, measured
footsteps could be heard approaching.

“There they come,” said Father Absinthe.

“Ah! I dared not hope it! I shall have a good chance now.”

At the same moment, two sergeants de ville, whose attention had been
attracted by this group at the street corner, hastened toward them. In a
few words, Lecoq explained the situation, and it was decided that one of
the sergeants should take the accomplice to the station-house, while the
other remained with Father Absinthe to cut off May’s retreat.

“And now,” said Lecoq, “I will run round to the Rue de Grenelle and give
the alarm. To whose house does this garden belong?”

“What!” replied one of the sergeants in surprise, “don’t you know the
gardens of the Duke de Sairmeuse, the famous duke who is a millionaire
ten times over, and who was formerly the friend--”

“Ah, yes, I know, I know!” said Lecoq.

“The thief,” resumed the sergeant, “walked into a pretty trap when he
got over that wall. There was a reception at the mansion this evening,
as there is every Monday, and every one in the house is still up. The
guests are only just leaving, for there were five or six carriages still
at the door as we passed by.”

Lecoq darted off extremely troubled by what he had just heard. It now
seemed to him that if May had got into this garden, it was not for
the purpose of committing a robbery, but in the hope of throwing his
pursuers off the track, and making his escape by way of the Rue de
Grenelle, which he hoped to do unnoticed, in the bustle and confusion
attending the departure of the guests.

On reaching the Hotel de Sairmeuse, a princely dwelling, the long facade
of which was brilliantly illuminated, Lecoq found a last carriage just
coming from the courtyard, while several footmen were extinguishing the
lights, and an imposing “Suisse,” dazzling to behold in his gorgeous
livery, prepared to close the heavy double doors of the grand entrance.

The young detective advanced toward this important personage: “Is this
the Hotel de Sairmeuse?” he inquired.

The Suisse suspended his work to survey the audacious vagabond who
ventured to question him, and then in a harsh voice replied: “I advise
you to pass on. I want none of your jesting.”

Lecoq had forgotten that he was clad as a barriere loafer. “Ah,”
 he rejoined, “I’m not what I seem to be. I’m an agent of the secret
service; by name Lecoq. Here is my card, and I came to tell you that
an escaped criminal has just scaled the garden wall in the rear of the
Hotel de Sairmeuse.”

“A crim-in-al?”

The young detective thought a little exaggeration could do no harm, and
might perhaps insure him more ready aid. “Yes,” he replied; “and one
of the most dangerous kind--a man who has the blood of three victims
already on his hands. We have just arrested his accomplice, who helped
him over the wall.”

The flunky’s ruby nose paled perceptibly. “I will summon the servants,”
 he faltered, and suiting the action to the word, he was raising his hand
to the bell-chain, employed to announce the arrival of visitors, when
Lecoq hastily stopped him.

“A word first!” said he. “Might not the fugitive have passed through
the house and escaped by this door, without being seen? In that case he
would be far away by this time.”

“Impossible!”

“But why?”

“Excuse me, but I know what I am saying. First, the door opening into
the garden is closed; it is only open during grand receptions, not for
our ordinary Monday drawing-rooms. Secondly, Monseigneur requires me to
stand on the threshold of the street door when he is receiving. To-day
he repeated this order, and you may be sure that I haven’t disobeyed
him.”

“Since that’s the case,” said Lecoq, slightly reassured, “we shall
perhaps succeed in finding our man. Warn the servants, but without
ringing the bell. The less noise we make, the greater will be our chance
of success.”

In a moment the fifty servants who peopled the ante-rooms, stables, and
kitchens of the Hotel de Sairmeuse were gathered together. The great
lanterns in the coach houses and stables were lighted, and the entire
garden was illuminated as by enchantment.

“If May is concealed here,” thought Lecoq, delighted to see so many
auxiliaries, “it will be impossible for him to escape.”

But it was in vain that the gardens were thoroughly explored over and
over again; no one could be found. The sheds where gardening tools were
kept, the conservatories, the summer houses, the two rustic pavilions at
the foot of the garden, even the dog kennels, were scrupulously visited,
but all in vain. The trees, with the exception of some horse-chestnuts
at the rear of the garden, were almost destitute of leaves, but they
were not neglected on that account. An agile boy, armed with a lantern,
climbed each tree, and explored even the topmost branches.

“The murderer must have left by the way he came,” obstinately repeated
the Suisse who had armed himself with a huge pistol, and who would not
let go his hold on Lecoq, fearing an accident perhaps.

To convince the Suisse of his error it was necessary for the young
detective to place himself in communication with Father Absinthe and the
sergeant de ville on the other side of the wall. As Lecoq had expected,
the latter both replied that they had not once taken their eyes off the
wall, and that not even a mouse had crossed into the street.

The exploration had hitherto been conducted after a somewhat haphazard
fashion, each of the servants obeying his own inspiration; but the
necessity of a methodically conducted search was now recognized.
Accordingly, Lecoq took such measures that not a corner, not a recess,
could possibly escape scrutiny; and he was dividing the task between his
willing assistants, when a new-comer appeared upon the scene. This was a
grave, smooth-faced individual in the attire of a notary.

“Monsieur Otto, Monseigneur’s first valet de chambre,” the Suisse
murmured in Lecoq’s ear.

This important personage came on behalf of Monsieur le Duc (he did not
say “Monseigneur”) to inquire the meaning of all this uproar. When he
had received an explanation, M. Otto condescended to compliment Lecoq on
his efficiency, and to recommend that the house should be searched
from garret to cellar. These precautions alone would allay the fears of
Madame la Duchesse.

He then departed, and the search began again with renewed ardor. A
mouse concealed in the gardens of the Hotel de Sairmeuse could not
have escaped discovery, so minute were the investigations. Not a single
object of any size was left undisturbed. The trees were examined leaf
by leaf, one might almost say. Occasionally the discouraged servants
proposed to abandon the search; but Lecoq urged them on. He ran from
one to the other, entreating and threatening by turns, swearing that
he asked only one more effort, and that this effort would assuredly be
crowned with success. Vain promises! The fugitive could not be found.

The evidence was now conclusive. To persist in searching the garden
any longer would be worse than folly. Accordingly, the young detective
decided to recall his auxiliaries. “That’s enough,” he said, in a
despondent voice. “It is now certain that the criminal is no longer in
the garden.”

Was he cowering in some corner of the great house, white with fear,
and trembling at the noise made by his pursuers? One might reasonably
suppose this to be the case; and such was the opinion of the servants.
Above all, such was the opinion of the Suisse who renewed with growing
assurance his affirmations of a few moments before.

“I have not moved from the threshold of the house to-night,” he said,
“and I should certainly have seen any person who passed out.”

“Let us go into the house, then,” said Lecoq. “But first let me ask
my companion, who is waiting for me in the street, to join me. It is
unnecessary for him to remain any longer where he is.”

When Father Absinthe had responded to the summons all the lower doors
were carefully closed and guarded, and the search recommenced inside
the house, one of the largest and most magnificent residences of the
Faubourg Saint-Germain. But at this moment all the treasures of the
universe could not have won a single glance or a second’s attention
from Lecoq. All his thoughts were occupied with the fugitive. He
passed through several superb drawing-rooms, along an unrivaled picture
gallery, across a magnificent dining-room, with sideboards groaning
beneath their load of massive plate, without paying the slightest
attention to the marvels of art and upholstery that were offered to his
view. He hurried on, accompanied by the servants who were guiding and
lighting him. He lifted heavy articles of furniture as easily as he
would have lifted a feather; he moved each chair and sofa from its
place, he explored each cupboard and wardrobe, and drew back in turns
all the wall-hangings, window-curtains, and portieres. A more complete
search would have been impossible. In each of the rooms and passages
that Lecoq entered not a nook was left unexplored, not a corner was
forgotten. At length, after two hours’ continuous work, Lecoq returned
to the first floor. Only five or six servants had accompanied him on his
tour of inspection. The others had dropped off one by one, weary of this
adventure, which had at first possessed the attractions of a pleasure
party.

“You have seen everything, gentlemen,” declared an old footman.

“Everything!” interrupted the Suisse, “everything! Certainly not.
There are the private apartments of Monseigneur and those of Madame la
Duchesse still to be explored.”

“Alas!” murmured Lecoq, “What good would it be?”

But the Suisse had already gone to rap gently at one of the doors
opening into the hall. His interest equaled that of the detectives. They
had seen the murderer enter; he had not seen him go out; therefore the
man was in the house and he wished him to be found.

The door at which he had knocked soon opened, and the grave,
clean-shaven face of Otto, the duke’s first valet de chambre, showed
itself. “What the deuce do you want?” he asked in surly tones.

“To enter Monseigneur’s room,” replied the Suisse, “in order to see if
the fugitive has not taken refuge there.”

“Are you crazy?” exclaimed the head valet de chambre. “How could any
one have entered here? Besides, I can’t suffer Monsieur le Duc to be
disturbed. He has been at work all night, and he is just going to take a
bath before going to bed.”

The Suisse seemed very vexed at this rebuff; and Lecoq was presenting
his excuses, when another voice was heard exclaiming. “Let these worthy
men do their duty, Otto.”

“Ah! do you hear that!” exclaimed the Suisse triumphantly.

“Very well, since Monsieur le Duc permits it. Come in, I will light you
through the apartments.”

Lecoq entered, but it was only for form’s sake that he walked through
the different apartments; a library, an admirable study, and a charming
smoking-room. As he was passing through the bed-chamber, he had the
honor of seeing the Duc de Sairmeuse through the half-open door of a
small, white, marble bath-room.

“Ah, well!” cried the duke, affably, “is the fugitive still invisible?”

“Still invisible, monsieur,” Lecoq respectfully replied.

The valet de chambre did not share his master’s good humor. “I think,
gentlemen,” said he, “that you may spare yourselves the trouble of
visiting the apartments of the duchess. It is a duty we have taken
upon ourselves--the women and I--and we have looked even in the bureau
drawers.”

Upon the landing the old footman, who had not ventured to enter his
master’s apartments, was awaiting the detectives. He had doubtless
received his orders, for he politely inquired if they desired anything,
and if, after such a fatiguing night, they would not find some cold
meat and a glass of wine acceptable. Father Absinthe’s eyes sparkled.
He probably thought that in this royal abode they must have delicious
things to eat and drink--such viands, indeed, as he had never tasted in
his life. But Lecoq civilly refused, and left the Hotel de Sairmeuse,
reluctantly followed by his old companion.

He was eager to be alone. For several hours he had been making immense
efforts to conceal his rage and despair. May escaped! vanished!
evaporated! The thought drove him almost mad. What he had declared to
be impossible had nevertheless occurred. In his confidence and pride, he
had sworn to answer for the prisoner’s head with his own life; and yet
he had allowed him to slip between his fingers.

When he was once more in the street, he paused in front of Father
Absinthe, and crossing his arms, inquired: “Well, my friend, what do you
think of all this?”

The old detective shook his head, and in serene unconsciousness of
his want of tact, responded: “I think that Gevrol will chuckle with
delight.”

At this mention of his most cruel enemy, Lecoq bounded from the ground
like a wounded bull. “Oh!” he exclaimed. “Gevrol has not won the battle
yet. We have lost May; it is a great misfortune; but his accomplice
remains in our hands. We hold the crafty man who has hitherto defeated
all our plans, no matter how carefully arranged. He is certainly
shrewd and devoted to his friend; but we will see if his devotion will
withstand the prospect of hard labor in the penitentiary. And that
is what awaits him, if he is silent, and if he thus accepts the
responsibility of aiding and abetting the fugitive’s escape. Oh! I’ve no
fears--M. Segmuller will know how to draw the truth out of him.”

So speaking, Lecoq brandished his clinched fist with a threatening
air and then, in calmer tones, he added: “But we must go to the
station-house where the accomplice was removed. I wish to question him a
little.”




XXII

It was six o’clock, and the dawn was just breaking when Father Absinthe
and his companion reached the station-house, where they found the
superintendent seated at a small table, making out his report. He
did not move when they entered, failing to recognize them under their
disguises. But when they mentioned their names, he rose with evident
cordiality, and held out his hand.

“Upon my word!” said he, “I congratulate you on your capture last
night.”

Father Absinthe and Lecoq exchanged an anxious look. “What capture?”
 they both asked in a breath.

“Why, that individual you sent me last night so carefully bound.”

“Well, what about him?”

The superintendent burst into a hearty laugh. “So you are ignorant of
your good fortune,” said he. “Ah! luck has favored you, and you will
receive a handsome reward.”

“Pray tell us what we’ve captured?” asked Father Absinthe, impatiently.

“A scoundrel of the deepest dye, an escaped convict, who has been
missing for three months. You must have a description of him in your
pocket--Joseph Couturier, in short.”

On hearing these words, Lecoq became so frightfully pale that Father
Absinthe, fearing he was going to faint, raised his arms to prevent
his falling. A chair stood close by, however, and on this Lecoq allowed
himself to drop. “Joseph Couturier,” he faltered, evidently unconscious
of what he was saying. “Joseph Couturier! an escaped convict!”

The superintendent certainly did not understand Lecoq’s agitation any
better than Father Absinthe’s discomfited air.

“You have reason to be proud of your work; your success will make a
sensation this morning,” he repeated. “You have captured a famous prize.
I can see Gevrol’s nose now when he hears the news. Only yesterday
he was boasting that he alone was capable of securing this dangerous
rascal.”

After such an irreparable failure as that which had overtaken Lecoq,
the unintended irony of these compliments was bitter in the extreme.
The superintendent’s words of praise fell on his ears like so many blows
from a sledge hammer.

“You must be mistaken,” he eventually remarked, rising from his seat and
summoning all his energy to his assistance. “That man is not Couturier.”

“Oh, I’m not mistaken; you may be quite sure of that. He fully answers
the description appended to the circular ordering his capture, and even
the little finger of his left hand is lacking, as is mentioned.”

“Ah! that’s a proof indeed!” groaned Father Absinthe.

“It is indeed. And I know another one more conclusive still. Couturier
is an old acquaintance of mine. I have had him in custody before; and he
recognized me last night just as I recognized him.”

After this further argument was impossible; hence it was in an entirely
different tone that Lecoq remarked: “At least, my friend, you will allow
me to address a few questions to your prisoner.”

“Oh! as many as you like. But first of all, let us bar the door and
place two of my men before it. This Couturier has a fondness for the
open air, and he wouldn’t hesitate to dash out our brains if he only saw
a chance of escape.”

After taking these precautions, the man was removed from the cage in
which he had been confined. He stepped forward with a smile on his face,
having already recovered that nonchalant manner common to old offenders
who, when in custody, seem to lose all feeling of anger against the
police. They are not unlike those gamblers who, after losing their last
halfpenny, nevertheless willingly shake hands with their adversary.

Couturier at once recognized Lecoq. “Ah!” said he, “It was you who did
that business last night. You can boast of having a solid fist! You fell
upon me very unexpectedly; and the back of my neck is still the worse
for your clutch.”

“Then, if I were to ask a favor of you, you wouldn’t be disposed to
grant it?”

“Oh, yes! all the same. I have no more malice in my composition than a
chicken; and I rather like your face. What do you want of me?”

“I should like to have some information about the man who accompanied
you last night.”

Couturier’s face darkened. “I am really unable to give you any,” he
replied.

“Why?”

“Because I don’t know him. I never saw him before last night.”

“It’s hard to believe that. A fellow doesn’t enlist the first-comer for
an expedition like yours last evening. Before undertaking such a job
with a man, one finds out something about him.”

“I don’t say I haven’t been guilty of a stupid blunder,” replied
Couturier. “Indeed I could murder myself for it, but there was nothing
about the man to make me suspect that he belonged to the secret-service.
He spread a net for me, and I jumped into it. It was made for me, of
course; but it wasn’t necessary for me to put my foot into it.”

“You are mistaken, my man,” said Lecoq. “The individual in question
didn’t belong to the police force. I pledge you my word of honor, he
didn’t.”

For a moment Couturier surveyed Lecoq with a knowing air, as if he hoped
to discover whether he were speaking the truth or attempting to deceive
him. “I believe you,” he said at last. “And to prove it I’ll tell you
how it happened. I was dining alone last evening in a restaurant in
the Rue Mouffetard, when that man came in and took a seat beside me.
Naturally we began to talk; and I thought him a very good sort of a
fellow. I forget how it began, but somehow or other he mentioned that he
had some clothes he wanted to sell; and being glad to oblige him, I took
him to a friend, who bought them from him. It was doing him a good turn,
wasn’t it? Well, he offered me something to drink, and I returned the
compliment. We had a number of glasses together, and by midnight I began
to see double. He then began to propose a plan, which, he swore, would
make us both rich. It was to steal the plate from a superb mansion.
There would be no risk for me; he would take charge of the whole affair.

“I had only to help him over the wall, and keep watch. The proposal was
tempting--was it not? You would have thought so, if you had been in my
place, and yet I hesitated. But the fellow insisted. He swore that he
was acquainted with the habits of the house; that Monday evening was a
grand gala night there, and that on these occasions the servants didn’t
lock up the plate. After a little while I consented.”

A fleeting flush tinged Lecoq’s pale cheeks. “Are you sure he told you
that the Duc de Sairmeuse received every Monday evening?” he asked,
eagerly.

“Certainly; how else could I have known it! He even mentioned the name
you uttered just now, a name ending in ‘euse.’”

A strange thought had just flitted through Lecoq’s mind.

“What if May and the Duc de Sairmeuse should be one and the same
person?” But the notion seemed so thoroughly absurd, so utterly
inadmissible that he quickly dismissed it, despising himself even for
having entertained it for a single instant. He cursed his inveterate
inclination always to look at events from a romantic impossible side,
instead of considering them as natural commonplace incidents. After all
there was nothing surprising in the fact that a man of the world, such
as he supposed May to be, should know the day set aside by the Duc de
Sairmeuse for the reception of his friends.

The young detective had nothing more to expect from Couturier. He
thanked him, and after shaking hands with the superintendent, walked
away, leaning on Father Absinthe’s arm. For he really had need of
support. His legs trembled, his head whirled, and he felt sick both
in body and in mind. He had failed miserably, disgracefully. He had
flattered himself that he possessed a genius for his calling, and yet he
had been easily outwitted.

To rid himself of pursuit, May had only had to invent a pretended
accomplice, and this simple stratagem had sufficed to nonplus those who
were on his trail.

Father Absinthe was rendered uneasy by his colleague’s evident
dejection. “Where are we going?” he inquired; “to the Palais de Justice,
or to the Prefecture de Police?”

Lecoq shuddered on hearing this question, which brought him face to
face with the horrible reality of his situation. “To the Prefecture!” he
responded. “Why should I go there? To expose myself to Gevrol’s insults,
perhaps? I haven’t courage enough for that. Nor do I feel that I have
strength to go to M. Segmuller and say: ‘Forgive me: you have judged me
too favorably. I am a fool!’”

“What are we to do?”

“Ah! I don’t know. Perhaps I shall embark for America--perhaps I shall
throw myself into the river.”

He had walked about a hundred yards when suddenly he stopped short.
“No!” he exclaimed, with a furious stamp of his foot. “No, this
affair shan’t end like this. I have sworn to have the solution of the
enigma--and I will have it!” For a moment he reflected; then, in a
calmer voice, he added: “There is one man who can save us, a man who
will see what I haven’t been able to discern, who will understand things
that I couldn’t. Let us go and ask his advice, my course will depend on
his reply--come!”

After such a day and such a night, it might have been expected that
these two men would have felt an irresistible desire to sleep and rest.
But Lecoq was sustained by wounded vanity, intense disappointment, and
yet unextinguished hope of revenge: while poor Father Absinthe was not
unlike some luckless cab-horse, which, having forgotten there is such a
thing as repose, is no longer conscious of fatigue, but travels on until
he falls down dead. The old detective felt that his limbs were failing
him; but Lecoq said: “It is necessary,” and so he walked on.

They both went to Lecoq’s lodgings, where they laid aside their
disguises and made themselves trim. Then after breakfasting they hastily
betook themselves to the Rue St. Lazare, where, entering one of the most
stylish houses in the street, Lecoq inquired of the concierge: “Is M.
Tabaret at home?”

“Yes, but he’s ill,” was the reply.

“Very ill?” asked Lecoq anxiously.

“It is hard to tell,” replied the man: “it is his old complaint--gout.”
 And with an air of hypocritical commiseration, he added: “M. Tabaret is
not wise to lead the life he does. Women are very well in a way, but at
his age--”

The two detectives exchanged a meaning glance, and as soon as they were
out of hearing burst out laughing. Their hilarity had scarcely ceased
when they reached the first floor, and rang the bell at the door of one
of the apartments. The buxom-looking woman who appeared in answer to his
summons, informed them that her master would receive them, although
he was confined to his bed. “However, the doctor is with him now,” she
added. “But perhaps the gentlemen would not mind waiting until he has
gone?” The gentlemen replying in the affirmative, she then conducted
them into a handsome library, and invited them to sit down.

The person whom Lecoq had come to consult was a man celebrated for
wonderful shrewdness and penetration, well-nigh exceeding the bounds of
possibility. For five-and-forty years he had held a petty post in one of
the offices of the Mont de Piete, just managing to exist upon the meagre
stipend he received. Suddenly enriched by the death of a relative, of
whom he had scarcely ever heard, he immediately resigned his functions,
and the very next day began to long for the same employment he had so
often anathematized. In his endeavors to divert his mind, he began
to collect old books, and heaped up mountains of tattered, worm-eaten
volumes in immense oak bookcases. But despite this pastime to many
so attractive, he could not shake off his weariness. He grew thin and
yellow, and his income of forty thousand francs was literally killing
him, when a sudden inspiration came to his relief. It came to him one
evening after reading the memoirs of a celebrated detective, one of
those men of subtle penetration, soft as silk, and supple as steel, whom
justice sometimes sets upon the trail of crime.

“And I also am a detective!” he exclaimed.

This, however, he must prove. From that day forward he perused with
feverish interest every book he could find that had any connection with
the organization of the police service and the investigation of crime.
Reports and pamphlets, letters and memoirs, he eagerly turned from one
to the other, in his desire to master his subject. Such learning as he
might find in books did not suffice, however, to perfect his education.
Hence, whenever a crime came to his knowledge he started out in quest of
the particulars and worked up the case by himself.

Soon these platonic investigations did not suffice, and one evening,
at dusk, he summoned all his resolution, and, going on foot to the
Prefecture de Police, humbly begged employment from the officials there.
He was not very favorably received, for applicants were numerous. But
he pleaded his cause so adroitly that at last he was charged with some
trifling commissions. He performed them admirably. The great difficulty
was then overcome. Other matters were entrusted to him, and he soon
displayed a wonderful aptitude for his chosen work.

The case of Madame B----, the rich banker’s wife, made him virtually
famous. Consulted at a moment when the police had abandoned all hope of
solving the mystery, he proved by A plus B--by a mathematical deduction,
so to speak--that the dear lady must have stolen her own property; and
events soon proved that he had told the truth. After this success he was
always called upon to advise in obscure and difficult cases.

It would be difficult to tell his exact status at the Prefecture. When
a person is employed, salary or compensation of some kind is understood,
but this strange man had never consented to receive a penny. What he did
he did for his own pleasure--for the gratification of a passion which
had become his very life. When the funds allowed him for expenses seemed
insufficient, he at once opened his private purse; and the men who
worked with him never went away without some substantial token of his
liberality. Of course, such a man had many enemies. He did as much
work--and far better work than any two inspectors of police; and he
didn’t receive a sou of salary. Hence, in calling him “spoil-trade,” his
rivals were not far from right.

Whenever any one ventured to mention his name favorably in Gevrol’s
presence, the jealous inspector could scarcely control himself, and
retorted by denouncing an unfortunate mistake which this remarkable
man once made. Inclined to obstinacy, like all enthusiastic men, he
had indeed once effected the conviction of an innocent prisoner--a poor
little tailor, who was accused of killing his wife. This single error (a
grievous one no doubt), in a career of some duration, had the effect of
cooling his ardor perceptibly; and subsequently he seldom visited the
Prefecture. But yet he remained “the oracle,” after the fashion of those
great advocates who, tired of practise at the bar, still win great
and glorious triumphs in their consulting rooms, lending to others the
weapons they no longer care to wield themselves.

When the authorities were undecided what course to pursue in some great
case, they invariably said: “Let us go and consult Tirauclair.” For this
was the name by which he was most generally known: a sobriquet derived
from a phrase which was always on his lips. He was constantly saying:
“_Il faut que cela se tire au clair_: That must be brought to
light.” Hence, the not altogether inappropriate appellation of “Pere
Tirauclair,” or “Father Bring-to-Light.”

Perhaps this sobriquet assisted him in keeping his occupation secret
from his friends among the general public. At all events they never
suspected them. His disturbed life when he was working up a case, the
strange visitors he received, his frequent and prolonged absences from
home, were all imputed to a very unreasonable inclination to gallantry.
His concierge was deceived as well as his friends, and laughing at his
supposed infatuation, disrespectfully called him an old libertine. It
was only the officials of the detective force who knew that Tirauclair
and Tabaret were one and the same person.

Lecoq was trying to gain hope and courage by reflecting on the career of
this eccentric man, when the buxom housekeeper reentered the library
and announced that the physician had left. At the same time she opened a
door and exclaimed: “This is the room; you gentlemen can enter now.”




XXIII

On a large canopied bed, sweating and panting beneath the weight
of numerous blankets, lay the two-faced oracle--Tirauclair, of the
Prefecture--Tabaret, of the Rue Saint Lazare. It was impossible to
believe that the owner of such a face, in which a look of stupidity
was mingled with one of perpetual astonishment, could possess superior
talent, or even an average amount of intelligence. With his retreating
forehead, and his immense ears, his odious turned-up nose, tiny eyes,
and coarse, thick lips, M. Tabaret seemed an excellent type of the
ignorant, pennywise, petty rentier class. Whenever he took his walks
abroad, the juvenile street Arabs would impudently shout after him or
try to mimic his favorite grimace. And yet his ungainliness did not seem
to worry him in the least, while he appeared to take real pleasure
in increasing his appearance of stupidity, solacing himself with the
reflection that “he is not really a genius who seems to be one.”

At the sight of the two detectives, whom he knew very well, his eyes
sparkled with pleasure. “Good morning, Lecoq, my boy,” said he. “Good
morning, my old Absinthe. So you think enough down there of poor Papa
Tirauclair to come and see him?”

“We need your advice, Monsieur Tabaret.”

“Ah, ah!”

“We have just been as completely outwitted as if we were babies in long
clothes.”

“What! was your man such a very cunning fellow?”

Lecoq heaved a sigh. “So cunning,” he replied, “that, if I were
superstitious, I should say he was the devil himself.”

The sick man’s face wore a comical expression of envy. “What! you have
found a treasure like that,” said he, “and you complain! Why, it is
a magnificent opportunity--a chance to be proud of! You see, my boys,
everything has degenerated in these days. The race of great criminals
is dying out--those who’ve succeeded the old stock are like counterfeit
coins. There’s scarcely anything left outside a crowd of low offenders
who are not worth the shoe leather expended in pursuing them. It is
enough to disgust a detective, upon my word. No more trouble, emotion,
anxiety, or excitement. When a crime is committed nowadays, the criminal
is in jail the next morning, you’ve only to take the omnibus, and go
to the culprit’s house and arrest him. He’s always found, the more the
pity. But what has your fellow been up to?”

“He has killed three men.”

“Oh! oh! oh!” said old Tabaret, in three different tones, plainly
implying that this criminal was evidently superior to others of his
species. “And where did this happen?”

“In a wine-shop near the barriere.”

“Oh, yes, I recollect: a man named May. The murders were committed in
the Widow Chupin’s cabin. I saw the case mentioned in the ‘Gazette des
Tribunaux,’ and your comrade, Fanferlot l’Ecureuil, who comes to see me,
told me you were strangely puzzled about the prisoner’s identity. So you
are charged with investigating the affair? So much the better. Tell me
all about it, and I will assist you as well as I can.”

Suddenly checking himself, and lowering his voice, Tirauclair added:
“But first of all, just do me the favor to get up. Now, wait a moment,
and when I motion you, open that door there, on the left, very suddenly.
Mariette, my housekeeper, who is curiosity incarnate, is standing there
listening. I hear her hair rubbing against the lock. Now!”

The young detective immediately obeyed, and Mariette, caught in the act,
hastened away, pursued by her master’s sarcasms. “You might have known
that you couldn’t succeed at that!” he shouted after her.

Although Lecoq and Father Absinthe were much nearer the door than old
Tirauclair, neither of them had heard the slightest sound; and they
looked at each other in astonishment, wondering whether their host had
been playing a little farce for their benefit, or whether his sense of
hearing was really so acute as this incident would seem to indicate.

“Now,” said Tabaret, settling himself more comfortably upon his
pillows--“now I will listen to you, my boy. Mariette will not come back
again.”

On his way to Tabaret’s, Lecoq had busied himself in preparing his
story; and it was in the clearest possible manner that he related all
the particulars, from the moment when Gevrol opened the door of the
Poivriere to the instant when May leaped over the garden wall in the
rear of the Hotel de Sairmeuse.

While the young detective was telling his story, old Tabaret seemed
completely transformed. His gout was entirely forgotten. According to
the different phases of the recital, he either turned and twisted on
his bed, uttering little cries of delight or disappointment, or else
lay motionless, plunged in the same kind of ecstatic reverie which
enthusiastic admirers of classical music yield themselves up to while
listening to one of the great Beethoven’s divine sonatas.

“If I had been there! If only I had been there!” he murmured regretfully
every now and then through his set teeth, though when Lecoq’s story was
finished, enthusiasm seemed decidedly to have gained the upper hand.
“It is beautiful! it is grand!” he exclaimed. “And with just that one
phrase: ‘It is the Prussians who are coming,’ for a starting point!
Lecoq, my boy, I must say that you have conducted this affair like an
angel!”

“Don’t you mean to say like a fool?” asked the discouraged detective.

“No, my friend, certainly not. You have rejoiced my old heart. I can
die; I shall have a successor. Ah! that Gevrol who betrayed you--for
he did betray you, there’s no doubt about it--that obtuse, obstinate
‘General’ is not worthy to blacken your shoes!”

“You overpower me, Monsieur Tabaret!” interrupted Lecoq, as yet
uncertain whether his host was poking fun at him or not. “But it is none
the less true that May has disappeared, and I have lost my reputation
before I had begun to make it.”

“Don’t be in such a hurry to reject my compliments,” replied old
Tabaret, with a horrible grimace. “I say that you have conducted this
investigation very well; but it could have been done much better, very
much better. You have a talent for your work, that’s evident; but
you lack experience; you become elated by a trifling advantage, or
discouraged by a mere nothing; you fail, and yet persist in holding fast
to a fixed idea, as a moth flutters about a candle. Then, you are young.
But never mind that, it’s a fault you will outgrow only too soon. And
now, to speak frankly, I must tell you that you have made a great many
blunders.”

Lecoq hung his head like a schoolboy receiving a reprimand from his
teacher. After all was he not a scholar, and was not this old man his
master?

“I will now enumerate your mistakes,” continued old Tabaret, “and I will
show you how, on at least three occasions, you allowed an opportunity
for solving this mystery to escape you.”

“But--”

“Pooh! pooh! my boy, let me talk a little while now. What axiom did you
start with? You said: ‘Always distrust appearances; believe precisely
the contrary of what appears true, or even probable.’”

“Yes, that is exactly what I said to myself.”

“And it was a very wise conclusion. With that idea in your lantern to
light your path, you ought to have gone straight to the truth. But you
are young, as I said before; and the very first circumstance you find
that seems at all probable you quite forget the rule which, as you
yourself admit, should have governed your conduct. As soon as you meet a
fact that seems even more than probable, you swallow it as eagerly as a
gudgeon swallows an angler’s bait.”

This comparison could but pique the young detective. “I don’t think I’ve
been so simple as that,” protested he.

“Bah! What did you think, then, when you heard that M. d’Escorval had
broken his leg in getting out of his carriage?”

“Believe! I believed what they told me, because--” He paused, and
Tirauclair burst into a hearty fit of laughter.

“You believed it,” he said, “because it was a very plausible story.”

“What would you have believed had you been in my place?”

“Exactly the opposite of what they told me. I might have been mistaken;
but it would be the logical conclusion as my first course of reasoning.”

This conclusion was so bold that Lecoq was disconcerted. “What!” he
exclaimed; “do you suppose that M. d’Escorval’s fall was only a fiction?
that he didn’t break his leg?”

Old Tabaret’s face suddenly assumed a serious expression. “I don’t
suppose it,” he replied; “I’m sure of it.”




XXIV

Lecoq’s confidence in the oracle he was consulting was very great; but
even old Tirauclair might be mistaken, and what he had just said seemed
such an enormity, so completely beyond the bounds of possibility, that
the young man could not conceal a gesture of incredulous surprise.

“So, Monsieur Tabaret, you are ready to affirm that M. d’Escorval is
in quite as good health as Father Absinthe or myself; and that he has
confined himself to his room for a couple of months to give a semblance
of truth to a falsehood?”

“I would be willing to swear it.”

“But what could possibly have been his object?”

Tabaret lifted his hands to heaven, as if imploring forgiveness for the
young man’s stupidity. “And it was in you,” he exclaimed, “in you that
I saw a successor, a disciple to whom I might transmit my method of
induction; and now, you ask me such a question as that! Reflect a
moment. Must I give you an example to assist you? Very well. Let it be
so. Suppose yourself a magistrate. A crime is committed; you are
charged with the duty of investigating it, and you visit the prisoner
to question him. Very well. This prisoner has, hitherto, succeeded in
concealing his identity--this was the case in the present instance, was
it not? Very well. Now, what would you do if, at the very first glance,
you recognized under the prisoner’s disguise your best friend, or your
worst enemy? What would you do, I ask?”

“I should say to myself that a magistrate who is obliged to hesitate
between his duty and his inclinations, is placed in a very trying
position, and I should endeavor to avoid the responsibility.”

“I understand that; but would you reveal this prisoner’s
identity--remember, he might be your friend or your enemy?”

The question was so delicate that Lecoq remained silent for a moment,
reflecting before he replied.

The pause was interrupted by Father Absinthe. “I should reveal nothing
whatever!” he exclaimed. “I should remain absolutely neutral. I should
say to myself others are trying to discover this man’s identity. Let
them do so if they can; but let my conscience be clear.”

This was the cry of honesty; not the counsel of a casuist.

“I also should be silent,” Lecoq at last replied; “and it seems to
me that, in holding my tongue, I should not fail in my duty as a
magistrate.”

On hearing these words, Tabaret rubbed his hands together, as he always
did when he was about to present some overwhelming argument. “Such being
the case,” said he, “do me the favor to tell me what pretext you would
invent in order to withdraw from the case without exciting suspicion?”

“I don’t know; I can’t say now. But if I were placed in such a position
I should find some excuse--invent something--”

“And if you could find nothing better,” interrupted Tabaret, “you would
adopt M. d’Escorval’s expedient; you would pretend you had broken a
limb. Only, as you are a clever fellow, you would sacrifice your arm; it
would be less inconvenient than your leg; and you wouldn’t be condemned
to seclusion for several months.”

“So, Monsieur Tabaret, you are convinced that M. d’Escorval knows who
May really is.”

Old Tirauclair turned so suddenly in his bed that his forgotten gout
drew from him a terrible groan. “Can you doubt?” he exclaimed. “Can you
possibly doubt it? What proofs do you want then? What connection do you
see between the magistrate’s fall and the prisoner’s attempt at suicide?
I wasn’t there as you were; I only know the story as you have told it
to me. I can’t look at the facts with my own eyes, but according to your
statements, which are I suppose correct, this is what I understand. When
M. d’Escorval has completed his task at the Widow Chupin’s house,
he comes to the prison to examine the supposed murderer. The two men
recognize each other. Had they been alone, mutual explanations might
have ensued, and affairs taken quite a different turn. But they were not
alone; a third party was present--M. d’Escorval’s clerk. So they could
say nothing. The magistrate asked a few common-place questions, in a
troubled voice, and the prisoner, terribly agitated, replied as best
he could. Now, after leaving the cell, M. d’Escorval no doubt said to
himself: ‘I can’t investigate the offenses of a man I hate!’ He was
certainly terribly perplexed. When you tried to speak to him, as he was
leaving the prison, he harshly told you to wait till the next day; and a
quarter of an hour later he pretended to fall down and break his leg.”

“Then you think that M. d’Escorval and May are enemies?” inquired Lecoq.

“Don’t the facts prove that beyond a doubt?” retorted Tabaret. “If they
had been friends, the magistrate might have acted in the same manner;
but then the prisoner wouldn’t have attempted to strangle himself. But
thanks to you; his life was saved; for he owes his life to you. During
the night, confined in a straight-waistcoat, he was powerless to injure
himself. Ah! how he must have suffered that night! What agony! So,
in the morning, when he was conducted to the magistrate’s room for
examination, it was with a sort of frenzy that he dashed into the
dreaded presence of his enemy. He expected to find M. d’Escorval there,
ready to triumph over his misfortunes; and he intended to say: ‘Yes,
it’s I. There is a fatality in it. I have killed three men, and I am
in your power. But there is a mortal feud between us, and for that
very reason you haven’t the right to prolong my tortures! It would be
infamous cowardice if you did so.’ However, instead of M. d’Escorval,
he sees M. Segmuller. Then what happens? He is surprised, and his eyes
betray the astonishment he feels when he realizes the generosity of his
enemy--an enemy from whom he had expected no indulgence. Then a smile
comes to his lips--a smile of hope; for he thinks, since M. d’Escorval
has not betrayed his secret, that he may be able to keep it, and emerge,
perhaps, from this shadow of shame and crime with his name and honor
still untarnished.”

Old Tabaret paused, and then, with a sudden change of tone and an
ironical gesture, he added: “And that--is my explanation.”

Father Absinthe had risen, frantic with delight. “Cristi!” he exclaimed,
“that’s it! that’s it!”

Lecoq’s approbation was none the less evident although unspoken. He
could appreciate this rapid and wonderful work of induction far better
than his companion.

For a moment or two old Tabaret reclined upon his pillows enjoying
the sweets of admiration; then he continued: “Do you wish for further
proofs, my boy? Recollect the perseverance M. d’Escorval displayed in
sending to M. Segmuller for information. I admit that a man may have
a passion for his profession; but not to such an extent as that. You
believed that his leg was broken. Then were you not surprised to find
a magistrate, with a broken limb, suffering mortal anguish, taking such
wonderful interest in a miserable murderer? I haven’t any broken bones,
I’ve only got the gout; but I know very well that when I’m suffering,
half the world might be judging the other half, and yet the idea of
sending Mariette for information would never occur to me. Ah! a moment’s
reflection would have enabled you to understand the reason of his
solicitude, and would probably have given you the key to the whole
mystery.”

Lecoq, who was such a brilliant casuist in the Widow Chupin’s hovel, who
was so full of confidence in himself, and so earnest in expounding his
theories to simple Father Absinthe--Lecoq hung his head abashed and did
not utter a word. But he felt neither anger nor impatience.

He had come to ask advice, and was glad that it should be given him. He
had made many mistakes, as he now saw only too plainly; and when they
were pointed out to him he neither fumed nor fretted, nor tried to prove
that he had been right when he had been wrong. This was certainly an
excellent trait in his character.

Meanwhile, M. Tabaret had poured out a great glass of some cooling drink
and drained it. He now resumed: “I need not remind you of the mistake
you made in not compelling Toinon Chupin to tell you all she knew about
this affair while she was in your power. ‘A bird in the hand’--you know
the proverb.”

“Be assured, Monsieur Tabaret, that this mistake has cost me enough to
make me realize the danger of allowing a well-disposed witness’s zeal to
cool down.”

“We will say no more about that, then. But I must tell you that three
or four times, at least, it has been in your power to clear up this
mystery.”

The oracle paused, awaiting some protestation from his disciple. None
came, however. “If he says this,” thought the young detective, “it must
indeed be so.”

This discretion made a great impression on old Tabaret, and increased
the esteem he had conceived for Lecoq. “The first time that you were
lacking in discretion,” said he, “was when you tried to discover the
owner of the diamond earring found at the Poivriere.”

“I made every effort to discover the last owner.”

“You tried very hard, I don’t deny it; but as for making every
effort--that’s quite another thing. For instance, when you heard that
the Baroness de Watchau was dead, and that all her property had been
sold, what did you do?”

“You know; I went immediately to the person who had charge of the sale.”

“Very well! and afterwards?”

“I examined the catalogue; and as, among the jewels mentioned, I could
find none that answered the description of these diamonds, I knew that
the clue was quite lost.”

“There is precisely where you are mistaken!” exclaimed old Tirauclair,
exultantly. “If such valuable jewels are not mentioned in the catalogue
of the sale, the Baroness de Watchau could not have possessed them at
the time of her death. And if she no longer possessed them she must have
given them away or sold them. And who could she have sold them to? To
one of her lady friends, very probably. For this reason, had I been in
your place, I should have found out the names of her intimate friends;
this would have been a very easy task; and then, I should have tried to
win the favor of all the lady’s-maids in the service of these friends.
This would have only been a pastime for a good-looking young fellow like
you. Then, I should have shown this earring to each maid in succession
until I found one who said: ‘That diamond belongs to my mistress,’ or
one who was seized with a nervous trembling.”

“And to think that this idea did not once occur to me!” ejaculated
Lecoq.

“Wait, wait, I am coming to the second mistake you made,” retorted the
oracle. “What did you do when you obtained possession of the trunk
which May pretended was his? Why you played directly into this cunning
adversary’s hand. How could you fail to see that this trunk was only
an accessory article; a bit of ‘property’ got ready in ‘mounting’ the
‘comedy’? You should have known that it could only have been deposited
with Madame Milner by the accomplice, and that all its contents must
have been purchased for the occasion.”

“I knew this, of course; but even under these circumstances, what could
I do?”

“What could you do, my boy? Well, I am only a poor old man, but I should
have interviewed every clothier in Paris; and at last some one would
have exclaimed: ‘Those articles! Why, I sold them to an individual like
this or that--who purchased them for one of his friends whose measure he
brought with him.’”

Angry with himself, Lecoq struck his clenched hand violently upon
the table beside him. “Sacrebleu!” he exclaimed, “that method was
infallible, and so simple too! Ah! I shall never forgive myself for my
stupidity as long as I live!”

“Gently, gently!” interrupted old Tirauclair. “You are going too far,
my dear boy. Stupidity is not the proper word at all; you should say
carelessness, thoughtlessness. You are young--what else could one
expect? What is far less inexcusable is the manner in which you
conducted the chase, after the prisoner was allowed to escape.”

“Alas!” murmured the young man, now completely discouraged; “did I
blunder in that?”

“Terribly, my son; and here is where I really blame you. What diabolical
influence induced you to follow May, step by step, like a common
policeman?”

This time Lecoq was stupefied. “Ought I to have allowed him to escape
me?” he inquired.

“No; but if I had been by your side in the gallery of the Odeon, when
you so clearly divined the prisoner’s intentions, I should have said to
you: ‘This fellow, friend Lecoq, will hasten to Madame Milner’s house to
inform her of his escape. Let us run after him.’ I shouldn’t have tried
to prevent his seeing her, mind. But when he had left the Hotel de
Mariembourg, I should have added: ‘Now, let him go where he chooses; but
attach yourself to Madame Milner; don’t lose sight of her; cling to
her as closely as her own shadow, for she will lead you to the
accomplice--that is to say--to the solution of the mystery.’”

“That’s the truth; I see it now.”

“But instead of that, what did you do? You ran to the hotel, you
terrified the boy! When a fisherman has cast his bait and the fish are
swimming near, he doesn’t sound a gong to frighten them all away!”

Thus it was that old Tabaret reviewed the entire course of investigation
and pursuit, remodeling it in accordance with his own method of
induction. Lecoq had originally had a magnificent inspiration. In his
first investigations he had displayed remarkable talent; and yet he had
not succeeded. Why? Simply because he had neglected the axiom with which
he started: “Always distrust what seems probable!”

But the young man listened to the oracle’s “summing up” with divided
attention. A thousand projects were darting through his brain, and at
length he could no longer restrain himself. “You have saved me from
despair,” he exclaimed, “I thought everything was lost; but I see that
my blunders can be repaired. What I neglected to do, I can do now; there
is still time. Haven’t I the diamond earring, as well as various effects
belonging to the prisoner, still in my possession? Madame Milner still
owns the Hotel de Mariembourg, and I will watch her.”

“And what for, my boy?”

“What for? Why, to find my fugitive, to be sure!”

Had the young detective been less engrossed with his idea, he would have
detected a slight smile that curved Papa Tirauclair’s thick lips.

“Ah, my son! is it possible that you don’t suspect the real name of this
pretended buffoon?” inquired the oracle somewhat despondently.

Lecoq trembled and averted his face. He did not wish Tabaret to see his
eyes. “No,” he replied, “I don’t suspect--”

“You are uttering a falsehood!” interrupted the sick man. “You know as
well as I do, that May resides in the Rue de Grenelle-Saint-Germain, and
that he is known as the Duc de Sairmeuse.”

On hearing these words, Father Absinthe indulged in a hearty laugh: “Ah!
that’s a good joke!” he exclaimed. “Ah, ha!”

Such was not Lecoq’s opinion, however. “Well, yes, Monsieur Tabaret,”
 said he, “the idea did occur to me; but I drove it away.”

“And why, if you please?”

“Because--because--”

“Because you would not believe in the logical sequence of your premises;
but I am consistent, and I say that it seems impossible the murderer
arrested in the Widow Chupin’s drinking den should be the Duc de
Sairmeuse. Hence, the murderer arrested there, May, the pretended
buffoon, is the Duc de Sairmeuse!”




XXV

How this idea had entered old Tabaret’s head, Lecoq could not
understand. A vague suspicion had, it is true, flitted through his own
mind; but it was in a moment of despair when he was distracted at having
lost May, and when certain of Couturier’s remarks furnished the excuse
for any ridiculous supposition. And yet now Father Tirauclair calmly
proclaimed this suspicion--which Lecoq had not dared seriously to
entertain, even for an instant--to be an undoubted fact.

“You look as if you had suddenly fallen from the clouds,” exclaimed the
oracle, noticing his visitor’s amazement. “Do you suppose that I spoke
at random like a parrot?”

“No, certainly not, but--”

“Tush! You are surprised because you know nothing of contemporary
history. If you don’t wish to remain all your life a common detective,
like your friend Gevrol, you must read, and make yourself familiar with
all the leading events of the century.”

“I must confess that I don’t see the connection.”

M. Tabaret did not deign to reply. Turning to Father Absinthe, he
requested the old detective, in the most affable tones, to go to the
library and fetch two large volumes entitled: “General Biography of
the Men of the Present Age,” which he would find in the bookcase on the
right. Father Absinthe hastened to obey; and as soon as the books were
brought, M. Tabaret began turning the pages with an eager hand, like a
person seeking some word in a dictionary.

“Esbayron,” he muttered, “Escars, Escayrac, Escher, Escodica--at last
we have it--Escorval! Listen attentively, my boy, and you will be
enlightened.”

This injunction was entirely unnecessary. Never had the young
detective’s faculties been more keenly on the alert. It was in an
emphatic voice that the sick man then read: “Escorval (Louis-Guillaume,
baron d’).--Diplomatist and politician, born at Montaignac, December
3d, 1769; of an old family of lawyers. He was completing his studies in
Paris at the outbreak of the Revolution and embraced the popular
cause with all the ardor of youth. But, soon disapproving the excesses
committed in the name of Liberty, he sided with the Reactionists,
advised, perhaps, by Roederer, who was one of his relatives. Commended
to the favor of the First Counsel by M. de Talleyrand, he began
his diplomatic career with a mission to Switzerland; and during the
existence of the First Empire he was entrusted with many important
negotiations. Devoted to the Emperor, he found himself gravely
compromised at the advent of the Second Restoration. At the time of the
celebrated rising at Montaignac, he was arrested on the double charge of
high treason and conspiracy. He was tried by a military commission, and
condemned to death. The sentence was not executed, however. He owed his
life to the noble devotion and heroic energy of a priest, one of his
friends, the Abbe Midon, cure of the little village of Sairmeuse. The
baron d’Escorval had only one son, who embraced the judicial profession
at a very early age.”

Lecoq was intensely disappointed. “I understand,” he remarked. “This
is the biography of our magistrate’s father. Only I don’t see that it
teaches us anything.”

An ironical smile curved old Tirauclair’s lips. “It teaches us that
M. d’Escorval’s father was condemned to death,” he replied. “That’s
something, I assure you. A little patience, and you will soon know
everything.”

Having found a new leaf, he recommenced to read: “Sairmeuse
(Anne-Marie-Victor de Tingry, Duc de).--A French general and politician,
born at the chateau de Sairmeuse, near Montaignac, in 1758. The
Sairmeuse family is one of the oldest and most illustrious in France. It
must not be confounded with the ducal family of Sermeuse, whose name is
written with an ‘e.’ Leaving France at the beginning of the Revolution,
Anne de Sairmeuse began by serving in the army of Conde. Some years
later he offered his sword to Russia; and it is asserted by some of his
biographers that he was fighting in the Russian ranks at the time of the
disastrous retreat from Moscow. Returning to France with the Bourbons,
he became notorious by the intensity of his ultra-royalist opinions.
It is certain that he had the good fortune to regain possession of his
immense family estates; and the rank and dignities which he had gained
in foreign lands were confirmed. Appointed by the king to preside at the
military commission charged with arresting and trying the conspirators
of Montaignac his zeal and severity resulted in the capture and
conviction of all the parties implicated.”

Lecoq sprang up with sparkling eyes. “I see it clearly now,” he
exclaimed. “The father of the present Duc de Sairmeuse tried to have the
father of the present M. d’Escorval beheaded.”

M. Tabaret was the picture of complacency. “You see the assistance
history gives,” said he. “But I have not finished, my boy; the present
Duc de Sairmeuse also has his article which will be of interest to us.
So listen: Sairmeuse (Anne-Marie-Martial)--Son of the preceding, was
born in London toward the close of the last century; received his early
education in England, and completed it at the Court of Austria, which
he subsequently visited on several confidential missions. Heir to the
opinions, prejudices, and animosities of his father, he placed at the
service of his party a highly cultivated intellect, unusual penetration,
and extraordinary abilities. A leader at a time when political passion
was raging highest, he had the courage to assume the sole responsibility
of the most unpopular measures. The hostility he encountered, however
eventually obliged him to retire from office, leaving behind him
animosities likely to terminate only with his life.”

The sick man closed the book, and with assumed modesty, he asked: “Ah,
well! What do you think of my little method of induction?”

But Lecoq was too much engrossed with his own thoughts to reply to this
question. “I think,” he remarked, “that if the Duc de Sairmeuse had
disappeared for two months--the period of May’s imprisonment, all Paris
would have known of it--and so--”

“You are dreaming,” interrupted Tabaret. “Why with his wife and his
valet de chambre for accomplices, the duke could absent himself for a
year if he liked, and yet all his servants would believe him to be in
the house.”

“I admit that,” said Lecoq, at last; “but unfortunately, there is one
circumstance which completely upsets the theory we have built up so
laboriously.”

“And what is that if you please?”

“If the man who took part in the broil at the Poivriere had been the Duc
de Sairmeuse, he would have disclosed his name--he would have declared
that, having been attacked, he had only defended himself--and his name
alone would have opened the prison doors. Instead of that, what did the
prisoner do? He attempted to kill himself. Would a grand seigneur, like
the Duc de Sairmeuse, to whom life must be a perpetual enchantment, have
thought of committing suicide?”

A mocking whistle from the old Tabaret interrupted the speaker. “You
seem to have forgotten the last sentence in his biography: ‘M. Sairmeuse
leaves behind him ill-will and hatred.’ Do you know the price he might
have been compelled to pay for his liberty! No--no more do I. To explain
his presence at the Poivriere, and the presence of a woman, who was
perhaps his wife, who knows what disgraceful secrets he would have
been obliged to reveal? Between shame and suicide, he chose suicide. He
wished to save his name and honor intact.”

Old Tirauclair spoke with such vehemence that even Father Absinthe was
deeply impressed, although, to tell the truth, he had understood but
little of the conversation.

As for Lecoq, he rose very pale, his lips trembling a little. “You will
excuse my hypocrisy, Monsieur Tabaret,” he said in an agitated voice.
“I only offered these last objections for form’s sake. I had thought of
what you now say, but I distrusted myself, and I wanted to hear you say
it yourself.” Then with an imperious gesture, he added: “Now, I know
what I have to do.”

Old Tabaret raised his hands toward heaven with every sign of intense
dismay. “Unhappy man!” he exclaimed; “do you think of going to arrest
the Duc de Sairmeuse! Poor Lecoq! Free, this man is almost omnipotent,
and you, an infinitesimal agent of police, would be shattered as easily
as glass. Take care, my boy, don’t attack the duke. I wouldn’t be
responsible for the consequences. You might imperil your life.”

The young detective shook his head. “Oh! I don’t deceive myself,” said
he. “I know that the duke is far beyond my reach--at least for the
present. But he will be in my power again, the day I learn his secret.
I don’t fear danger; but I know, that if I am to succeed, I must conceal
myself, and so I will. Yes, I will remain in the shade until I can
unveil this mystery; but then I shall reappear in my true character. And
if May be really the Duc de Sairmeuse, I shall have my revenge.”


THE HONOR OF THE NAME

By Emile Gaboriau




THE HONOR OF THE NAME



CHAPTER I

On the first Sunday in the month of August, 1815, at ten o’clock
precisely--as on every Sunday morning--the sacristan of the parish
church at Sairmeuse sounded the three strokes of the bell which warn
the faithful that the priest is ascending the steps of the altar to
celebrate high mass.

The church was already more than half full, and from every side little
groups of peasants were hurrying into the church-yard. The women were
all in their bravest attire, with cunning little _fichus_ crossed upon
their breasts, broad-striped, brightly colored skirts, and large white
coifs.

Being as economical as they were coquettish, they came barefooted,
bringing their shoes in their hands, but put them on reverentially
before entering the house of God.

But few of the men entered the church. They remained outside to talk,
seating themselves in the porch, or standing about the yard, in the
shade of the century-old elms.

For such was the custom in the hamlet of Sairmeuse.

The two hours which the women consecrated to prayer the men employed
in discussing the news, the success or the failure of the crops; and,
before the service ended, they could generally be found, glass in hand,
in the bar-room of the village inn.

For the farmers for a league around, the Sunday mass was only an excuse
for a reunion, a sort of weekly bourse.

All the cures who had been successively stationed at Sairmeuse had
endeavored to put an end to this scandalous habit, as they termed it;
but all their efforts had made no impression upon country obstinacy.

They had succeeded in gaining only one concession. At the moment of the
elevation of the Host, voices were hushed, heads uncovered, and a few
even bowed the knee and made the sign of the cross.

But this was the affair of an instant only, and conversation was
immediately resumed with increased vivacity.

But to-day the usual animation was wanting.

No sounds came from the little knots of men gathered here and there, not
an oath, not a laugh. Between buyers and sellers, one did not overhear
a single one of those interminable discussions, punctuated with the
popular oaths, such as: “By my faith in God!” or “May the devil burn
me!”

They were not talking, they were whispering together. A gloomy
sadness was visible upon each face; lips were placed cautiously at the
listener’s ear; anxiety could be read in every eye.

One scented misfortune in the very air. Only a month had elapsed since
Louis XVIII. had been, for the second time, installed in the Tuileries
by a triumphant coalition.

The earth had not yet had time to swallow the sea of blood that flowed
at Waterloo; twelve hundred thousand foreign soldiers desecrated the
soil of France; the Prussian General Muffling was Governor of Paris.

And the peasantry of Sairmeuse trembled with indignation and fear.

This king, brought back by the allies, was no less to be dreaded than
the allies themselves.

To them this great name of Bourbon signified only a terrible burden of
taxation and oppression.

Above all, it signified ruin--for there was scarcely one among them who
had not purchased some morsel of government land; and they were assured
now that all estates were to be returned to the former proprietors, who
had emigrated after the overthrow of the Bourbons.

Hence, it was with a feverish curiosity that most of them clustered
around a young man who, only two days before, had returned from the
army.

With tears of rage in his eyes, he was recounting the shame and the
misery of the invasion.

He told of the pillage at Versailles, the exactions at Orleans, and the
pitiless requisitions that had stripped the people of everything.

“And these accursed foreigners to whom the traitors have delivered
us, will not go so long as a shilling or a bottle of wine is left in
France!” he exclaimed.

As he said this he shook his clinched fist menacingly at a white flag
that floated from the tower.

His generous anger won the close attention of his auditors, and they
were still listening to him with undiminished interest, when the sound
of a horse’s hoofs resounded upon the stones of the only street in
Sairmeuse.

A shudder traversed the crowd. The same fear stopped the beating of
every heart.

Who could say that this rider was not some English or Prussian officer?
He had come, perhaps, to announce the arrival of his regiment, and
imperiously demand money, clothing, and food for his soldiers.

But the suspense was not of long duration.

The rider proved to be a fellow-countryman, clad in a torn and dirty
blue linen blouse. He was urging forward, with repeated blows, a little,
bony, nervous mare, fevered with foam.

“Ah! it is Father Chupin,” murmured one of the peasants with a sigh of
relief.

“The same,” observed another. “He seems to be in a terrible hurry.”

“The old rascal has probably stolen the horse he is riding.”

This last remark disclosed the reputation Father Chupin enjoyed among
his neighbors.

He was, indeed, one of those thieves who are the scourge and the terror
of the rural districts. He pretended to be a day-laborer, but the
truth was, that he held work in holy horror, and spent all his time in
sleeping and idling about his hovel. Hence, stealing was the only
means of support for himself, his wife, two sons--terrible youths, who,
somehow, had escaped the conscription.

They consumed nothing that was not stolen. Wheat, wine, fuel,
fruits--all were the rightful property of others. Hunting and fishing
at all seasons, and with forbidden appliances, furnished them with ready
money.

Everyone in the neighborhood knew this; and yet when Father Chupin was
pursued and captured, as he was occasionally, no witness could be found
to testify against him.

“He is a hard case,” men said; “and if he had a grudge against anyone,
he would be quite capable of lying in ambush and shooting him as he
would a squirrel.”

Meanwhile the rider had drawn rein at the inn of the Boeuf Couronne.

He alighted from his horse, and, crossing the square, approached the
church.

He was a large man, about fifty years of age, as gnarled and sinewy as
the stem of an old grape-vine. At the first glance one would not have
taken him for a scoundrel. His manner was humble, and even gentle; but
the restlessness of his eye and the expression of his thin lips betrayed
diabolical cunning and the coolest calculation.

At any other time this despised and dreaded individual would have been
avoided; but curiosity and anxiety led the crowd toward him.

“Ah, well, Father Chupin!” they cried, as soon as he was within the
sound of their voices; “whence do you come in such haste?”

“From the city.”

To the inhabitants of Sairmeuse and its environs, “the city” meant
the country town of the _arrondissement_, Montaignac, a charming
sub-prefecture of eight thousand souls, about four leagues distant.

“And was it at Montaignac that you bought the horse you were riding just
now?”

“I did not buy it; it was loaned to me.”

This was such a strange assertion that his listeners could not repress a
smile. He did not seem to notice it, however.

“It was loaned me,” he continued, “in order that I might bring some
great news here the quicker.”

Fear resumed possession of the peasantry.

“Is the enemy in the city?” anxiously inquired some of the more timid.

“Yes; but not the enemy you refer to. This is the former lord of the
manor, the Duc de Sairmeuse.”

“Ah! they said he was dead.”

“They were mistaken.”

“Have you seen him?”

“No, I have not seen him, but someone else has seen him for me, and has
spoken to him. And this someone is Monsieur Laugeron, the proprietor of
the Hotel de France at Montaignac. I was passing the house this morning,
when he called me. ‘Here, old man,’ he said, ‘do you wish to do me a
favor?’ Naturally I replied: ‘Yes.’ Whereupon he placed a coin in my
hand and said: ‘Well! go and tell them to saddle a horse for you,
then gallop to Sairmeuse, and tell my friend Lacheneur that the Duc
de Sairmeuse arrived here last night in a post-chaise, with his son,
Monsieur Martial, and two servants.’”

Here, in the midst of these peasants, who were listening to him with
pale cheeks and set teeth, Father Chupin preserved the subdued mien
appropriate to a messenger of misfortune.

But if one had observed him carefully, one would have detected an
ironical smile upon his lips and a gleam of malicious joy in his eyes.

He was, in fact, inwardly jubilant. At that moment he had his revenge
for all the slights and all the scorn he had been forced to endure. And
what a revenge!

And if his words seemed to fall slowly and reluctantly from his lips, it
was only because he was trying to prolong the sufferings of his auditors
as much as possible.

But a robust young fellow, with an intelligent face, who, perhaps, read
Father Chupin’s secret heart, brusquely interrupted him:

“What does the presence of the Duc de Sairmeuse at Montaignac matter to
us?” he exclaimed. “Let him remain at the Hotel de France as long as he
chooses; we shall not go in search of him.”

“No! we shall not go in search of him,” echoed the other peasants,
approvingly.

The old rogue shook his head with affected commiseration.

“Monsieur le Duc will not put you to that trouble,” he replied; “he will
be here in less than two hours.”

“How do you know?”

“I know it through Monsieur Laugeron, who, when I mounted his horse,
said to me: ‘Above all, old man, explain to my friend Lacheneur that the
duke has ordered horses to be in readiness to convey him to Sairmeuse at
eleven o’clock.’”

With a common movement, all the peasants who had watches consulted them.

“And what does he want here?” demanded the same young farmer.

“Pardon! he did not tell me,” replied Father Chupin; “but one need not
be very cunning to guess. He comes to revisit his former estates, and
to take them from those who have purchased them, if possible. From you,
Rousselet, he will claim the meadows upon the Oiselle, which always
yield two crops; from you, Father Gauchais, the ground upon which
the Croix-Brulee stands; from you, Chanlouineau, the vineyards on the
Borderie----”

Chanlouineau was the impetuous young man who had interrupted Father
Chupin twice already.

“Claim the Borderie!” he exclaimed, with even greater violence; “let
him try, and we will see. It was waste land when my father bought
it--covered with briers; even a goat could not have found pasture there.
We have cleared it of stones, we have scratched up the soil with our
very nails, we have watered it with our sweat, and now they would try to
take it from us! Ah! they shall have my last drop of blood first!”

“I do not say but----”

“But what? Is it any fault of ours that the nobles fled to foreign
lands? We have not stolen their lands, have we? The government offered
them for sale; we bought them, and paid for them; they are lawfully
ours.”

“That is true; but Monsieur de Sairmeuse is the great friend of the
king.”

The young soldier, whose voice had aroused the most noble sentiments
only a moment before, was forgotten.

Invaded France, the threatening enemy, were alike forgotten. The
all-powerful instinct of avarice was suddenly aroused.

“In my opinion,” resumed Chanlouineau, “we should do well to consult the
Baron d’Escorval.”

“Yes, yes!” exclaimed the peasants; “let us go at once!”

They were starting, when a villager who sometimes read the papers,
checked them by saying:

“Take care what you do. Do you not know that since the return of the
Bourbons Monsieur d’Escorval is of no account whatever? Fouche has him
upon the proscription list, and he is under the surveillance of the
police.”

This objection dampened the enthusiasm.

“That is true,” murmured some of the older men; “a visit to Monsieur
d’Escorval would, perhaps, do us more harm than good. And, besides, what
advice could he give us?”

Chanlouineau had forgotten all prudence.

“What of that?” he exclaimed. “If Monsieur d’Escorval has no counsel to
give us about this matter, he can, perhaps, teach us how to resist and
to defend ourselves.”

For some moments Father Chupin had been studying, with an impassive
countenance, the storm of anger he had aroused. In his secret heart
he experienced the satisfaction of the incendiary at the sight of the
flames he has kindled.

Perhaps he already had a presentiment of the infamous part he would play
a few months later.

Satisfied with his experiment, he assumed, for the time, the role of
moderator.

“Wait a little. Do not cry before you are hurt,” he exclaimed, in an
ironical tone. “Who told you that the Duc de Sairmeuse would trouble
you? How much of his former domain do you all own between you? Almost
nothing. A few fields and meadows and a hill on the Borderie. All these
together did not in former times yield him an income of five thousand
francs a year.”

“Yes, that is true,” replied Chanlouineau; “and if the revenue you
mention is quadrupled, it is only because the land is now in the hands
of forty proprietors who cultivate it themselves.”

“Another reason why the duke will not say a word; he will not wish to
set the whole district in commotion. In my opinion, he will dispossess
only one of the owners of his former estates, and that is our worthy
ex-mayor--Monsieur Lacheneur, in short.”

Ah! he knew only too well the egotism of his compatriots. He knew with
what complacency and eagerness they would accept an expiatory victim
whose sacrifice should be their salvation.

“That is a fact,” remarked an old man; “Monsieur Lacheneur owns nearly
all the Sairmeuse property.”

“Say all, while you are about it,” rejoined Father Chupin. “Where does
Monsieur Lacheneur live? In that beautiful Chateau de Sairmeuse whose
gable we can see there through the trees. He hunts in the forests which
once belonged to the Ducs de Sairmeuse; he fishes in their lakes; he
drives the horses which once belonged to them, in the carriages upon
which one could now see their coat-of-arms, if it had not been painted
out.

“Twenty years ago, Lacheneur was a poor devil like myself; now, he is a
grand gentleman with fifty thousand livres a year. He wears the finest
broadcloth and top-boots like the Baron d’Escorval. He no longer works;
he makes others work; and when he passes, everyone must bow to the
earth. If you kill so much as a sparrow upon his lands, as he says, he
will cast you into prison. Ah, he has been fortunate. The emperor made
him mayor. The Bourbons deprived him of his office; but what does that
matter to him? He is still the real master here, as the Sairmeuse were
in other days. His son is pursuing his studies in Paris, intending to
become a notary. As for his daughter, Mademoiselle Marie-Anne--”

“Not a word against her!” exclaimed Chanlouineau; “if she were mistress,
there would not be a poor man in the country; and yet, how some of her
pensioners abuse her bounty. Ask your wife if this is not so, Father
Chupin.”

Undoubtedly the impetuous young man spoke at the peril of his life.

But the wicked old Chupin swallowed this affront which he would never
forget, and humbly continued:

“I do not say that Mademoiselle Marie-Anne is not generous; but after
all her charitable work she has plenty of money left for her fine
dresses and her fallals. I think that Monsieur Lacheneur ought to
be very well content, even after he has restored to its former owner
one-half or even three-quarters of the property he has acquired--no one
can tell how. He would have enough left then to grind the poor under
foot.”

After his appeal to selfishness, Father Chupin appealed to envy. There
could be no doubt of his success.

But he had not time to pursue his advantage. The services were over, and
the worshippers were leaving the church.

Soon there appeared upon the porch the man in question, with a young
girl of dazzling beauty leaning upon his arm.

Father Chupin walked straight toward him, and brusquely delivered his
message.

M. Lacheneur staggered beneath the blow. He turned first so red, then so
frightfully pale, that those around him thought he was about to fall.

But he quickly recovered his self-possession, and without a word to the
messenger, he walked rapidly away, leading his daughter.

Some minutes later an old post-chaise, drawn by four horses, dashed
through the village at a gallop, and paused before the house of the
village cure.

Then one might have witnessed a singular spectacle.

Father Chupin had gathered his wife and his children together, and the
four surrounded the carriage, shouting, with all the power of their
lungs:

“Long live the Duc de Sairmeuse!”



CHAPTER II

A gently ascending road, more than two miles in length, shaded by a
quadruple row of venerable elms, led from the village to the Chateau de
Sairmeuse.

Nothing could be more beautiful than this avenue, a fit approach to a
palace; and the stranger who beheld it could understand the naively vain
proverb of the country: “He does not know the real beauty of France, who
has never seen Sairmeuse nor the Oiselle.”

The Oiselle is the little river which one crosses by means of a wooden
bridge on leaving the village, and whose clear and rapid waters give a
delicious freshness to the valley.

At every step, as one ascends, the view changes. It is as if an
enchanting panorama were being slowly unrolled before one.

On the right you can see the saw-mills of Fereol. On the left, like an
ocean of verdure, the forest of Dolomien trembles in the breeze. Those
imposing ruins on the other side of the river are all that remain of
the feudal manor of the house of Breulh. That red brick mansion, with
granite trimmings, half concealed by a bend in the river, belongs to the
Baron d’Escorval.

And, if the day is clear, one can easily distinguish the spires of
Montaignac in the distance.

This was the path traversed by M. Lacheneur after Chupin had delivered
his message.

But what did he care for the beauties of the landscape!

Upon the church porch he had received his death-wound; and now, with a
tottering and dragging step, he dragged himself along like one of those
poor soldiers, mortally wounded upon the field of battle, who go back,
seeking a ditch or quiet spot where they can lie down and die.

He seemed to have lost all thought of his surroundings--all
consciousness of previous events. He pursued his way, lost in his
reflections, guided only by force of habit.

Two or three times his daughter, Marie-Anne, who was walking by his
side, addressed him; but an “Ah! let me alone!” uttered in a harsh tone,
was the only response she could draw from him.

Evidently he had received a terrible blow; and undoubtedly, as often
happens under such circumstances, the unfortunate man was reviewing all
the different phases of his life.

At twenty Lacheneur was only a poor ploughboy in the service of the
Sairmeuse family.

His ambition was modest then. When stretched beneath a tree at the hour
of noonday rest, his dreams were as simple as those of an infant.

“If I could but amass a hundred pistoles,” he thought, “I would ask
Father Barrois for the hand of his daughter Martha; and he would not
refuse me.” A hundred pistoles! A thousand francs!--an enormous sum
for him who, in two years of toil and privation had only laid by eleven
louis, which he had placed carefully in a tiny box and hidden in the
depths of his straw mattress.

Still he did not despair. He had read in Martha’s eyes that she would
wait.

And Mlle. Armande de Sairmeuse, a rich old maid, was his god-mother;
and he thought, if he attacked her adroitly, that he might, perhaps,
interest her in his love-affair.

Then the terrible storm of the revolution burst over France.

With the fall of the first thunder-bolts, the Duke of Sairmeuse left
France with the Count d’Artois. They took refuge in foreign lands as
a passer-by seeks shelter in a doorway from a summer shower, saying to
himself: “This will not last long.”

The storm did last, however; and the following year Mlle. Armande, who
had remained at Sairmeuse, died.

The chateau was then closed, the president of the district took
possession of the keys in the name of the government, and the servants
were scattered.

Lacheneur took up his residence in Montaignac.

Young, daring, and personally attractive, blessed with an energetic
face, and an intelligence far above his station, it was not long before
he became well known in the political clubs.

For three months Lacheneur was the tyrant of Montaignac.

But this metier of public speaker is by no means lucrative, so the
surprise throughout the district was immense, when it was ascertained
that the former ploughboy had purchased the chateau, and almost all the
land belonging to his old master.

It is true that the nation had sold this princely domain for scarcely
a twentieth part of its real value. The appraisement was sixty-nine
thousand francs. It was giving the property away.

And yet, it was necessary to have this amount, and Lacheneur possessed
it, since he had poured it in a flood of beautiful louis d’or into the
hands of the receiver of the district.

From that moment his popularity waned. The patriots who had applauded
the ploughboy, cursed the capitalist. He discreetly left them to recover
from their rage as best they could, and returned to Sairmeuse. There
everyone bowed low before Citoyen Lacheneur.

Unlike most people, he did not forget his past hopes at the moment when
they might be realized.

He married Martha Barrois, and, leaving the country to work out its
own salvation without his assistance, he gave his time and attention to
agriculture.

Any close observer, in those days, would have felt certain that the man
was bewildered by the sudden change in his situation.

His manner was so troubled and anxious that one, to see him, would
have supposed him a servant in constant fear of being detected in some
indiscretion.

He did not open the chateau, but installed himself and his young wife in
the cottage formerly occupied by the head game-keeper, near the entrance
of the park.

But, little by little, with the habit of possession, came assurance.

The Consulate had succeeded the Directory, the Empire succeeded the
Consulate, Citoyen Lacheneur became M. Lacheneur.

Appointed mayor two years later, he left the cottage and took possession
of the chateau.

The former ploughboy slumbered in the bed of the Ducs de Sairmeuse; he
ate from the massive plate, graven with their coat-of-arms; he received
his visitors in the magnificent salon in which the Ducs de Sairmeuse had
received their friends in years gone by.

To those who had known him in former days, M. Lacheneur had become
unrecognizable. He had adapted himself to his lofty station. Blushing
at his own ignorance; he had found the courage--wonderful in one of his
age--to acquire the education which he lacked.

Then, all his undertakings were successful to such a degree that
his good fortune had become proverbial. That he took any part in an
enterprise, sufficed to make it turn out well.

His wife had given him two lovely children, a son and a daughter.

His property, managed with a shrewdness and sagacity which the former
owners had not possessed, yielded him an income of at least sixty
thousand francs.

How many, under similar circumstances, would have lost their heads! But
he, M. Lacheneur, had been wise enough to retain his _sang-froid_.

In spite of the princely luxury that surrounded him, his own habits were
simple and frugal. He had never had an attendant for his own person. His
large income he consecrated almost entirely to the improvement of his
estate or to the purchase of more land. And yet, he was not avaricious.
In all that concerned his wife or children, he did not count the cost.
His son, Jean, had been educated in Paris; he wished him to be fitted
for any position. Unwilling to consent to a separation from his
daughter, he had procured a governess to take charge of her education.

Sometimes his friends accused him of an inordinate ambition for his
children; but he always shook his head sadly, as he replied:

“If _I_ can only insure them a modest and comfortable future! But what
folly it is to count upon the future. Thirty years ago, who could have
foreseen that the Sairmeuse family would be deprived of their estates?”

With such opinions he should have been a good master; he was, but no one
thought the better of him on that account. His former comrades could not
forgive him for his sudden elevation.

They seldom spoke of him without wishing his ruin in ambiguous words.

Alas! the evil days came. Toward the close of the year 1812, he lost his
wife, the disasters of the year 1813 swept away a large portion of his
personal fortune, which had been invested in a manufacturing enterprise.

Compromised by the first Restoration, he was obliged to conceal himself
for a time; and to cap the climax, the conduct of his son, who was still
in Paris, caused him serious disquietude.

Only the evening before, he had thought himself the most unfortunate of
men.

But here was another misfortune menacing him; a misfortune so terrible
that all the others were forgotten.

From the day on which he had purchased Sairmeuse to this fatal Sunday in
August, 1815, was an interval of twenty years.

Twenty years! And it seemed to him only yesterday that, blushing and
trembling, he had laid those piles of louis d’or upon the desk of the
receiver of the district.

Had he dreamed it?

He had not dreamed it. His entire life, with its struggles and its
miseries, its hopes and its fears, its unexpected joys and its blighted
hopes, all passed before him.

Lost in these memories, he had quite forgotten the present situation,
when a commonplace incident, more powerful than the voice of his
daughter, brought him back to the terrible reality. The gate leading to
the Chateau de Sairmeuse, to _his_ chateau, was found to be locked.

He shook it with a sort of rage; and, being unable to break the
fastening, he found some relief in breaking the bell.

On hearing the noise, the gardener came running to the scene of action.

“Why is this gate closed?” demanded M. Lacheneur, with unwonted violence
of manner. “By what right do you barricade my house when I, the master,
am without?”

The gardener tried to make some excuse.

“Hold your tongue!” interrupted M. Lacheneur. “I dismiss you; you are no
longer in my service.”

He passed on, leaving the gardener petrified with astonishment, crossed
the court-yard--a court-yard worthy of the mansion, bordered with velvet
turf, with flowers, and with dense shrubbery.

In the vestibule, inlaid with marble, three of his tenants sat awaiting
him, for it was on Sunday that he always received the workmen who
desired to confer with him.

They rose at his approach, and removed their hats deferentially. But he
did not give them time to utter a word.

“Who permitted you to enter here?” he said, savagely, “and what do you
desire? They sent you to play the spy on me, did they? Leave, I tell
you!”

The three farmers were even more bewildered and dismayed than the
gardener had been, and their remarks must have been interesting.

But M. Lacheneur could not hear them. He had opened the door of the
grand salon, and dashed in, followed by his frightened daughter.

Never had Marie-Anne seen her father in such a mood; and she trembled,
her heart torn by the most frightful presentiments.

She had heard it said that oftentimes, under the influence of some dire
calamity, unfortunate men have suddenly lost their reason entirely; and
she was wondering if her father had become insane.

It would seem, indeed, that such was the case. His eyes flashed,
convulsive shudders shook his whole body, a white foam gathered on his
lips.

He made the circuit of the room as a wild beast makes the circuit of his
cage, uttering harsh imprecations and making frenzied gestures.

His actions were strange, incomprehensible. Sometimes he seemed to be
trying the thickness of the carpet with the toe of his boot; sometimes
he threw himself upon a sofa or a chair, as if to test its softness.

Occasionally, he paused abruptly before some one of the valuable
pictures that covered the walls, or before a bronze. One might have
supposed that he was taking an inventory, and appraising all the
magnificent and costly articles which decorated this apartment, the most
sumptuous in the chateau.

“And I must renounce all this!” he exclaimed, at last.

These words explained everything.

“No, never!” he resumed, in a transport of rage; “never! never! I
cannot! I will not!”

Now Marie-Anne understood it all. But what was passing in her father’s
mind? She wished to know; and, leaving the low chair in which she had
been seated, she went to her father’s side.

“Are you ill, father?” she asked, in her sweet voice; “what is the
matter? What do you fear? Why do you not confide in me?--Am I not your
daughter? Do you no longer love me?”

At the sound of this dear voice, M. Lacheneur trembled like a sleeper
suddenly aroused from the terrors of a nightmare, and he cast an
indescribable glance upon his daughter.

“Did you not hear what Chupin said to me?” he replied, slowly. “The Duc
de Sairmeuse is at Montaignac; he will soon be here; and we are dwelling
in the chateau of his fathers, and his domain has become ours!”

The vexed question regarding the national lands, which agitated France
for thirty years, Marie understood, for she had heard it discussed a
thousand times.

“Ah, well, dear father,” said she, “what does that matter, even if we do
hold the property? You have bought it and paid for it, have you not? So
it is rightfully and lawfully ours.”

M. Lacheneur hesitated a moment before replying.

But his secret suffocated him. He was in one of those crises in which a
man, however strong he may be, totters and seeks some support, however
fragile.

“You would be right, my daughter,” he murmured, with drooping head, “if
the money that I gave in exchange for Sairmeuse had really belonged to
me.”

At this strange avowal the young girl turned pale and recoiled a step.

“What?” she faltered; “this gold was not yours, my father? To whom did
it belong? From whence did it come?”

The unhappy man had gone too far to retract.

“I will tell you all, my daughter,” he replied, “and you shall judge.
You shall decide. When the Sairmeuse family fled from France, I had only
my hands to depend upon, and as it was almost impossible to obtain work,
I wondered if starvation were not near at hand.

“Such was my condition when someone came after me one evening to tell
me that Mademoiselle Armande de Sairmeuse, my godmother, was dying, and
wished to speak with me. I ran to the chateau.

“The messenger had told the truth. Mademoiselle Armande was sick unto
death. I felt this on seeing her upon her bed, whiter than wax.

“Ah! if I were to live a hundred years, never should I forget her face
as it looked at that moment. It was expressive of a strength of will and
an energy that would hold death at bay until the task upon which she had
determined was performed.

“When I entered the room I saw a look of relief appear upon her
countenance.

“‘How long you were in coming!’ she murmured faintly.

“I was about to make some excuse, when she motioned me to pause, and
ordered the women who surrounded her to leave the room.

“As soon as we were alone:

“‘You are an honest boy,’, said she, ‘and I am about to give you a proof
of my confidence. People believe me to be poor, but they are mistaken.
While my relatives were gayly ruining themselves, I was saving the five
hundred louis which the duke, my brother, gave me each year.’

“She motioned me to come nearer, and to kneel beside her bed.

“I obeyed, and Mademoiselle Armande leaned toward me, almost glued her
lips to my ear, and added:

“‘I possess eighty thousand francs.’

“I felt a sudden giddiness, but my godmother did not notice it.

“‘This amount,’ she continued, ‘is not a quarter part of the former
income from our family estates. But now, who knows but it will, one day,
be the only resource of the Sairmeuse? I am going to place it in your
charge, Lacheneur. I confide it to your honor and to your devotion. The
estates belonging to the emigrants are to be sold, I hear. If such an
act of injustice is committed, you will probably be able to purchase
our property for seventy thousand francs. If the property is sold by the
government, purchase it; if the lands belonging to the emigrants are not
sold, take that amount to the duke, my brother, who is with the
Count d’Artois. The surplus, that is to say, the ten thousand francs
remaining, I give to you--they are yours.’

“She seemed to recover her strength. She raised herself in bed, and,
holding the crucifix attached to her rosary to my lips, she said:

“‘Swear by the image of our Saviour, that you will faithfully execute
the last will of your dying godmother.’

“I took the required oath, and an expression of satisfaction overspread
her features.

“‘That is well,’ she said; ‘I shall die content. You will have a
protector on high. But this is not all. In times like these in which we
live, this gold will not be safe in your hands unless those about you
are ignorant that you possess it. I have been endeavoring to discover
some way by which you could remove it from my room, and from the
chateau, without the knowledge of anyone; and I have found a way. The
gold is here in this cupboard, at the head of my bed, in a stout oaken
chest. You must find strength to move the chest--you must. You can
fasten a sheet around it and let it down gently from the window into the
garden. You will then leave the house as you entered it, and as soon as
you are outside, you must take the chest and carry it to your home. The
night is very dark, and no one will see you, if you are careful. But
make haste; my strength is nearly gone.’

“The chest was heavy, but I was very strong.

“In less than ten minutes the task of removing the chest from the
chateau was accomplished, without a single sound that would betray us.
As I closed the window, I said:

“‘It is done, godmother.’

“‘God be praised!’ she whispered; ‘Sairmeuse is saved!’

“I heard a deep sigh. I turned; she was dead.”

This scene that M. Lacheneur was relating rose vividly before him.

To feign, to disguise the truth, or to conceal any portion of it was an
impossibility.

He forgot himself and his daughter; he thought only of the dead woman,
of Mlle. Armande de Sairmeuse.

And he shuddered on pronouncing the words: “She was dead.” It seemed to
him that she was about to speak, and to insist upon the fulfilment of
his pledge.

After a moment’s silence, he resumed, in a hollow voice:

“I called for aid; it came. Mademoiselle Armande was adored by everyone;
there was great lamentation, and a half hour of indescribable confusion
followed her death. I was able to withdraw, unnoticed, to run into
the garden, and to carry away the oaken chest. An hour later, it was
concealed in the miserable hovel in which I dwelt. The following year I
purchased Sairmeuse.”

He had confessed all; and he paused, trembling, trying to read his
sentence in the eyes of his daughter.

“And can you hesitate?” she demanded.

“Ah! you do not know----”

“I know that Sairmeuse must be given up.”

This was the decree of his own conscience, that faint voice which speaks
only in a whisper, but which all the tumult on earth cannot overpower.

“No one saw me take away the chest,” he faltered. “If anyone suspected
it, there is not a single proof against me. But no one does suspect it.”

Marie-Anne rose, her eyes flashed with generous indignation.

“My father!” she exclaimed; “oh! my father!”

Then, in a calmer tone, she added:

“If others know nothing of this, can _you_ forget it?”

M. Lacheneur appeared almost ready to succumb to the torture of the
terrible conflict raging in his soul.

“Return!” he exclaimed. “What shall I return? That which I have
received? So be it. I consent. I will give the duke the eighty thousand
francs; to this amount I will add the interest on this sum since I have
had it, and--we shall be free of all obligation.”

The girl sadly shook her head.

“Why do you resort to subterfuges which are so unworthy of you?” she
asked, gently. “You know perfectly well that it was Sairmeuse which
Mademoiselle Armande intended to intrust to the servant of her house.
And it is Sairmeuse which must be returned.”

The word “servant” was revolting to a man, who, at least, while the
empire endured, had been a power in the land.

“Ah! you are cruel, my daughter,” he said, with intense bitterness; “as
cruel as a child who has never suffered--as cruel as one who, having
never himself been tempted, is without mercy for those who have yielded
to temptation.

“It is one of those acts which God alone can judge, since God alone can
read the depths of one’s secret soul.

“I am only a depositary, you tell me. It was, indeed, in this light that
I formerly regarded myself.

“If your poor sainted mother was still alive, she would tell you the
anxiety and anguish I felt on being made the master of riches which
were not mine. I trembled lest I should yield to their seductions; I was
afraid of myself. I felt as a gambler might feel who had the winnings
of others confided to his care; as a drunkard might feel who had been
placed in charge of a quantity of the most delicious wines.

“Your mother would tell you that I moved heaven and earth to find the
Duc de Sairmeuse. But he had left the Count d’Artois, and no one knew
where he had gone or what had become of him. Ten years passed before
I could make up my mind to inhabit the chateau--yes, ten years--during
which I had the furniture dusted each morning as if the master was to
return that evening.

“At last I ventured. I had heard Monsieur d’Escorval declare that the
duke had been killed in battle. I took up my abode here. And from day to
day, in proportion as the domain of Sairmeuse became more beautiful
and extensive beneath my care, I felt myself more and more its rightful
owner.”

But this despairing pleading in behalf of a bad cause produced no
impression upon Marie-Anne’s loyal heart.

“Restitution must be made,” she repeated. M. Lacheneur wrung his hands.

“Implacable!” he exclaimed; “she is implacable. Unfortunate girl! does
she not understand that it is for her sake I wish to remain where I
am? I am old, and I am familiar with toil and poverty; idleness has
not removed the callosities from my hands. What do I require to keep me
alive until the day comes for me to take my place in the graveyard? A
crust of bread and an onion in the morning, a porringer of soup in the
evening, and for the night a bundle of straw. I could easily earn that.
But you, unhappy child! and your brother, what will become of you?”

“We must not discuss nor haggle with duty, my father. I think, however,
that you are needlessly alarmed. I believe the duke is too noble-hearted
ever to allow you to suffer want after the immense service you have
rendered him.”

The old servitor of the house of Sairmeuse laughed a loud, bitter laugh.

“You believe that!” said he; “then you do not know the nobles who have
been our masters for ages. ‘A., you are a worthy fellow!’--very coldly
said--will be the only recompense I shall receive; and you will see us,
me, at my plough; you, out at service. And if I venture to speak of
the ten thousand francs that were given me, I shall be treated as an
impostor, as an impudent fool. By the holy name of God this shall not
be!”

“Oh, my father!”

“No! this shall not be. And I realize--as you cannot realize--the
disgrace of such a fall. You think you are beloved in Sairmeuse? You are
mistaken. We have been too fortunate not to be the victims of hatred and
jealousy. If I fall to-morrow, you will see all who kissed your hands
to-day fall upon you to tear you to pieces!”

His eye glittered; he believed he had found a victorious argument.

“And then you, yourself, will realize the horror of the disgrace. It
will cost you the deadly anguish of a separation from him whom your
heart has chosen.”

He had spoken truly, for Marie-Anne’s beautiful eyes filled with tears.

“If what you say proves true, father,” she murmured, in an altered
voice, “I may, perhaps, die of sorrow; but I cannot fail to realize that
my confidence and my love has been misplaced.”

“And you still insist upon my returning Sairmeuse to its former owner?”

“Honor speaks, my father.”

M. Lacheneur made the arm-chair in which he was seated tremble by a
violent blow of his fist.

“And if I am just as obstinate,” he exclaimed--“if I keep the
property--what will you do?”

“I shall say to myself, father, that honest poverty is better than
stolen wealth. I shall leave this chateau, which belongs to the Duc
de Sairmeuse, and I shall seek a situation as a servant in the
neighborhood.”

M. Lacheneur sank back in his arm-chair sobbing. He knew his daughter’s
nature well enough to be assured that what she said, that she would do.

But he was conquered; his daughter had won the battle. He had decided to
make the heroic sacrifice.

“I will relinquish Sairmeuse,” he faltered, “come what may----”

He paused suddenly; a visitor was entering the room.

It was a young man about twenty years of age, of distinguished
appearance, but with a rather melancholy and gentle manner.

His eyes when he entered the apartment encountered those of Marie-Anne;
he blushed slightly, and the girl half turned away, crimsoning to the
roots of her hair.

“Monsieur,” said the young man, “my father sends me to inform you that
the Duc de Sairmeuse and his son have just arrived. They have asked the
hospitality of our cure.”

M. Lacheneur rose, unable to conceal his frightful agitation.

“You will thank the Baron d’Escorval for his attention, my dear
Maurice,” he responded. “I shall have the honor of seeing him to-day,
after a very momentous step which we are about to take, my daughter and
I.”

Young d’Escorval had seen, at the first glance, that his presence was
inopportune, so he remained only a few moments.

But as he was taking leave, Marie-Anne found time to say, in a low
voice:

“I think I know your heart, Maurice; this evening I shall know it
certainly.”



CHAPTER III

Few of the inhabitants of Sairmeuse knew, except by name, the terrible
duke whose arrival had thrown the whole village into commotion.

Some of the oldest residents had a faint recollection of having seen
him long ago, before ‘89 indeed, when he came to visit his aunt, Mlle.
Armande.

His duties, then, had seldom permitted him to leave the court.

If he had given no sign of life during the empire, it was because he had
not been compelled to submit to the humiliations and suffering which so
many of the emigrants were obliged to endure in their exile.

On the contrary, he had received, in exchange for the wealth of which he
had been deprived by the revolution, a princely fortune.

Taking refuge in London after the defeat of the army of Conde, he had
been so fortunate as to please the only daughter of Lord Holland, one of
the richest peers in England, and he had married her.

She possessed a fortune of two hundred and fifty thousand pounds
sterling, more than six million francs.

Still the marriage was not a happy one. The chosen companion of the
dissipated and licentious Count d’Artois was not likely to prove a very
good husband.

The young duchess was contemplating a separation when she died,
in giving birth to a boy, who was baptized under the names of
Anne-Marie-Martial.

The loss of his wife did not render the Duc de Sairmeuse inconsolable.

He was free and richer than he had ever been.

As soon as _les convenances_ permitted, he confided his son to the care
of a relative of his wife, and began his roving life again.

Rumor had told the truth. He had fought, and that furiously, against
France in the Austrian, and then in the Russian ranks.

And he took no pains to conceal the fact; convinced that he had only
performed his duty. He considered that he had honestly and loyally
gained the rank of general which the Emperor of all the Russias had
bestowed upon him.

He had not returned to France during the first Restoration; but his
absence had been involuntary. His father-in-law, Lord Holland, had just
died, and the duke was detained in London by business connected with his
son’s immense inheritance.

Then followed the “Hundred Days.” They exasperated him.

But “the good cause,” as he styled it, having triumphed anew, he
hastened to France.

Alas! Lacheneur judged the character of his former master correctly,
when he resisted the entreaties of his daughter.

This man, who had been compelled to conceal himself during the first
Restoration, knew only too well, that the returned _emigres_ had learned
nothing and forgotten nothing.

The Duc de Sairmeuse was no exception to the rule.

He thought, and nothing could be more sadly absurd, that a mere act
of authority would suffice to suppress forever all the events of the
Revolution and of the empire.

When he said: “I do not admit that!” he firmly believed that there was
nothing more to be said; that controversy was ended; and that what _had_
been was as if it had never been.

If some, who had seen Louis XVII. at the helm in 1814, assured the duke
that France had changed in many respects since 1789, he responded with a
shrug of the shoulders:

“Nonsense! As soon as we assert ourselves, all these rascals, whose
rebellion alarms you, will quietly sink out of sight.”

Such was really his opinion.

On the way from Montaignac to Sairmeuse, the duke, comfortably ensconced
in his berlin, unfolded his theories for the benefit of his son.

“The King has been poorly advised,” he said, in conclusion. “Besides,
I am disposed to believe that he inclines too much to Jacobinism. If
he would listen to my advice, he would make use of the twelve hundred
thousand soldiers which our friends have placed at his disposal, to
bring his subjects to a sense of their duty. Twelve hundred thousand
bayonets have far more eloquence than the articles of a charter.”

He continued his remarks on this subject until the carriage approached
Sairmeuse.

Though but little given to sentiment, he was really affected by the
sight of the country in which he was born--where he had played as a
child, and of which he had heard nothing since the death of his aunt.

Everything was changed: still the outlines of the landscape remained the
same; the valley of the Oiselle was as bright and laughing as in days
gone by.

“I recognize it!” he exclaimed, with a delight that made him forget
politics. “I recognize it!”

Soon the changes became more striking.

The carriage entered Sairmeuse, and rattled over the stones of the only
street in the village.

This street, in former years, had been unpaved, and had always been
rendered impassable by wet weather.

“Ah, ha!” murmured the duke, “this is an improvement!”

It was not long before he noticed others. The dilapidated, thatched
hovels had given place to pretty and comfortable white cottages with
green blinds, and a vine hanging gracefully over the door.

As the carriage passed the public square in front of the church, Martial
observed the groups of peasants who were still talking there.

“What do you think of all these peasants?” he inquired of his father.
“Do they have the appearance of people who are preparing a triumphal
reception for their old masters?”

M. de Sairmeuse shrugged his shoulders. He was not the man to renounce
an illusion for such a trifle.

“They do not know that I am in this post-chaise,” he replied. “When they
know----”

Shouts of “Vive Monsieur le Duc de Sairmeuse!” interrupted him.

“Do you hear that, Marquis?” he exclaimed.

And pleased by these cries that proved him in the right, he leaned from
the carriage-window, waving his hand to the honest Chupin family, who
were running after the vehicle with noisy shouts.

The old rascal, his wife, and his children, all possessed powerful
voices; and it was not strange that the duke believed the whole village
was welcoming him. He was convinced of it; and when the berlin stopped
before the house of the cure, M. de Sairmeuse was persuaded that the
_prestige_ of the nobility was greater than ever.

Upon the threshold of the parsonage, Bibiaine, the old housekeeper, was
standing. She knew who these guests must be, for the cure’s servants
always know what is going on.

“Monsieur has not yet returned from church,” she said, in response to
the duke’s inquiry; “but if the gentlemen wish to wait, it will not be
long before he comes, for the poor, dear man has not breakfasted yet.”

“Let us go in,” the duke said to his son. And guided by the housekeeper,
they entered a sort of drawing-room, where the table was spread.

M. de Sairmeuse took an inventory of the apartment in a single glance.
The habits of a house reveal those of its master. This was clean, poor,
and bare. The walls were whitewashed; a dozen chairs composed the entire
furniture; upon the table, laid with monastic simplicity, were only tin
dishes.

This was either the abode of an ambitious man or a saint.

“Will these gentlemen take any refreshments?” inquired Bibiaine.

“Upon my word,” replied Martial, “I must confess that the drive has
whetted my appetite amazingly.”

“Blessed Jesus!” exclaimed the old housekeeper, in evident despair.
“What am I to do? I, who have nothing! That is to say--yes--I have an
old hen left in the coop. Give me time to wring its neck, to pick it,
and clean it----”

She paused to listen, and they heard a step in the passage.

“Ah!” she exclaimed, “here is Monsieur le Cure now!”

The son of a poor farmer in the environs of Montaignac, he owed his
Latin and tonsure to the privations of his family.

Tall, angular, and solemn, he was as cold and impassive as the stones of
his church.

By what immense efforts of will, at the cost of what torture, had he
made himself what he was? One could form some idea of the terrible
restraint to which he had subjected himself by looking at his eyes,
which occasionally emitted the lightnings of an impassioned soul.

Was he old or young? The most subtle observer would have hesitated to
say on seeing this pallid and emaciated face, cut in two by an immense
nose--a real eagle’s beak--as thin as the edge of a razor.

He wore a white cassock, which had been patched and darned in numberless
places, but which was a marvel of cleanliness, and which hung about his
tall, attenuated body like the sails of a disabled vessel.

He was known as the Abbe Midon.

At the sight of the two strangers seated in his drawing-room, he
manifested some slight surprise.

The carriage standing before the door had announced the presence of a
visitor; but he had expected to find one of his parishioners.

No one had warned him or the sacristan, and he was wondering with whom
he had to deal, and what they desired of him.

Mechanically, he turned to Bibiaine, but the old servant had taken
flight.

The duke understood his host’s astonishment.

“Upon my word, Abbe!” he said, with the impertinent ease of a _grand
seigneur_ who makes himself at home everywhere, “we have taken your
house by storm, and hold the position, as you see. I am the Duc de
Sairmeuse, and this is my son, the Marquis.”

The priest bowed, but he did not seem very greatly impressed by the
exalted rank of his guests.

“It is a great honor for me,” he replied, in a more than reserved tone,
“to receive a visit from the former master of this place.”

He emphasized this word “former” in such a manner that it was impossible
to doubt his sentiments and his opinions.

“Unfortunately,” he continued, “you will not find here the comforts to
which you are accustomed, and I fear----”

“Nonsense!” interrupted the duke. “An old soldier is not fastidious,
and what suffices for you, Monsieur Abbe, will suffice for us. And rest
assured that we shall amply repay you in one way or another for any
inconvenience we may cause you.”

The priest’s eye flashed. This want of tact, this disagreeable
familiarity, this last insulting remark, kindled the anger of the man
concealed beneath the priest.

“Besides,” added Martial, gayly, “we have been vastly amused by
Bibiaine’s anxieties, we already know that there is a chicken in the
coop----”

“That is to say there was one, Monsieur le Marquis.”

The old housekeeper, who suddenly reappeared, explained her master’s
response. She seemed overwhelmed with despair.

“Blessed Virgin! Monsieur, what shall I do?” she clamored. “The chicken
has disappeared. Someone has certainly stolen it, for the coop is
securely closed!”

“Do not accuse your neighbor hastily,” interrupted the cure; “no one has
stolen it from us. Bertrande was here this morning to ask alms in the
name of her sick daughter. I had no money, and I gave her this fowl that
she might make a good bouillon for the sick girl.”

This explanation changed Bibiaine’s consternation to fury.

Planting herself in the centre of the room, one hand upon her hip, and
gesticulating wildly with the other, she exclaimed, pointing to her
master:

“That is just the sort of man he is; he has less sense than a baby! Any
miserable peasant who meets him can make him believe anything he wishes.
Any great falsehood brings tears to his eyes, and then they can do what
they like with him. In that way they take the very shoes off his feet
and the bread from his mouth. Bertrande’s daughter, messieurs, is no
more ill than you or I!”

“Enough,” said the priest, sternly, “enough.” Then, knowing by
experience that his voice had not the power to check her flood of
reproaches, he took her by the arm and led her out into the passage.

M. de Sairmeuse and his son exchanged a glance of consternation.

Was this a comedy that had been prepared for their benefit? Evidently
not, since their arrival had not been expected.

But the priest, whose character had been so plainly revealed by this
quarrel with his domestic, was not a man to their taste.

At least, he was evidently not the man they had hoped to find--not the
auxiliary whose assistance was indispensable to the success of their
plans.

Yet they did not exchange a word; they listened.

They heard the sound as of a discussion in the passage. The master spoke
in low tones, but with an unmistakable accent of command; the servant
uttered an astonished exclamation.

But the listeners could not distinguish a word.

Soon the priest re-entered the apartment.

“I hope, gentlemen,” he said, with a dignity that could not fail to
check any attempt at raillery, “that you will excuse this ridiculous
scene. The cure of Sairmeuse, thank God! is not so poor as she says.”

Neither the duke nor Martial made any response.

Even their remarkable assurance was very sensibly diminished; and M. de
Sairmeuse deemed it advisable to change the subject.

This he did, by relating the events which he had just witnessed in
Paris, and by insisting that His Majesty, Louis XVIII., had been
welcomed with enthusiasm and transports of affection.

Fortunately, the old housekeeper interrupted this recital.

She entered, loaded with china, silver, and bottles, and behind her came
a large man in a white apron, bearing three or four covered dishes in
his hands.

It was the order to go and obtain this repast from the village inn which
had drawn from Bibiaine so many exclamations of wonder and dismay in the
passage.

A moment later the cure and his guests took their places at the table.

Had the much-lamented chicken constituted the dinner the rations would
have been “short.” This the worthy woman was obliged to confess, on
seeing the terrible appetite evinced by M. de Sairmeuse and his son.

“One would have sworn that they had eaten nothing for a fortnight,” she
told her friends, the next day.

Abbe Midon was not hungry, though it was two o’clock, and he had eaten
nothing since the previous evening.

The sudden arrival of the former masters of Sairmeuse filled his
heart with gloomy forebodings. Their coming, he believed, presaged the
greatest misfortunes.

So while he played with his knife and fork, pretending to eat, he was
really occupied in watching his guests, and in studying them with
all the penetration of a priest, which, by the way, is generally far
superior to that of a physician or of a magistrate.

The Duc de Sairmeuse was fifty-seven, but looked considerably younger.

The storms of his youth, the dissipation of his riper years, the great
excesses of every kind in which he had indulged, had not impaired his
iron constitution in the least.

Of herculean build, he was extremely proud of his strength, and of his
hands, which were well-formed, but large, firmly knit and powerful, such
hands as rightly belonged to a gentleman whose ancestors had given many
a crushing blow with ponderous battle-axe in the crusades.

His face revealed his character. He possessed all the graces and all the
vices of a courtier.

He was, at the same time _spirituel_ and ignorant, sceptical and
violently imbued with the prejudices of his class.

Though less robust than his father, Martial was a no less
distinguished-looking cavalier. It was not strange that women raved over
his blue eyes, and the beautiful blond hair which he inherited from his
mother.

To his father he owed energy, courage, and, it must also be added,
perversity. But he was his superior in education and in intellect. If he
shared his father’s prejudices, he had not adopted them without weighing
them carefully. What the father might do in a moment of excitement, the
son was capable of doing in cold blood.

It was thus that the abbe, with rare sagacity, read the character of his
guests.

So it was with great sorrow, but without surprise, that he heard the
duke advance, on the questions of the day, the impossible ideas shared
by nearly all the _emigres_.

Knowing the condition of the country, and the state of public opinion,
the cure endeavored to convince the obstinate man of his mistake; but
upon this subject the duke would not permit contradiction, or even
raillery; and he was fast losing his temper, when Bibiaine appeared at
the parlor door.

“Monsieur le Duc,” said she, “Monsieur Lacheneur and his daughter are
without and desire to speak to you.”



CHAPTER IV.

This name Lacheneur awakened no recollection in the mind of the duke.

First, he had never lived at Sairmeuse.

And even if he had, what courtier of the _ancien regime_ ever troubled
himself about the individual names of the peasants, whom he regarded
with such profound indifference.

When a _grand seigneur_ addressed these people, he said: “Halloo! hi,
there! friend, my worthy fellow!”

So it was with the air of a man who is making an effort of memory that
the Duc de Sairmeuse repeated:

“Lacheneur--Monsieur Lacheneur----”

But Martial, a closer observer than his father, had noticed that the
priest’s glance wavered at the sound of this name.

“Who is this person, Abbe?” demanded the duke, lightly.

“Monsieur Lacheneur,” replied the priest, with very evident hesitation,
“is the present owner of the Chateau de Sairmeuse.”

Martial, the precocious diplomat, could not repress a smile on hearing
this response, which he had foreseen. But the duke bounded from his
chair.

“Ah!” he exclaimed, “it is the rascal who has had the impudence--Let him
come in, old woman, let him come in.”

Bibiaine retired, and the priest’s uneasiness increased.

“Permit me, Monsieur le Duc,” he said, hastily, “to remark that Monsieur
Lacheneur exercises a great influence in this region--to offend him
would be impolitic----”

“I understand--you advise me to be conciliatory. Such sentiments are
purely Jacobin. If His Majesty listens to the advice of such as you,
all these sales of confiscated estates will be ratified. Zounds! our
interests are the same. If the Revolution has deprived the nobility of
their property, it has also impoverished the clergy.”

“The possessions of a priest are not of this world, Monsieur,” said the
cure, coldly.

M. de Sairmeuse was about to make some impertinent response, when M.
Lacheneur appeared, followed by his daughter.

The wretched man was ghastly pale, great drops of perspiration stood out
upon his temples, his restless, haggard eyes revealed his distress of
mind.

Marie-Anne was as pale as her father, but her attitude and the light
that burned in her eyes told of invincible energy and determination.

“Ah, well! friend,” said the duke, “so we are the owner of Sairmeuse, it
seems.”

This was said with such a careless insolence of manner that the cure
blushed that they should thus treat, in his own house, a man whom he
considered his equal.

He rose and offered the visitors chairs.

“Will you take a seat, dear Monsieur Lacheneur?” said he, with
a politeness intended as a lesson for the duke; “and you, also,
Mademoiselle, do me the honor----”

But the father and the daughter both refused the proffered civility with
a motion of the head.

“Monsieur le Duc,” continued Lacheneur, “I am an old servant of your
house----”

“Ah! indeed!”

“Mademoiselle Armande, your aunt, accorded my poor mother the honor of
acting as my godmother----”

“Ah, yes,” interrupted the duke. “I remember you now. Our family
has shown great goodness to you and yours. And it was to prove your
gratitude, probably, that you made haste to purchase our estate!”

The former ploughboy was of humble origin, but his heart and his
character had developed with his fortunes; he understood his own worth.

Much as he was disliked, and even detested, by his neighbors, everyone
respected him.

And here was a man who treated him with undisguised scorn. Why? By what
right?

Indignant at the outrage, he made a movement as if to retire.

No one, save his daughter, knew the truth; he had only to keep silence
and Sairmeuse remained his.

Yes, he had still the power to keep Sairmeuse, and he knew it, for
he did not share the fears of the ignorant rustics. He was too well
informed not to be able to distinguish between the hopes of the
_emigres_ and the possible. He knew that an abyss separated the dream
from the reality.

A beseeching word uttered in a low tone by his daughter, made him turn
again to the duke.

“If I purchased Sairmeuse,” he answered, in a voice husky with emotion,
“it was in obedience to the command of your dying aunt, and with the
money which she gave me for that purpose. If you see me here, it is only
because I come to restore to you the deposit confided to my keeping.”

Anyone not belonging to that class of spoiled fools which surround a
throne would have been deeply touched.

But the duke thought this grand act of honesty and of generosity the
most simple and natural thing in the world.

“That is very well, so far as the principal is concerned,” said he. “Let
us speak now of the interest. Sairmeuse, if I remember rightly, yielded
an average income of one thousand louis per year. These revenues, well
invested, should have amounted to a very considerable amount. Where is
this?”

This claim, thus advanced and at such a moment, was so outrageous, that
Martial, disgusted, made a sign to his father, which the latter did not
see.

But the cure hoping to recall the extortioner to something like a sense
of shame, exclaimed:

“Monsieur le Duc! Oh, Monsieur le Duc!”

Lacheneur shrugged his shoulders with an air of resignation.

“The income I have used for my own living expenses, and in educating
my children; but most of it has been expended in improving the estate,
which today yields an income twice as large as in former years.”

“That is to say, for twenty years, Monsieur Lacheneur has played the
part of lord of the manor. A delightful comedy. You are rich now, I
suppose.”

“I possess nothing. But I hope you will allow me to take ten thousand
francs, which your aunt gave to me.”

“Ah! she gave you ten thousand francs? And when?”

“On the same evening that she gave me the eighty thousand francs
intended for the purchase of the estate.”

“Perfect! What proof can you furnish that she gave you this sum?”

Lacheneur stood motionless and speechless. He tried to reply, but
he could not. If he opened his lips it would only be to pour forth a
torrent of menaces, insults, and invectives.

Marie-Anne stepped quickly forward.

“The proof, Monsieur,” said she, in a clear, ringing voice, “is the word
of this man, who, of his own free will, comes to return to you--to give
you a fortune.”

As she sprang forward her beautiful dark hair escaped from its
confinement, the rich blood crimsoned her cheeks, her dark eyes flashed
brilliantly, and sorrow, anger, horror at the humiliation, imparted a
sublime expression to her face.

She was so beautiful that Martial regarded her with wonder.

“Lovely!” he murmured, in English; “beautiful as an angel!”

These words, which she understood, abashed Marie-Anne. But she had said
enough; her father felt that he was avenged.

He drew from his pocket a roll of papers, and throwing them upon the
table: “Here are your titles,” he said, addressing the duke in a tone
full of implacable hatred. “Keep the legacy that your aunt gave me,
I wish nothing of yours. I shall never set foot in Sairmeuse again.
Penniless I entered it, penniless I will leave it!”

He quitted the room with head proudly erect, and when they were outside,
he said but one word to his daughter:

“Well!”

“You have done your duty,” she replied; “it is those who have not done
it, who are to be pitied!”

She had no opportunity to say more. Martial came running after them,
anxious for another chance of seeing this young girl whose beauty had
made such an impression upon him.

“I hastened after you,” he said, addressing Marie-Anne, rather than M.
Lacheneur, “to reassure you. All this will be arranged, Mademoiselle.
Eyes so beautiful as yours should never know tears. I will be your
advocate with my father--”

“Mademoiselle Lacheneur has no need of an advocate!” a harsh voice
interrupted.

Martial turned, and saw the young man, who, that morning, went to warn
M. Lacheneur of the duke’s arrival.

“I am the Marquis de Sairmeuse,” he said, insolently.

“And I,” said the other, quietly, “am Maurice d’Escorval.”

They surveyed each other for a moment; each expecting, perhaps, an
insult from the other. Instinctively, they felt that they were to
be enemies; and the bitterest animosity spoke in the glances they
exchanged. Perhaps they felt a presentiment that they were to be
champions of two different principles, as well as rivals.

Martial, remembering his father, yielded.

“We shall meet again, Monsieur d’Escorval,” he said, as he retired. At
this threat, Maurice shrugged his shoulders, and said:

“You had better not desire it.”



CHAPTER V

The abode of the Baron d’Escorval, that brick structure with stone
trimmings which was visible from the superb avenue leading to Sairmeuse,
was small and unpretentious.

Its chief attraction was a pretty lawn that extended to the banks of the
Oiselle, and a small but beautifully shaded park.

It was known as the Chateau d’Escorval, but that appellation was gross
flattery. Any petty manufacturer who had amassed a small fortune would
have desired a larger, handsomer, and more imposing establishment.

M. d’Escorval--and it will be an eternal honor to him in history--was
not rich.

Although he had been intrusted with several of those missions from which
generals and diplomats often return laden with millions, M. d’Escorval’s
worldly possessions consisted only of the little patrimony bequeathed
him by his father: a property which yielded an income of from twenty to
twenty-five thousand francs a year.

This modest dwelling, situated about a mile from Sairmeuse, represented
the savings of ten years.

He had built it in 1806, from a plan drawn by his own hand; and it was
the dearest spot on earth to him.

He always hastened to this retreat when his work allowed him a few days
of rest.

But this time he had not come to Escorval of his own free will.

He had been compelled to leave Paris by the proscribed list of the 24th
of July--that fatal list which summoned the enthusiastic Labedoyere and
the honest and virtuous Drouot before a court-martial.

And even in this solitude, M. d’Escorval’s situation was not without
danger.

He was one of those who, some days before the disaster of Waterloo, had
strongly urged the Emperor to order the execution of Fouche, the former
minister of police.

Now, Fouche knew this counsel; and he was powerful.

“Take care!” M. d’Escorval’s friends wrote him from Paris.

But he put his trust in Providence, and faced the future, threatening
though it was, with the unalterable serenity of a pure conscience.

The baron was still young; he was not yet fifty, but anxiety, work, and
long nights passed in struggling with the most arduous difficulties of
the imperial policy, had made him old before his time.

He was tall, slightly inclined to _embonpoint_, and stooped a little.

His calm eyes, his serious mouth, his broad, furrowed forehead, and his
austere manners inspired respect.

“He must be stern and inflexible,” said those who saw him for the first
time.

But they were mistaken.

If, in the exercise of his official duties, this truly great man had the
strength to resist all temptations to swerve from the path of right; if,
when duty was at stake, he was as rigid as iron, in private life he
was as unassuming as a child, and kind and gentle even to the verge of
weakness.

To this nobility of character he owed his domestic happiness, that rare
and precious happiness which fills one’s existence with a celestial
perfume.

During the bloodiest epoch of the Reign of Terror, M. d’Escorval had
wrested from the guillotine a young girl named Victoire-Laure d’Alleu, a
distant cousin of the Rhetaus of Commarin, as beautiful as an angel, and
only three years younger than himself.

He loved her--and though she was an orphan, destitute of fortune, he
married her, considering the treasure of her virgin heart of far greater
value than the most magnificent dowry.

She was an honest woman, as her husband was an honest man, in the most
strict and vigorous sense of the word.

She was seldom seen at the Tuileries, where M. d’Escorval’s worth made
him eagerly welcomed. The splendors of the Imperial Court, which at
that time surpassed all the pomp of the time of Louis XIV., had no
attractions for her.

Grace, beauty, youth and accomplishments--she reserved them all for the
adornment of her home.

Her husband was her God. She lived in him and through him. She had not a
thought which did not belong to him.

The short time that he could spare from his arduous labors to devote to
her were her happiest hours.

And when, in the evening, they sat beside the fire in their modest
drawing-room, with their son Maurice playing on the rug at their feet,
it seemed to them that they had nothing to wish for here below.

The overthrow of the empire surprised them in the heydey of their
happiness.

Surprised them? No. For a long time M. d’Escorval had seen the
prodigious edifice erected by the genius whom he had made his idol
totter as if about to fall.

Certainly, he felt intense chagrin at this fall, but he was heart-broken
at the sight of all the treason and cowardice which followed it. He was
indignant and horrified at the rising _en masse_ of the avaricious, who
hastened to gorge themselves with the spoil.

Under these circumstances, exile from Paris seemed an actual blessing.

“Besides,” as he remarked to the baroness, “we shall soon be forgotten
here.”

But even while he said this he felt many misgivings. Still, by his side,
his noble wife presented a tranquil face, even while she trembled for
the safety of her adored husband.

On this first Sunday in August, M. d’Escorval and his wife had been
unusually sad. A vague presentiment of approaching misfortune weighed
heavily upon their hearts.

At the same hour that Lacheneur presented himself at the house of the
Abbe Midon, they were seated upon the terrace in front of the house,
gazing anxiously at the two roads leading from Escorval to the chateau,
and to the village of Sairmeuse.

Warned, that same morning, by his friends in Montaignac of the arrival
of the duke, the baron had sent his son to inform M. Lacheneur.

He had requested him to be absent as short a time as possible; but
in spite of this fact, the hours were rolling by, and Maurice had not
returned.

“What if something has happened to him!” both father and mother were
thinking.

No; nothing had happened to him. Only a word from Mlle. Lacheneur had
sufficed to make him forget his usual deference to his father’s wishes.

“This evening,” she had said, “I shall certainly know your heart.”

What could this mean? Could she doubt him?

Tortured by the most cruel anxieties, the poor youth could not resolve
to go away without an explanation, and he hung around the chateau hoping
that Marie-Anne would reappear.

She did reappear at last, but leaning upon the arm of her father.

Young d’Escorval followed them at a distance, and soon saw them enter
the parsonage. What were they going to do there? He knew that the duke
and his son were within.

The time that they remained there, and which he passed in the public
square, seemed more than a century long.

They emerged at last, however, and he was about to join them when he was
prevented by the appearance of Martial, whose promises he overheard.

Maurice knew nothing of life; he was as innocent as a child, but he
could not mistake the intentions that dictated this step on the part of
the Marquis de Sairmeuse.

At the thought that a libertine’s caprice should dare rest for an
instant upon the pure and beautiful girl whom he loved with all the
strength of his being--whom he had sworn should be his wife--all his
blood mounted madly to his brain.

He felt a wild longing to chastise the insolent wretch.

Fortunately--unfortunately, perhaps--his hand was arrested by the
recollection of a phrase which he had heard his father repeat a thousand
times:

“Calmness and irony are the only weapons worthy of the strong.”

And he possessed sufficient strength of will to appear calm, while, in
reality, he was beside himself with passion. It was Martial who lost his
self-control, and who threatened him.

“Ah! yes, I will find you again, upstart!” repeated Maurice, through his
set teeth as he watched his enemy move away.

For Martial had turned and discovered that Marie-Anne and her father had
left him. He saw them standing about a hundred paces from him. Although
he was surprised at their indifference, he made haste to join them, and
addressed M. Lacheneur.

“We are just going to your father’s house,” was the response he
received, in an almost ferocious tone.

A glance from Marie-Anne commanded silence. He obeyed, and walked a
few steps behind them, with his head bowed upon his breast, terribly
anxious, and seeking vainly to explain what had passed.

His attitude betrayed such intense sorrow that his mother divined it as
soon as she caught sight of him.

All the anguish which this courageous woman had hidden for a month,
found utterance in a single cry.

“Ah! here is misfortune!” said she, “we shall not escape it.”

It was, indeed, misfortune. One could not doubt it when one saw M.
Lacheneur enter the drawing-room.

He advanced with the heavy, uncertain step of a drunken man, his eye
void of expression, his features distorted, his lips pale and trembling.

“What has happened?” asked the baron, eagerly.

But the other did not seem to hear him.

“Ah! I warned her,” he murmured, continuing a monologue which had begun
before he entered the room. “I told my daughter so.”

Mme. d’Escorval, after kissing Marie-Anne, drew the girl toward her.

“What has happened? For God’s sake, tell me what has happened!” she
exclaimed.

With a gesture expressive of the most sorrowful resignation, the girl
motioned her to look and to listen to M. Lacheneur.

He had recovered from that stupor--that gift of God--which follows
cries that are too terrible for human endurance. Like a sleeper who, on
waking, finds his miseries forgotten during his slumber, lying in wait
for him, he regained with consciousness the capacity to suffer.

“It is only this, Monsieur le Baron,” replied the unfortunate man in a
harsh, unnatural voice: “I rose this morning the richest proprietor
in the country, and I shall lay down to-night poorer than the
poorest beggar in this commune. I had everything; I no longer have
anything--nothing but my two hands. They earned me my bread for
twenty-five years; they will earn it for me now until the day of my
death. I had a beautiful dream; it is ended.”

Before this outburst of despair, M. d’Escorval turned pale.

“You must exaggerate your misfortune,” he faltered; “explain what has
happened.”

Unconscious of what he was doing, M. Lacheneur threw his hat upon a
chair, and flinging back his long, gray hair, he said:

“To you I will tell all. I came here for that purpose. I know you; I
know your heart. And have you not done me the honor to call me your
friend?”

Then, with the cruel exactness of the living, breathing truth, he
related the scene which had just taken place at the presbytery.

The baron listened petrified with astonishment, almost doubting the
evidence of his own senses. Mme. d’Escorval’s indignant and sorrowful
exclamations showed that every noble sentiment in her soul revolted
against such injustice.

But there was one auditor, whom Marie-Anne alone observed, who was moved
to his very entrails by this recital. This auditor was Maurice.

Leaning against the door, pale as death, he tried most energetically,
but in vain, to repress the tears of rage and of sorrow which swelled up
in his eyes.

To insult Lacheneur was to insult Marie-Anne--that is to say, to injure,
to strike, to outrage him in all that he held most dear in the world.

Ah! it is certain that Martial, had he been within his reach, would have
paid dearly for these insults to the father of the girl Maurice loved.

But he swore that this chastisement was only deferred--that it should
surely come.

And it was not mere angry boasting. This young man, though so modest
and so gentle in manner, had a heart that was inaccessible to fear. His
beautiful, dark eyes, which had the trembling timidity of the eyes of a
young girl, met the gaze of an enemy without flinching.

When M. Lacheneur had repeated the last words which he had addressed to
the Duc de Sairmeuse, M. d’Escorval offered him his hand.

“I have told you already that I was your friend,” he said, in a voice
faltering with emotion; “but I must tell you to-day that I am proud of
having such a friend as you.”

The unfortunate man trembled at the touch of that loyal hand which
clasped his so warmly, and his face betrayed an ineffable satisfaction.

“If my father had not returned it,” murmured the obstinate Marie-Anne,
“my father would have been an unfaithful guardian--a thief. He has done
only his duty.”

M. d’Escorval turned to the young girl, a little surprised.

“You speak the truth, Mademoiselle,” he said, reproachfully; “but when
you are as old as I am, and have had my experience, you will know that
the accomplishment of a duty is, under certain circumstances, a heroism
of which few persons are capable.”

M. Lacheneur turned to his friend.

“Ah! your words do me good, Monsieur,” said he. “Now, I am content with
what I have done.”

The baroness rose, too much the woman to know how to resist the generous
dictates of her heart.

“And I, also, Monsieur Lacheneur,” she said, “desire to press your hand.
I wish to tell you that I esteem you as much as I despise the ingrates
who have sought to humiliate you, when they should have fallen at your
feet. They are heartless monsters, the like of whom certainly cannot be
found upon the earth.”

“Alas!” sighed the baron, “the allies have brought back others who, like
these men, think the world created exclusively for their benefit.”

“And these people wish to be our masters,” growled Lacheneur.

By some strange fatality no one chanced to hear the remark made by M.
Lacheneur. Had they overheard and questioned him, he would probably have
disclosed some of the projects which were as yet in embryo in his own
mind; and in that case what disastrous consequences might have been
averted.

M. d’Escorval had regained his usual coolness.

“Now, my dear friend,” he inquired, “what course do you propose to
pursue with these members of the Sairmeuse family?”

“They will hear nothing more from me--for some time, at least.”

“What! Shall you not claim the ten thousand francs that they owe you?”

“I shall ask them for nothing.”

“You will be compelled to do so. Since you have alluded to the legacy,
your own honor will demand that you insist upon its payment by all legal
methods. There are still judges in France.”

M. Lacheneur shook his head.

“The judges will not accord me the justice I desire. I shall not apply
to them.”

“But----”

“No, Monsieur, no. I wish to have nothing to do with these men. I
shall not even go to the chateau to remove my clothing nor that of my
daughter. If they send it to us--very well. If it pleases them to keep
it, so much the better. The more shameful, infamous and odious their
conduct appears, the better I shall be satisfied.”

The baron made no reply; but his wife spoke, believing she had a sure
means of conquering this incomprehensible obstinacy.

“I should understand your determination if you were alone in the world,”
 said she, “but you have children.”

“My son is eighteen, Madame; he possesses good health and an excellent
education. He can make his own way in Paris, if he chooses to remain
there.”

“But your daughter?”

“Marie-Anne will remain with me.”

M. d’Escorval thought it his duty to interfere.

“Take care, my dear friend, that your grief does not overthrow your
reason,” said he. “Reflect! What will become of you--your daughter and
yourself?”

The wretched man smiled sadly.

“Oh,” he replied, “we are not as destitute as I said. I exaggerated our
misfortune. We are still landed proprietors. Last year an old cousin,
whom I could never induce to come and live at Sairmeuse, died,
bequeathing all her property to Marie-Anne. This property consisted of a
poor little cottage near the Reche, with a little garden and a few acres
of sterile land. In compliance with my daughter’s entreaties, I repaired
the cottage, and sent there a few articles of furniture--a table, some
chairs, and a couple of beds. My daughter designed it as a home for old
Father Guvat and his wife. And I, surrounded by wealth and luxury, said
to myself: ‘How comfortable those two old people will be there.
They will live as snug as a bug in a rug!’ Well, what I thought so
comfortable for others, will be good enough for me. I will raise
vegetables, and Marie-Anne shall sell them.”

Was he speaking seriously?

Maurice must have supposed so, for he sprang forward.

“This shall not be, Monsieur Lacheneur!” he exclaimed.

“Oh----”

“No, this shall not be, for I love Marie-Anne, and I ask you to give her
to me for my wife.”



CHAPTER VI

Maurice and Marie-Anne had loved each other for many years.

As children, they had played together in the magnificent grounds
surrounding the Chateau de Sairmeuse, and in the park at Escorval.

Together they chased the brilliant butterflies, searched for pebbles
on the banks of the river, or rolled in the hay while their mothers
sauntered through the meadows bordering the Oiselle.

For their mothers were friends.

Mme. Lacheneur had been reared like other poor peasant girls; that is
to say, on the day of her marriage it was only with great difficulty she
succeeded in inscribing her name upon the register.

But from the example of her husband she had learned that prosperity, as
well as _noblesse_, entails certain obligations upon one, and with rare
courage, crowned with still rarer success, she had undertaken to acquire
an education in keeping with her fortune and her new rank.

And the baroness had made no effort to resist the sympathy that
attracted her to this meritorious young woman, in whom she had discerned
a really superior mind and a truly refined nature.

When Mme. Lacheneur died, Mme. d’Escorval mourned for her as she would
have mourned for a favorite sister.

From that moment Maurice’s attachment assumed a more serious character.

Educated in a Parisian lyceum, his teachers sometimes had occasion to
complain of his want of application.

“If your professors are not satisfied with you,” said his mother, “you
shall not accompany me to Escorval on the coming of your vacation, and
you will not see your little friend.”

And this simple threat was always sufficient to make the school-boy
resume his studies with redoubled diligence.

So each year, as it passed, strengthened the _grande passion_ which
preserved Maurice from the restlessness and the errors of adolescence.

The two children were equally timid and artless, and equally infatuated
with each other.

Long walks in the twilight under the eyes of their parents, a glance
that revealed their delight at meeting each other, flowers exchanged
between them--which were religiously preserved--such were their simple
pleasures.

But that magical and sublime word, love--so sweet to utter, and so sweet
to hear--had never once dropped from their lips.

The audacity of Maurice had never gone beyond a furtive pressure of the
hand.

The parents could not be ignorant of this mutual affection; and if they
pretended to shut their eyes, it was only because it did not displease
them nor disturb their plans.

M. and Mme. d’Escorval saw no objection to their son’s marriage with a
young girl whose nobility of character they appreciated, and who was as
beautiful as she was good. That she was the richest heiress in all the
country round about was naturally no objection.

So far as M. Lacheneur was concerned, he was delighted at the prospect
of a marriage which would ally him, a former ploughboy, with an old
family whose head was universally respected.

So, although no direct allusion to the subject had ever escaped the lips
of the baron or of M. Lacheneur, there was a tacit agreement between the
two families.

Yes, the marriage was considered a foregone conclusion.

And yet this impetuous and unexpected declaration by Maurice struck
everyone dumb.

In spite of his agitation, the young man perceived the effect produced
by his words, and frightened by his own boldness, he turned and looked
questioningly at his father.

The baron’s face was grave, even sad; but his attitude expressed no
displeasure.

This gave renewed courage to the anxious lover.

“You will excuse me, Monsieur,” he said, addressing Lacheneur, “for
presenting my request in such a manner, and at such a time. But surely,
when fate glowers ominously upon you, that is the time when your friends
should declare themselves--and deem themselves fortunate if their
devotion can make you forget the infamous treatment to which you have
been subjected.”

As he spoke, he was watching Marie-Anne.

Blushing and embarrassed, she turned away her head, perhaps to conceal
the tears which inundated her face--tears of joy and of gratitude.

The love of the man she adored came forth victorious from a test which
it would not be prudent for many heiresses to impose.

Now she could truly say that she knew Maurice’s heart.

He, however, continued:

“I have not consulted my father, sir; but I know his affection for me
and his esteem for you. When the happiness of my life is at stake, he
will not oppose me. He, who married my dear mother without a dowry, must
understand my feelings.”

He was silent, awaiting the verdict.

“I approve your course, my son,” said M. d’Escorval, deeply affected;
“you have conducted yourself like an honorable man. Certainly you
are very young to become the head of a family; but, as you say,
circumstances demand it.”

He turned to M. Lacheneur, and added:

“My dear friend, I, in my son’s behalf, ask the hand of your daughter in
marriage.”

Maurice had not expected so little opposition.

In his delight he was almost tempted to bless the hateful Duc de
Sairmeuse, to whom he would owe his approaching happiness.

He sprang toward his father, and seizing his hands, he raised them to
his lips, faltering:

“Thanks! you are so good! I love you! Oh, how happy I am!”

Alas! the poor boy was in too much haste to rejoice.

A gleam of pride flashed in M. Lacheneur’s eyes; but his face soon
resumed its gloomy expression.

“Believe me, Monsieur le Baron, I am deeply touched by your grandeur of
soul--yes, deeply touched. You wish to make me forget my humiliation;
but, for this very reason, I should be the most contemptible of men if I
did not refuse the great honor you desire to confer upon my daughter.”

“What!” exclaimed the baron, in utter astonishment; “you refuse?”

“I am compelled to do so.”

Thunderstruck at first, Maurice afterward renewed the attack with an
energy which no one had ever suspected in his character before.

“Do you, then, wish to ruin my life, Monsieur?” he exclaimed; “to ruin
_our_ life; for if I love Marie-Anne, she also loves me.”

It was easy to see that he spoke the truth. The unhappy girl, crimson
with happy blushes the moment before, had suddenly become whiter than
marble, as she looked imploringly at her father.

“It cannot be,” repeated M. Lacheneur; “and the day will come when you
will bless the decision I make known at this moment.”

Alarmed by her son’s evident agony, Mme. d’Escorval interposed:

“You must have reasons for this refusal.”

“None that I can disclose, Madame. But never while I live shall my
daughter be your son’s wife!”

“Ah! it will kill my child!” exclaimed the baroness.

M. Lacheneur shook his head.

“Monsieur Maurice,” said he, “is young; he will console himself--he will
forget.”

“Never!” interrupted the unhappy lover--“never!”

“And your daughter?” inquired the baroness.

Ah! this was the weak spot in his armor; the instinct of a mother was
not mistaken. M. Lacheneur hesitated a moment; but he finally conquered
the weakness that had threatened to master him.

“Marie-Anne,” he replied, slowly, “knows her duty too well not to obey
when I command. When I tell her the motive that governs my conduct, she
will become resigned; and if she suffers, she will know how to conceal
her sufferings.”

He paused suddenly. They heard in the distance a firing of musketry, the
discharge of rifles, whose sharp ring overpowered even the sullen roar
of cannon.

Every face grew pale. Circumstances imparted to these sounds an ominous
significance.

With the same anguish clutching the hearts of both, M. d’Escorval and
Lacheneur sprang out upon the terrace.

But all was still again. Extended as was the horizon, the eye could
discern nothing unusual. The sky was blue; not a particle of smoke hung
over the trees.

“It is the enemy,” muttered M. Lacheneur, in a tone which told how
gladly he would have shouldered his gun, and, with five hundred others,
marched against the united allies.

He paused. The explosions were repeated with still greater violence, and
for a period of five minutes succeeded each other without cessation.

M. d’Escorval listened with knitted brows.

“That is not the fire of an engagement,” he murmured.

To remain long in such a state of uncertainty was out of the question.

“If you will permit me, father,” ventured Maurice, “I will go and
ascertain----”

“_Go_,” replied the baron, quietly; “but if it is anything, which I
doubt, do not expose yourself to danger; return.”

“Oh! be prudent!” insisted Mme. d’Escorval, who already saw her son
exposed to the most frightful peril.

“Be prudent!” entreated Marie-Anne, who alone understood what
attractions danger might have for a despairing and unhappy man.

These precautions were unnecessary. As Maurice was rushing to the door,
his father stopped him.

“Wait,” said he; “here is someone who can probably give us information.”

A man had just appeared around a turn of the road leading to Sairmeuse.

He was advancing bareheaded in the middle of the dusty road, with
hurried strides, and occasionally brandishing his stick, as if
threatening an enemy visible to himself alone.

Soon they were able to distinguish his features.

“It is Chanlouineau!” exclaimed M. Lacheneur.

“The owner of the vineyards on the Borderie?”

“The same! The handsomest young farmer in the country, and the best
also. Ah! he has good blood in his veins; we may well be proud of him.”

“Ask him to stop,” said M. d’Escorval.

Lacheneur leaned over the balustrade, and, forming a trumpet out of his
two hands, he called:

“Oh! Chanlouineau!”

The robust young farmer raised his head.

“Come up,” shouted Lacheneur; “the baron wishes to speak with you.”

Chanlouineau responded by a gesture of assent. They saw him enter
the gate, cross the garden, and at last appear at the door of the
drawing-room.

His features were distorted with fury, his disordered clothing gave
evidence of a serious conflict. His cravat was gone, and his torn
shirt-collar revealed his muscular throat.

“Where is this fighting?” demanded Lacheneur eagerly; “and with whom?”

Chanlouineau gave a nervous laugh which resembled a roar of rage.

“They are not fighting,” he replied; “they are amusing themselves. This
firing which you hear is in honor of Monsieur le Duc de Sairmeuse.”

“Impossible!”

“I know it very well; and yet, what I have told you is the truth. It is
the work of that miserable wretch and thief, Chupin. Ah, _canaille_! If
I ever find him within reach of my arm he will never steal again.”

M. Lacheneur was confounded.

“Tell us what has happened,” he said, excitedly.

“Oh, it is as clear as daylight. When the duke arrived at Sairmeuse,
Chupin, the old scoundrel, with his two rascally boys, and that old hag,
his wife, ran after the carriage like beggars after a diligence,
crying, ‘Vive Monsieur le Duc!’ The duke was enchanted, for he doubtless
expected a volley of stones, and he placed a six-franc piece in the hand
of each of the wretches. This money gave Chupin an appetite for more,
so he took it into his head to give this old noble a reception like that
which was given to the Emperor. Having learned through Bibiaine, whose
tongue is as long as a viper’s, all that has passed at the presbytery,
between you, Monsieur Lacheneur, and the duke, he came and proclaimed it
in the market-place. When they heard it, all who had purchased national
lands were frightened. Chupin had counted on this, and soon he began
telling the poor fools that they must burn powder under the duke’s nose
if they wished him to confirm their titles to their property.”

“And did they believe him?”

“Implicitly. It did not take them long to make their preparations. They
went to the town hall and took the firemen’s rifles, and the guns used
for firing a salute on fete days; the mayor gave them the powder, and
you heard----

“When I left Sairmeuse there were more than two hundred idiots before
the presbytery, shouting:

“_Vive Monseigneur! Vive le Duc de Sairmeuse_!”

It was as d’Escorval had thought.

“The same pitiful farce that was played in Paris, only on a smaller
scale,” he murmured. “Avarice and human cowardice are the same the world
over!”

Meanwhile, Chanlouineau was going on with his recital.

“To make the fete complete, the devil must have warned all the nobility
in the neighborhood, for they all came running. They say that Monsieur
de Sairmeuse is a favorite with the King, and that he can get anything
he wishes. So you can imagine how they all greeted him! I am only a poor
peasant, but never would I lie down in the dust before any man as these
old nobles who are so haughty with us, did before the duke. They kissed
his hands, and he allowed them to do it. He walked about the square with
the Marquis de Courtornieu----”

“And his son?” interrupted Maurice.

“The Marquis Martial, is it not? He is also walking before the church
with Mademoiselle Blanche de Courtornieu upon his arm. Ah! I do not
understand how people can call her pretty--a little bit of a thing,
so blond that one might suppose her hair was gray. Ah! how those two
laughed and made fun of the peasants. They say they are going to marry
each other. And even this evening there is to be a banquet at the
Chateau de Courtornieu in honor of the duke.”

He had told all he knew. He paused.

“You have forgotten only one thing,” said M. Lacheneur; “that is,
to tell us how your clothing happened to be torn, as if you had been
fighting.”

The young farmer hesitated for a moment, then replied, somewhat
brusquely:

“I can tell you, all the same. While Chupin was preaching, I also
preached, but not in the same strain. The scoundrel reported me. So, in
crossing the square, the duke paused before me and remarked: ‘So you are
an evil-disposed person?’ I said no, but that I knew my rights. Then he
took me by the coat and shook me, and told me that he would cure me,
and that he would take possession of _his_ vineyard again. _Saint Dieu_!
When I felt the old rascal’s hand upon me my blood boiled. I pinioned
him. Fortunately, six or seven men fell upon me, and compelled me to let
him go. But he had better make up his mind not to come prowling around
my vineyard!”

He clinched his hands, his eyes blazed ominously, his whole person
breathed an intense desire for vengeance.

And M. d’Escorval was silent, fearing to aggravate this hatred,
so imprudently kindled, and whose explosion, he believed, would be
terrible.

M. Lacheneur had risen from his chair.

“I must go and take possession of my cottage,” he remarked to
Chanlouineau; “you will accompany me; I have a proposition to make to
you.”

M. and Mme. d’Escorval endeavored to detain him, but he would not allow
himself to be persuaded, and he departed with his daughter.

But Maurice did not despair; Marie-Anne had promised to meet him the
following day in the pine-grove near the Reche.



CHAPTER VII

The demonstrations which had greeted the Duc de Sairmeuse had been
correctly reported by Chanlouineau.

Chupin had found the secret of kindling to a white heat the enthusiasm
of the cold and calculating peasants who were his neighbors.

He was a dangerous rascal, the old robber, shrewd and cautious; bold, as
those who possess nothing can afford to be; as patient as a savage; in
short, one of the most consummate scoundrels that ever existed.

The peasants feared him, and yet they had no conception of his real
character.

All his resources of mind had, until now, been expended in evading the
precipice of the rural code.

To save himself from falling into the hands of the gendarmes, and to
steal a few sacks of wheat, he had expended treasures of intrigue which
would have made the fortunes of twenty diplomats.

Circumstances, as he always said, had been against him.

So he desperately caught at the first and only opportunity worthy of his
talent, which had ever presented itself.

Of course, the wily rustic had said nothing of the true circumstances
which attended the restoration of Sairmeuse to its former owner.

From him, the peasants learned only the bare fact; and the news spread
rapidly from group to group.

“Monsieur Lacheneur has given up Sairmeuse,” said he. “Chateau, forests,
vineyards, fields--he surrenders everything.”

This was enough, and more than enough to terrify every land-owner in the
village.

If Lacheneur, this man who was so powerful in their eyes, considered the
danger so threatening that he deemed it necessary or advisable to make
a complete surrender, what was to become of them--poor devils--without
aid, without counsel, without defence?

They were told that the government was about to betray their interests;
that a decree was in process of preparation which would render their
title-deeds worthless. They could see no hope of salvation, except
through the duke’s generosity--that generosity which Chupin painted with
the glowing colors of the rainbow.

When one is not strong enough to weather the gale, one must bow like the
reed before it and rise again after the storm has passed; such was their
conclusion.

And they bowed. And their apparent enthusiasm was all the more
vociferous on account of the rage and fear that filled their hearts.

A close observer would have detected an undercurrent of anger and menace
in their shouts.

Each man also said to himself:

“What do we risk by crying, ‘Vive le Duc?’ Nothing; absolutely
nothing. If he is contented with that as a compensation for his lost
property--good! If he is not content, we shall have time afterward to
adopt other measures.”

So they shouted themselves hoarse.

And while the duke was sipping his coffee in the little drawing-room
of the presbytery, he expressed his lively satisfaction at the scene
without.

He, this _grand seigneur_ of times gone by, this man of absurd
prejudices and obstinate illusions; the unconquerable, and the
incorrigible--he took these acclamations, “truly spurious coin,” as
Chateaubriand says, for ready money.

“How you have deceived me, cure,” he was saying to Abbe Midon. “How
could you declare that your people were unfavorably disposed toward us?
One is compelled to believe that these evil intentions exist only in
your own mind and in your own heart.”

Abbe Midon was silent. What could he reply?

He could not understand this sudden revolution in public opinion--this
abrupt change from gloom and discontent to excessive gayety.

There is somebody at the bottom of all this, he thought.

It was not long before it became apparent who that somebody was.

Emboldened by his success without, Chupin ventured to present himself at
the presbytery.

He entered the drawing-room with his back rounded into a circle,
scraping and cringing, an obsequious smile upon his lips.

And through the half-open door one could discern, in the shadows of the
passage, the far from reassuring faces of his two sons.

He came as an ambassador, he declared, after an interminable litany of
protestations--he came to implore monseigneur to show himself upon the
public square.

“Ah, well--yes,” exclaimed the duke, rising; “yes, I will yield to the
wishes of these good people. Follow me, Marquis!”

As he appeared at the door of the presbytery, a loud shout rent the air;
the rifles were discharged, the guns belched forth their smoke and fire.
Never had Sairmeuse heard such a salvo of artillery. Three windows in
the Boeuf Couronne were shattered.

A veritable _grand seigneur_, the Duc de Sairmeuse knew how to preserve
an appearance of haughtiness and indifference. Any display of emotion
was, in his opinion, vulgar; but, in reality, he was delighted, charmed.

So delighted that he desired to reward his welcomers.

A glance over the deeds handed him by Lacheneur had shown him that
Sairmeuse had been restored to him intact.

The portions of the immense domain which had been detached and sold
separately were of relatively minor importance.

The duke thought it would be politic, and, at the same time,
inexpensive, to abandon all claim to these few acres, which were now
shared by forty or fifty peasants.

“My friends,” he exclaimed, in a loud voice, “I renounce, for myself and
for my descendants, all claim to the lands belonging to my house which
you have purchased. They are yours--I give them to you!”

By this absurd pretence of a gift, M. de Sairmeuse thought to add the
finishing touch to his popularity. A great mistake! It simply assured
the popularity of Chupin, the organizer of the farce.

And while the duke was promenading through the crowd with a proud and
self-satisfied air, the peasants were secretly laughing and jeering at
him.

And if they promptly took sides with him against Chanlouineau, it
was only because his gift was still fresh in their minds; except for
this----

But the duke had not time to think much about this encounter, which
produced a vivid impression upon his son.

One of his former companions in exile, the Marquis de Courtornieu, whom
he had informed of his arrival, hastened to welcome him, accompanied by
his daughter, Mlle. Blanche.

Martial could do no less than offer his arm to the daughter of his
father’s friend; and they took a leisurely promenade in the shade of
the lofty trees, while the duke renewed his acquaintance with all the
nobility of the neighborhood.

There was not a single nobleman who did not hasten to press the hand of
the Duc de Sairmeuse. First, he possessed, it was said, a property of
more than twenty millions in England. Then, he was the friend of the
King, and each neighbor had some favor to ask for himself, for his
relatives, or for his friends.

Poor king! He should have had entire France to divide like a cake
between these cormorants, whose voracious appetites it was impossible to
satisfy.

That evening, after a grand banquet at the Chateau de Courtornieu,
the duke slept in the Chateau de Sairmeuse, in the room which had been
occupied by Lacheneur, “like Louis XVIII.,” he laughingly said, “in the
chamber of Bonaparte.”

He was gay, chatty, and full of confidence in the future.

“Ah! it is good to be in one’s own house!” he remarked to his son again
and again.

But Martial responded only mechanically. His mind was occupied with
thoughts of two women who had made a profound impression upon his by
no means susceptible heart that day. He was thinking of those two young
girls, so utterly unlike. Blanche de Courtornieu--Marie-Anne Lacheneur.



CHAPTER VIII

Only those who, in the bright springtime of life, have loved, have been
loved in return, and have suddenly seen an impassable gulf open between
them and happiness, can realize Maurice d’Escorval’s disappointment.

All the dreams of his life, all his future plans, were based upon his
love for Marie-Anne.

If this love failed him, the enchanted castle which hope had erected
would crumble and fall, burying him in the ruins.

Without Marie-Anne he saw neither aim nor motive in his existence. Still
he did not suffer himself to be deluded by false hopes. Although at
first, his appointed meeting with Marie-Anne on the following day
seemed salvation itself, on reflection he was forced to admit that this
interview would change nothing, since everything depended upon the will
of another party--the will of M. Lacheneur.

The remainder of the day he passed in mournful silence. The dinner-hour
came; he took his seat at the table, but it was impossible for him
to swallow a morsel, and he soon requested his parents’ permission to
withdraw.

M. d’Escorval and the baroness exchanged a sorrowful glance, but did not
allow themselves to offer any comment.

They respected his grief. They knew that his was one of those sorrows
which are only aggravated by any attempt at consolation.

“Poor Maurice!” murmured Mme. d’Escorval, as soon as her son had left
the room. And, as her husband made no reply: “Perhaps,” she added,
hesitatingly, “perhaps it will not be prudent for us to leave him too
entirely to the dictates of his despair.”

The baron shuddered. He divined only too well the terrible apprehensions
of his wife.

“We have nothing to fear,” he replied, quickly; “I heard Marie-Anne
promise to meet Maurice to-morrow in the grove on the Reche.”

The anxious mother breathed more freely. Her blood had frozen with
horror at the thought that her son might, perhaps, be contemplating
suicide; but she was a mother, and her husband’s assurances did not
satisfy her.

She hastily ascended the stairs leading to her son’s room, softly opened
the door, and looked in. He was so engrossed in his gloomy revery that
he had heard nothing, and did not even suspect the presence of the
anxious mother who was watching over him.

He was sitting at the window, his elbows resting upon the sill, his head
supported by his hands, looking out into the night.

There was no moon, but the night was clear, and over beyond the light
fog that indicated the course of the Oiselle one could discern the
imposing mass of the Chateau de Sairmeuse, with its towers and fanciful
turrets.

More than once he had sat thus silently gazing at this chateau, which
sheltered what was dearest and most precious in all the world to him.

From his windows he could see those of the room occupied by Marie-Anne;
and his heart always quickened its throbbing when he saw them
illuminated.

“She is there,” he thought, “in her virgin chamber. She is kneeling to
say her prayers. She murmurs my name after that of her father, imploring
God’s blessing upon us both.”

But this evening he was not waiting for a light to gleam through the
panes of that dear window.

Marie-Anne was no longer at Sairmeuse--she had been driven away.

Where was she now? She, accustomed to all the luxury that wealth could
procure, no longer had any home except a poor thatch-covered hovel,
whose walls were not even whitewashed, whose only floor was the earth
itself, dusty as the public highway in summer, frozen or muddy in
winter.

She was reduced to the necessity of occupying herself the humble abode
she, in her charitable heart, had intended as an asylum for one of her
pensioners.

What was she doing now? Doubtless she was weeping.

At this thought poor Maurice was heartbroken.

What was his surprise, a little after midnight, to see the chateau
brilliantly illuminated.

The duke and his son had repaired to the chateau after the banquet given
by the Marquis de Courtornieu was over; and, before going to bed, they
made a tour of inspection through this magnificent abode in which
their ancestors had lived. They, therefore, might be said to have
taken possession of the mansion whose threshold M. de Sairmeuse had not
crossed for twenty-two years, and which Martial had never seen.

Maurice saw the lights leap from story to story, from casement to
casement, until at last even the windows of Marie-Anne’s room were
illuminated.

At this sight the unhappy youth could not restrain a cry of rage.

These men, these strangers, dared enter this virgin bower, which he,
even in thought, scarcely dared to penetrate.

They trampled carelessly over the delicate carpet with their heavy
boots. Maurice trembled in thinking of the liberties which they, in
their insolent familiarity, might venture upon. He fancied he could see
them examining and handling the thousand petty trifles with which young
girls love to surround themselves; they opened the presses, perhaps they
were reading an unfinished letter lying upon her writing-desk.

Never until this evening had Martial supposed he could hate another as
he hated these men.

At last, in despair, he threw himself upon his bed, and passed the
remainder of the night in thinking over what he should say to Marie-Anne
on the morrow, and in seeking some issue from this inextricable
labyrinth.

He rose before daybreak, and wandered about the park like a soul in
distress, fearing, yet longing, for the hour that would decide his fate.
Mme. d’Escorval was obliged to exert all her authority to make him take
some nourishment. He had quite forgotten that he had passed twenty-four
hours without eating.

When eleven o’clock sounded he left the house.

The lands of the Reche are situated on the other side of the Oiselle.
Maurice, to reach his destination, was obliged to cross the river at
a ferry only a short distance from his home. When he reached the
river-bank he found six or seven peasants who were waiting to cross.

These people did not observe Maurice. They were talking earnestly, and
he listened.

“It is certainly true,” said one of the men. “I heard it from
Chanlouineau himself only last evening. He was wild with delight. ‘I
invite you all to the wedding!’ he cried. ‘I am betrothed to Monsieur
Lacheneur’s daughter; the affair is decided.’”

This astounding news positively stunned Maurice. He was actually unable
to think or to move.

“Besides, he has been in love with her for a long time. Everyone knows
that. One had only to see his eyes when he met her--coals of fire were
nothing to them. But while her father was so rich he did not dare to
speak. Now that the old man has met with these reverses, he ventures to
offer himself, and is accepted.”

“An unfortunate thing for him,” remarked a little old man.

“Why so?”

“If Monsieur Lacheneur is ruined, as they say----”

The others laughed heartily.

“Ruined--Monsieur Lacheneur!” they exclaimed in chorus. “How absurd!
He is richer than all of us together. Do you suppose that he has been
stupid enough not to have laid anything aside during all these years? He
has put this money not in grounds, as he pretends, but somewhere else.”

“You are saying what is untrue!” interrupted Maurice, indignantly.
“Monsieur Lacheneur left Sairmeuse as poor as he entered it.”

On recognizing M. d’Escorval’s son, the peasants became extremely
cautious. He questioned them, but could obtain only vague and
unsatisfactory answers. A peasant, when interrogated, will never give
a response which he thinks will be displeasing to his questioner; he is
afraid of compromising himself.

The news he had heard, however, caused Maurice to hasten on still more
rapidly after crossing the Oiselle.

“Marie-Anne marry Chanlouineau!” he repeated; “it is impossible! it is
impossible!”



CHAPTER IX

The Reche, literally translated the “Waste,” where Marie-Anne had
promised to meet Maurice, owed its name to the rebellious and sterile
character of the soil.

Nature seemed to have laid her curse upon it. Nothing would grow there.
The ground was covered with stones, and the sandy soil defied all
attempts to enrich it.

A few stunted oaks rose here and there above the thorns and broom-plant.

But on the lowlands of the Reche is a flourishing grove. The firs are
straight and strong, for the floods of winter have deposited in some
of the clefts of the rock sufficient soil to sustain them and the wild
clematis and honeysuckle that cling to their branches.

On reaching this grove, Maurice consulted his watch. It marked the hour
of mid-day. He had supposed that he was late, but he was more than an
hour in advance of the appointed time.

He seated himself upon a high rock, from which he could survey the
entire Reche, and waited.

The day was magnificent; the air intensely hot. The rays of the August
sun fell with scorching violence upon the sandy soil, and withered the
few plants which had sprung up since the last rain.

The stillness was profound, almost terrible. Not a sound broke the
silence, not even the buzzing of an insect, nor a whisper of breeze in
the trees. All nature seemed sleeping. And on no side was there anything
to remind one of life, motion, or mankind.

This repose of nature, which contrasted so vividly with the tumult
raging in his own heart, exerted a beneficial effect upon Maurice.
These few moments of solitude afforded him an opportunity to regain his
composure, to collect his thoughts scattered by the storm of passion
which had swept over his soul, as leaves are scattered by the fierce
November gale.

With sorrow comes experience, and that cruel knowledge of life which
teaches one to guard one’s self against one’s hopes.

It was not until he heard the conversation of these peasants that
Maurice fully realized the horror of Lacheneur’s position. Suddenly
precipitated from the social eminence which he had attained, he found,
in the valley of humiliations into which he was cast, only hatred,
distrust, and scorn. Both factions despised and denied him. Traitor,
cried one; thief, cried the other. He no longer held any social status.
He was the fallen man, the man who _had_ been, and who was no more.

Was not the excessive misery of such a position a sufficient explanation
of the strangest and wildest resolutions?

This thought made Maurice tremble. Connecting the stories of the
peasants with the words addressed to Chanlouineau at Escorval by M.
Lacheneur on the preceding evening, he arrived at the conclusion that
this report of Marie-Anne’s approaching marriage to the young farmer was
not so improbable as he had at first supposed.

But why should M. Lacheneur give his daughter to an uncultured peasant?
From mercenary motives? Certainly not, since he had just refused an
alliance of which he had been proud in his days of prosperity. Could it
be in order to satisfy his wounded pride, then? Perhaps he did not wish
it to be said that he owed anything to a son-in-law.

Maurice was exhausting all his ingenuity and penetration in endeavoring
to solve this mystery, when at last, on a foot-path which crosses the
waste, a woman appeared--Marie-Anne.

He rose, but fearing observation, did not venture to leave the shelter
of the grove.

Marie-Anne must have felt a similar fear, for she hurried on, casting
anxious glances on every side as she ran. Maurice remarked, not without
surprise, that she was bare-headed, and that she had neither shawl nor
scarf about her shoulders.

As she reached the edge of the wood, he sprang toward her, and catching
her hand raised it to his lips.

But this hand, which she had so often yielded to him, was now gently
withdrawn, with so sad a gesture that he could not help feeling there
was no hope.

“I came, Maurice,” she began, “because I could not endure the thought of
your anxiety. By doing so I have betrayed my father’s confidence--he was
obliged to leave home. I hastened here. And yet I promised him, only two
hours ago, that I would never see you again. You hear me--never!”

She spoke hurriedly, but Maurice was appalled by the firmness of her
accent.

Had he been less agitated, he would have seen what a terrible effort
this semblance of calmness cost the young girl. He would have understood
it from her pallor, from the contraction of her lips, from the redness
of the eyelids which she had vainly bathed with fresh water, and which
betrayed the tears that had fallen during the night.

“If I have come,” she continued, “it is only to tell you that, for
your own sake, as well as for mine, there must not remain in the secret
recesses of your heart even the slightest shadow of a hope. All is over;
we are separated forever! Only weak natures revolt against a destiny
which they cannot alter. Let us accept our fate uncomplainingly. I
wished to see you once more, and to say this: Have courage, Maurice. Go
away--leave Escorval--forget me!”

“Forget you, Marie-Anne!” exclaimed the wretched young man, “forget
you!”

His eyes met hers, and in a husky voice he added:

“Will you then forget me?”

“I am a woman, Maurice--”

But he interrupted her:

“Ah! I did not expect this,” he said, despondently. “Poor fool that I
was! I believed that you would find a way to touch your father’s heart.”

She blushed slightly, hesitated, and said:

“I have thrown myself at my father’s feet; he repulsed me.”

Maurice was thunderstruck, but recovering himself:

“It was because you did not know how to speak to him!” he exclaimed in
a passion of fury; “but I shall know--I will present such arguments that
he will be forced to yield. What right has he to ruin my happiness with
his caprices? I love you---by right of this love, you are mine--mine
rather than his! I will make him understand this, you shall see. Where
is he? Where can I find him?”

Already he was starting to go, he knew not where. Marie-Anne caught him
by the arm.

“Remain,” she commanded, “remain! So you have failed to understand me,
Maurice. Ah, well! you must know the truth. I am acquainted now with the
reasons of my father’s refusal; and though his decision should cost me
my life, I approve it. Do not go to find my father. If, moved by your
prayers, he gave his consent, I should have the courage to refuse mine!”

Maurice was so beside himself that this reply did not enlighten him.
Crazed with anger and despair, and with no remorse for the insult he
addressed to this woman whom he loved so deeply, he exclaimed:

“Is it for Chanlouineau, then, that you are reserving your consent? He
believes so since he goes about everywhere saying that you will soon be
his wife.”

Marie-Anne shuddered as if a knife had entered her very heart; and yet
there was more sorrow than anger in the glance she cast upon Maurice.

“Must I stoop so low as to defend myself from such an imputation?” she
asked, sadly. “Must I declare that if even I suspect such an arrangement
between Chanlouineau and my father, I have not been consulted? Must I
tell you that there are some sacrifices which are beyond the strength
of poor human nature? Understand this: I have found strength to renounce
the man I love--I shall never be able to accept another in his place!”

Maurice hung his head, abashed by her earnest words, dazzled by the
sublime expression of her face.

Reason returned; he realized the enormity of his suspicions, and was
horrified with himself for having dared to give utterance to them.

“Oh! pardon!” he faltered, “pardon!”

What did the mysterious causes of all these events which had so rapidly
succeeded each other, or M. Lacheneur’s secrets, or Marie-Anne’s
reticence, matter to him now?

He was seeking some chance of salvation; he believed that he had found
it.

“We must fly!” he exclaimed: “fly at once without pausing to look back.
Before night we shall have passed the frontier.”

He sprang toward her with outstretched arms, as if to seize her and bear
her away; but she checked him by a single look.

“Fly!” said she, reproachfully; “fly! and is it you, Maurice, who
counsel me thus? What! while misfortune is crushing my poor father to
the earth, shall I add despair and shame to his sorrows? His friends
have deserted him; shall I, his daughter, also abandon him? Ah! if I
did that, I should be the vilest, the most cowardly of creatures! If
my father, yesterday, when I believed him the owner of Sairmeuse, had
demanded the sacrifice to which I consented last evening, I might,
perhaps, have resolved upon the extreme measure you have counselled. In
broad daylight I might have left Sairmeuse on the arm of my lover. It
is not the world that I fear! But if one might consent to fly from the
chateau of a rich and happy father, one _cannot_ consent to desert the
poor abode of a despairing and penniless parent. Leave me, Maurice,
where honor holds me. It will not be difficult for me, who am the
daughter of generations of peasants, to become a peasant. Go! I cannot
endure more! Go! and remember that one cannot be utterly wretched if
one’s conscience is clean, and one’s duty fulfilled!”

Maurice was about to reply, when a crackling of dry branches made him
turn his head.

Scarcely ten paces off, Martial de Sairmeuse was standing motionless,
leaning upon his gun.



CHAPTER X

The Duc de Sairmeuse had slept little and poorly on the night following
his return, or his restoration, as he styled it.

Inaccessible, as he pretended to be, to the emotions which agitate the
common herd, the scenes of the day had greatly excited him.

He could not help reviewing them, although he made it the rule of his
life never to reflect.

While exposed to the scrutiny of the peasants and of his acquaintances
at the Chateau de Courtornieu, he felt that his honor required him
to appear cold and indifferent, but as soon as he had retired to the
privacy of his own chamber, he gave free vent to his excessive joy.

For his joy _was_ intense, almost verging on delirium.

Now he was forced to admit to himself the immense service Lacheneur had
rendered him in restoring Sairmeuse.

This poor man to whom he had displayed the blackest ingratitude, this
man, honest to heroism, whom he had treated as an unfaithful servant,
had just relieved him of an anxiety which had poisoned his life.

Lacheneur had just placed the Duc de Sairmeuse beyond the reach of a not
probable, but very possible calamity which he had dreaded for some time.

If his secret anxiety had been made known, it would have created much
merriment.

“Nonsense!” people would have exclaimed, “everyone knows that the
Sairmeuse possesses property to the amount of at least eight or ten
millions, in England.”

This was true. Only these millions, which had accrued from the estate of
the duchess and of Lord Holland, had not been bequeathed to the duke.

He enjoyed absolute control of this enormous fortune; he disposed of
the capital and of the immense revenues to please himself; but it all
belonged to his son--to his only son.

The duke possessed nothing--a pitiful income of twelve hundred francs,
perhaps; but, strictly speaking, not even the means of subsistence.

Martial, certainly, had never said a word which would lead him to
suspect that he had any intention of removing his property from his
father’s control; but he might possibly utter this word.

Had he not good reason to believe that sooner or later this fatal word
would be uttered?

And even at the thought of such a contingency he shuddered with horror.

He saw himself reduced to a pension, a very handsome pension,
undoubtedly, but still a fixed, immutable, regular pension, by which he
would be obliged to regulate his expenditures.

He would be obliged to calculate that two ends might meet--he, who had
been accustomed to inexhaustible coffers.

“And this will necessarily happen sooner or later,” he thought. “If
Martial should marry, or if he should become ambitious, or meet with
evil counsellors, that will be the end of my reign.”

He watched and studied his son as a jealous woman studies and watches
the lover she mistrusts. He thought he read in his eyes many thoughts
which were not there; and according as he saw him, gay or sad, careless
or preoccupied, he was reassured or still more alarmed.

Sometimes he imagined the worst. “If I should quarrel with Martial,” he
thought, “he would take possession of his entire fortune, and I should
be left without bread.”

These torturing apprehensions were, to a man who judged the sentiments
of others by his own, a terrible chastisement.

Ah! no one would have wished his existence at the price he paid for
it--not even the poor wretches who envied his lot and his apparent
happiness, as they saw him roll by in his magnificent carriage.

There were days when he almost went mad.

“What am I?” he exclaimed, foaming with rage. “A mere plaything in the
hands of a child. My son owns me. If I displease him, he casts me aside.
Yes, he can dismiss me as he would a lackey. If I enjoy his fortune,
it is only because he is willing that I should do so. I owe my very
existence, as well as my luxuries, to his charity. But a moment of
anger, even a caprice, may deprive me of everything.”

With such ideas in his brain, the duke could not love his son.

He hated him.

He passionately envied him all the advantages he possessed--his youth,
his millions, his physical beauty, and his talents, which were really of
a superior order.

We meet every day mothers who are jealous of their daughters, and some
fathers!

This was one of those cases.

The duke, however, showed no sign of mental disquietude; and if Martial
had possessed less penetration, he would have believed that his father
adored him. But if he had detected the duke’s secret, he did not allow
him to discover it, nor did he abuse his power.

Their manner toward each other was perfect. The duke was kind even to
weakness; Martial full of deference. But their relations were not those
of father and son. One was in constant fear of displeasing the other;
the other was a little too sure of his power. They lived on a footing of
perfect equality, like two companions of the same age.

From this trying situation, Lacheneur had rescued the duke.

The owner of Sairmeuse, an estate worth more than a million, the duke
was free from his son’s tyranny; he had recovered his liberty.

What brilliant projects flitted through his brain that night!

He beheld himself the richest landowner in that locality; he was the
chosen friend of the King; had he not a right to aspire to anything?

Such a prospect enchanted him. He felt twenty years younger--the twenty
years that had been passed in exile.

So, rising before nine o’clock, he went to awaken Martial.

On returning from dining with the Marquis de Courtornieu, the
evening before, the duke had gone through the chateau; but this hasty
examination by candle-light had not satisfied his curiosity. He wished
to see it in detail by daylight.

Followed by his son, he explored one after another of the rooms of the
princely abode; and, with every step, the recollections of his infancy
crowded upon him.

Lacheneur had respected everything. The duke found articles as old as
himself, religiously preserved, occupying the old familiar places from
which they had never been removed.

When his inspection was concluded:

“Decidedly, Marquis,” he exclaimed, “this Lacheneur was not such a
rascal as I supposed. I am disposed to forgive him a great deal, on
account of the care which he has taken of our house in our absence.”

Martial seemed engrossed in thought.

“I think, Monsieur,” he said, at last, “that we should testify our
gratitude to this man by paying him a large indemnity.”

This word excited the duke’s anger.

“An indemnity!” he exclaimed. “Are you mad, Marquis? Think of the income
that he has received from my estate. Have you forgotten the calculation
made for us last evening by the Chevalier de la Livandiere?”

“The chevalier is a fool!” declared Martial promptly. “He forgot that
Lacheneur has trebled the value of Sairmeuse. I think that our family
honor requires us to bestow upon this man an indemnity of at least
one hundred thousand francs. This would, moreover, be a good stroke of
policy in the present state of public sentiment, and His Majesty would,
I am sure, be much pleased.”

“Stroke of policy”--“public sentiment”--“His Majesty.” One might have
obtained almost anything from M. de Sairmeuse by these arguments.

“Heavenly powers!” he exclaimed; “a hundred thousand francs! how you
talk! It is all very well for you, with your fortune! Still, if you
really think so----”

“Ah! my dear sir, is not my fortune yours? Yes, such is really my
opinion. So much so, indeed, that if you will allow me to do so, I will
see Lacheneur myself, and arrange the matter in such a way that his
pride will not be wounded. His is a devotion which it would be well to
retain.”

The duke opened his eyes to their widest extent.

“Lacheneur’s pride!” he murmured. “Devotion which it would be well to
retain! Why do you sing in this strain? Whence comes this extraordinary
interest?”

He paused, enlightened by a sudden recollection.

“I understand!” he exclaimed; “I understand. He has a pretty daughter.”

Martial smiled without replying.

“Yes, pretty as a rose,” continued the duke; “but one hundred thousand
francs! Zounds! That is a round sum to pay for such a whim. But, if you
insist upon it----”

Armed with this authorization, Martial, two hours later, started on his
mission.

The first peasant he met told him the way to the cottage which M.
Lacheneur now occupied.

“Follow the river,” said the man, “and when you see a pine-grove upon
your left, cross it.”

Martial was crossing it, when he heard the sound of voices. He
approached, recognized Marie-Anne and Maurice d’Escorval, and obeying an
angry impulse, he paused.



CHAPTER XI

During the decisive moments of life, when one’s entire future depends
upon a word, or a gesture, twenty contradictory inspirations can
traverse the mind in the time occupied by a flash of lightning.

On the sudden apparition of the young Marquis de Sairmeuse, Maurice
d’Escorval’s first thought was this:

“How long has he been there? Has he been playing the spy? Has he been
listening to us? What did he hear?”

His first impulse was to spring upon his enemy, to strike him in the
face, and compel him to engage in a hand-to-hand struggle.

The thought of Anne-Marie checked him.

He reflected upon the possible, even probable results of a quarrel born
of such circumstances. The combat which would ensue would cost this pure
young girl her reputation. Martial would talk of it; and country people
are pitiless. He saw this girl, whom he looked so devotedly upon, become
the talk of the neighborhood; saw the finger of scorn pointed at her,
and possessed sufficient self-control to master his anger. All these
reflections had occupied only half a second.

Then, politely touching his hat, and stepping toward Martial:

“You are a stranger, Monsieur,” said he, in a voice which was
frightfully altered, “and you have doubtless lost your way?” His words
were ill-chosen, and defeated his prudent intentions. A curt “Mind your
own business” would have been less wounding. He forgot that this word
“stranger” was the most deadly insult that one could cast in the face of
the former _emigres_, who had returned with the allied armies.

Still the young marquis did not change his insolently nonchalant
attitude.

He touched the visor of his hunting cap with his finger, and replied:

“It is true--I have lost my way.”

Agitated as Marie-Anne was, she could not fail to understand that her
presence was all that restrained the hatred of these two young men.
Their attitude, the glance with which they measured each other, did not
leave the shadow of a doubt on that score. If one was ready to spring
upon the other, the other was on the alert, ready to defend himself.

The silence of nearly a moment which followed was as threatening as the
profound calm which precedes the storm.

Martial was the first to break it.

“A peasant’s directions are not generally remarkable for their
clearness,” he said, lightly; “and for more than an hour I have been
seeking the house to which Monsieur Lacheneur has retired.”

“Ah!”

“I am sent to him by the Duc de Sairmeuse, my father.”

Knowing what he did, Maurice supposed that these strangely rapacious
individuals had some new demand to make.

“I thought,” said he, “that all relations between Monsieur Lacheneur and
Monsieur de Sairmeuse were broken off last evening at the house of the
abbe.”

This was said in the most provoking manner, and yet Martial never so
much as frowned. He had sworn that he would remain calm, and he had
strength enough to keep his word.

“If these relations--as God forbid--have been broken off,” he replied,
“believe me, Monsieur d’Escorval, it is no fault of ours.”

“Then it is not as people say?”

“What people? Who?”

“The people here in the neighborhood.”

“Ah! And what do these people say?”

“The truth. That you have been guilty of an offence which a man of honor
could never forgive nor forget.”

The young marquis shook his head gravely.

“You are quick to condemn, sir,” he said, coldly. “Permit me to hope
that Monsieur Lacheneur will be less severe than yourself; and that his
resentment--just, I confess, will vanish before”--he hesitated--“before
a truthful explanation.”

Such an expression from the lips of this haughty young aristocrat! Was
it possible?

Martial profited by the effect he had produced to advance toward
Marie-Anne, and, addressing himself exclusively to her, seemed after
that to ignore the presence of Maurice completely.

“For there has been a mistake--a misunderstanding, Mademoiselle,” he
continued. “Do not doubt it. The Sairmeuse are not ingrates. How
could anyone have supposed that we would intentionally give offense
to a--devoted friend of our family, and that at a moment when he had
rendered us a most signal service! A true gentleman like my father, and
a hero of probity like yours, cannot fail to esteem each other. I admit
that in the scene of yesterday, Monsieur de Sairmeuse did not appear to
advantage; but the step he takes today proves his sincere regret.”

Certainly this was not the cavalier tone which he had employed in
addressing Marie-Anne, for the first time, on the square in front of the
church.

He had removed his hat, he remained half inclined before her, and
he spoke in a tone of profound respect, as though it were a haughty
duchess, and not the humble daughter of that “rascal” Lacheneur whom he
was addressing.

Was it only a _roue’s_ manoeuvre? Or had he also involuntarily submitted
to the power of this beautiful girl? It was both; and it would have
been difficult for him to say where the voluntary ended, and where the
involuntary began.

He continued:

“My father is an old man who has suffered cruelly. Exile is hard to
bear. But if sorrows and deceptions have embittered his character, they
have not changed his heart. His apparent imperiousness and arrogance
conceal a kindness of heart which I have often seen degenerate into
positive weakness. And--why should I not confess it?--the Duc de
Sairmeuse, with his white hair, still retains the illusions of a child.
He refuses to believe that the world has progressed during the past
twenty years. Moreover, people had deceived him by the most absurd
fabrications. To speak plainly, even while we were in Montaignac,
Monsieur Lacheneur’s enemies succeeded in prejudicing my father against
him.”

One would have sworn that he was speaking the truth, so persuasive was
his voice, so entirely did the expression of his face, his glance, and
his gestures accord with his words.

And Maurice, who felt--who was certain that the young man was lying,
impudently lying, was abashed by this scientific prevarication which is
so universally practised in good society, and of which he was entirely
ignorant.

But what did the marquis desire here--and why this farce?

“Need I tell you, Mademoiselle,” he resumed, “all that I suffered last
evening in the little drawing-room in the presbytery? No, never in my
whole life can I recollect such a cruel moment. I understood, and I
did honor to Monsieur Lacheneur’s heroism. Hearing of our arrival, he,
without hesitation, without delay, hastened to voluntarily surrender
a princely fortune--and he was insulted. This excessive injustice
horrified me. And if I did not openly protest against it--if I did not
show my indignation--it was only because contradiction drives my father
to the verge of frenzy. And what good would it have done for me to
protest? The filial love and piety which you displayed were far more
powerful in their effect than any words of mine would have been. You
were scarcely out of the village before Monsieur de Sairmeuse, already
ashamed of his injustice, said to me: ‘I have been wrong, but I am an
old man; it is hard for me to decide to make the first advance; you,
Marquis, go and find Monsieur Lacheneur, and obtain his forgiveness.’”

Marie-Anne, redder than a peony, and terribly embarrassed, lowered her
eyes.

“I thank you, Monsieur,” she faltered, “in the name of my father--”

“Oh! do not thank me,” interrupted Martial, earnestly; “it will be my
duty, on the contrary, to render you thanks, if you can induce Monsieur
Lacheneur to accept the reparation which is due him--and he will accept
it, if you will only condescend to plead our cause. Who could resist
your sweet voice, your beautiful, beseeching eyes?”

However inexperienced Maurice might be, he could no longer fail to
comprehend Martial’s intentions. This man whom he mortally hated
already, dared to speak of love to Marie-Anne, and before him, Maurice.
In other words, the marquis, not content with having ignored and
insulted him, presumed to take an insolent advantage of his supposed
simplicity.

The certainty of this insult sent all his blood in a boiling torrent to
his brain.

He seized Martial by the arm, and with irresistible power whirled him
twice around, then threw him more than ten feet, exclaiming:

“This last is too much, Marquis de Sairmeuse!”

Maurice’s attitude was so threatening that Martial fully expected
another attack. The violence of the shock had thrown him down upon one
knee; without rising, he lifted his gun, ready to take aim.

It was not from anything like cowardice on the part of the Marquis de
Sairmeuse that he decided to fire upon an unarmed foe; but the affront
which he had received was so deadly and so ignoble in his opinion, that
he would have shot Maurice like a dog, rather than feel the weight of
his finger upon him again.

This explosion of anger from Maurice Marie-Anne had been expecting and
hoping for every moment.

She was even more inexperienced than her lover; but she was a woman, and
could not fail to understand the meaning of the young marquis.

He was evidently “paying his court to her.” And with what intentions! It
was only too easy to divine.

Her agitation, while the marquis spoke in a more and more tender voice,
changed first to stupor, then to indignation, as she realized his
marvellous audacity.

After that, how could she help blessing the violence which put an end
to a situation which was so insulting for her, and so humiliating for
Maurice?

An ordinary woman would have thrown herself between the two men who were
ready to kill each other. Marie-Anne did not move a muscle.

Was it not the duty of Maurice to protect her when she was insulted?
Who, then, if not he, should defend her from the insolent gallantry of
this libertine? She would have blushed, she who was energy personified,
to love a weak and pusillanimous man.

But any intervention was unnecessary. Maurice comprehended that this
was one of those affronts which the person insulted must not seem to
suspect, under penalty of giving the offending party the advantage.

He felt that Marie-Anne must not be regarded as the cause of the
quarrel!

His instant recognition of the situation produced a powerful reaction
in his mind; and he recovered, as if by magic, his coolness and the free
exercise of his faculties.

“Yes,” he resumed, defiantly, “this is hypocrisy enough. To dare to
prate of reparation after the insults that you and yours have inflicted,
is adding intentional humiliation to insult--and I will not permit it.”

Martial had thrown aside his gun; he now rose and brushed the knee of
his pantaloons, to which a few particles of dust had adhered, with a
phlegm whose secret he had learned in England.

He was too discerning not to perceive that Maurice had disguised the
true cause of his outburst of passion; but what did it matter to him?
Had he avowed it, the marquis would not have been displeased.

Yet it was necessary to make some response, and to preserve the
superiority which he imagined he had maintained up to that time.

“You will never know, Monsieur,” he said, glancing alternately at his
gun and at Marie-Anne, “all that you owe to Mademoiselle Lacheneur. We
shall meet again, I hope--”

“You have made that remark before,” Maurice interrupted, tauntingly.
“Nothing is easier than to find me. The first peasant you meet will
point out the house of Baron d’Escorval.”

“_Eh bien_! sir, I cannot promise that you will not see two of my
friends.”

“Oh! whenever it may please you!”

“Certainly; but it would gratify me to know by what right you make
yourself the judge of Monsieur Lacheneur’s honor, and take it upon
yourself to defend what has not been attacked. Who has given you this
right?”

From Martial’s sneering tone, Maurice was certain that he had overheard,
at least a part of, his conversation with Marie-Anne.

“My right,” he replied, “is that of friendship. If I tell you that your
advances are unwelcome, it is because I know that Monsieur Lacheneur
will accept nothing from you. No, nothing, under whatever guise you may
offer these alms which you tender merely to appease your own conscience.
He will never forgive the affront which is his honor and your shame. Ah!
you thought to degrade him, Messieurs de Sairmeuse! and you have lifted
him far above your mock grandeur. _He_ receive anything from you! Go;
learn that your millions will never give you a pleasure equal to the
ineffable joy he will feel, when seeing you roll by in your carriage, he
says to himself: ‘Those people owe everything to me!’”

His burning words vibrated with such intensity of feeling that
Marie-Anne could not resist the impulse to press his hand; and this
gesture was his revenge upon Martial, who turned pale with passion.

“But I have still another right,” continued Maurice. “My father
yesterday had the honor of asking of Monsieur Lacheneur the hand of his
daughter----”

“And I refused it!” cried a terrible voice.

Marie-Anne and both young men turned with the same movement of alarm and
surprise.

M. Lacheneur stood before them, and by his side was Chanlouineau, who
surveyed the group with threatening eyes.

“Yes, I refused it,” resumed M. Lacheneur, “and I do not believe that my
daughter will marry anyone without my consent. What did you promise me
this morning, Marie-Anne? Can it be you, you who grant a rendezvous to
gallants in the forest? Return to the house, instantly----”

“But father----”

“Return!” he repeated with an oath; “return, I command you.”

She obeyed and departed, not without giving Maurice a look in which he
read a farewell that she believed would be eternal.

As soon as she had gone, perhaps twenty paces, M. Lacheneur, with folded
arms, confronted Maurice.

“As for you, Monsieur d’Escorval,” said he, rudely, “I hope that you
will no longer undertake to prowl around my daughter----”

“I swear to you, Monsieur--”

“Oh, no oaths, if you please. It is an evil action to endeavor to turn
a young girl from her duty, which is obedience. You have broken forever
all relations between your family and mine.”

The poor youth tried to excuse himself, but M. Lacheneur interrupted
him.

“Enough! enough!” said he; “go back to your home.”

And as Maurice hesitated, he seized him by the collar and dragged him to
the little footpath leading through the grove.

It was the work of scarcely ten seconds, and yet, he found time to
whisper in the young man’s ear, in his formerly friendly tones:

“Go, you little wretch! do you wish to render all my precautions
useless?”

He watched Maurice as he disappeared, bewildered by the scene he had
just witnessed, and stupefied by what he had just heard; and it was not
until he saw that young d’Escorval was out of hearing that he turned to
Martial.

“As I have had the honor of meeting you, Monsieur le Marquis,” said he,
“I deem it my duty to inform you that Chupin and his sons are searching
for you everywhere. It is at the instance of the duke, your father, who
is anxious for you to repair at once to the Chateau de Courtornieu.”

He turned to Chanlouineau, and added:

“We will now proceed on our way.”

But Martial detained him with a gesture.

“I am much surprised to hear that they are seeking me,” said he. “My
father knows very well where he sent me; I was going to your house,
Monsieur, and at his request.”

“To my house?”

“To your house, yes, Monsieur, to express our sincere regret at the
scene which took place at the presbytery last evening.”

And without waiting for any response, Martial, with wonderful cleverness
and felicity of expression, began to repeat to the father the story
which he had just related to the daughter.

According to his version, his father and himself were in despair. How
could M. Lacheneur suppose them guilty of such black ingratitude?
Why had he retired so precipitately? The Duc de Sairmeuse held at
M. Lacheneur’s disposal any amount which it might please him to
mention--sixty, a hundred thousand francs, even more.

But M. Lacheneur did not appear to be dazzled in the least; and when
Martial had concluded, he replied, respectfully, but coldly, that he
would consider the matter.

This coldness amazed Chanlouineai; he did not conceal the fact when
the marquis, after many earnest protestations, at last wended his way
homeward.

“We have misjudged these people,” he declared.

But M. Lacheneur shrugged his shoulders.

“And so you are foolish enough to suppose that it was to me that he
offered all that money?”

“Zounds! I have ears.”

“Ah, well! my poor boy, you must not believe all they hear, if you have.
The truth is, that these large sums were intended to win the favor of my
daughter. She has pleased this coxcomb of a marquis; and--he wishes to
make her his mistress----”

Chanlouineau stopped short, with eyes flashing, and hands clinched.

“Good God!” he exclaimed; “prove that, and I am yours, body and soul--to
do anything you desire.”



CHAPTER XII

“No, never in my whole life have I met a woman who can compare with this
Marie-Anne! What grace and what dignity! Ah! her beauty is divine!”

So Martial was thinking while returning to Sairmeuse after his proposals
to M. Lacheneur.

At the risk of losing his way he took the shortest course, which led
across the fields and over ditches, which he leaped with the aid of his
gun.

He found a pleasure, entirely novel and very delightful, in picturing
Marie-Anne as he had just seen her, blushing and paling, about to swoon,
then lifting her head haughtily in her pride and disdain.

Who would have suspected that such indomitable energy and such an
impassioned soul was hidden beneath such girlish artlessness and
apparent coldness? What an adorable expression illumined her face, what
passion shone in those great black eyes when she looked at that little
fool d’Escorval! What would not one give to be regarded thus, even for a
moment? How could the boy help being crazy about her?

He himself loved her, without being, as yet, willing, to confess it.
What other name could be given to this passion which had overpowered
reason, and to the furious desires which agitated him?

“Ah!” he exclaimed, “she shall be mine. Yes, she shall be mine; I will
have her!”

Consequently he began to study the strategic side of the undertaking
which this resolution involved with the sagacity of one who had not been
without an extended experience in such matters.

His debut, he was forced to admit, had been neither fortunate nor
adroit. Conveyed compliments and money had both been rejected. If
Marie-Anne had heard his covert insinuations with evident horror, M.
Lacheneur had received, with even more than coldness, his advances and
his offers of actual wealth.

Moreover, he remembered Chanlouineau’s terrible eyes.

“How he measured me, that magnificent rustic!” he growled. “At a sign
from Marie-Anne he would have crushed me like an eggshell, without a
thought of my ancestors. Ah! does he also love her? There will be three
rivals in that case.”

But the more difficult and even perilous the undertaking seemed, the
more his passions were inflamed.

“My failures can be repaired,” he thought. “Occasions of meeting shall
not be wanting. Will it not be necessary to hold frequent interviews
with Monsieur Lacheneur in effecting a formal transfer of Sairmeuse?
I will win him over to my side. With the daughter my course is plain.
Profiting by my unfortunate experience, I will, in the future, be as
timid as I have been bold; and she will be hard to please if she is
not flattered by this triumph of her beauty. D’Escorval remains to be
disposed of----”

But this was the point upon which Martial was most exercised.

He had, it is true, seen this rival rudely dismissed by M. Lacheneur;
and yet the anger of the latter had seemed to him too great to be
absolutely real.

He suspected a comedy, but for whose benefit? For his, or for
Chanlouineau’s? And yet, what could possibly be the motive?

“And yet,” he reflected, “my hands are tied; and I cannot call this
little d’Escorval to account for his insolence. To swallow such an
affront in silence is hard. Still, he is brave, there is no denying
that; perhaps I can find some other way to provoke his anger. But even
then, what could I do? If I harmed a hair of his head, Marie-Anne would
never forgive me. Ah! I would give a handsome sum in exchange for some
little device to send him out of the country.”

Revolving in his mind these plans, whose frightful consequences he could
neither calculate nor foresee, Martial was walking up the avenue leading
to the chateau, when he heard hurried footsteps behind him.

He turned, and seeing two men running after him and motioning him to
stop, he paused.

It was Chupin, accompanied by one of his sons.

This old rascal had been enrolled among the servants charged with
preparing Sairmeuse for the reception of the duke; and he had already
discovered the secret of making himself useful to his master, which was
by seeming to be indispensable.

“Ah, Monsieur,” he cried, “we have been searching for you everywhere, my
son and I. It was Monsieur le Duc----”

“Very well,” said Martial, dryly. “I am returning----”

But Chupin was not sensitive; and although he had not been very
favorably received, he ventured to follow the marquis at a little
distance, but sufficiently near to make himself heard. He also had
his schemes; for it was not long before he began a long recital of the
calumnies which had been spread about the neighborhood in regard to the
Lacheneur affair. Why did he choose this subject in preference to any
other? Did he suspect the young marquis’s passion for Marie-Anne?

According to this report, Lacheneur--he no longer said “monsieur”--was
unquestionably a rascal; the complete surrender of Sairmeuse was only
a farce, as he must possess thousands, and hundreds of thousands of
francs, since he was about to marry his daughter.

If the scoundrel had felt only suspicions, they were changed into
certainty by the eagerness with which Martial demanded:

“How! is Mademoiselle Lacheneur to be married?”

“Yes, Monsieur.”

“And to whom?”

“To Chanlouineau, the fellow whom the peasants wished to kill yesterday
upon the square, because he was disrespectful to the duke. He is an
avaricious man; and if Marie-Anne does not bring him a good round sum as
a dowry, he will never marry her, no matter how beautiful she may be.”

“Are you sure of what you say?”

“It is true. My eldest son heard from Chanlouineau and from Lacheneur
that the wedding would take place within a month.”

And turning to his son:

“Is it not true, boy?”

“Yes,” promptly replied the youth, who had heard nothing of the kind.

Martial was silent, ashamed, perhaps, of allowing himself to listen
to the gossip, but glad to have been informed of such an important
circumstance.

If Chupin was not telling a falsehood--and what reason could he have for
doing so--it became evident that M. Lacheneur’s conduct concealed some
great mystery. Why, without some potent motive, should he have refused
to give his daughter to Maurice d’Escorval whom she loved, to bestow her
upon a peasant?

As he reached Sairmeuse, he was swearing that he would discover this
motive. A strange scene awaited him. In the broad open space extending
from the front of the chateau to the _parterre_ lay a huge pile of all
kinds of clothing, linen, plate, and furniture. One might have supposed
that the occupants of the chateau were moving. A half dozen men were
running to and fro, and standing in the centre of the rubbish was the
Duc de Sairmeuse, giving orders.

Martial did not understand the whole meaning of the scene at first. He
went to his father, and after saluting him respectfully, inquired:

“What is all this?”

M. de Sairmeuse laughed heartily.

“What! can you not guess?” he replied. “It is very simple, however. When
the lawful master, on his return, sleeps beneath the bed-coverings of
the usurper, it is delightful, the first night, not so pleasant on the
second. Everything here reminds me too forcibly of Monsieur Lacheneur.
It seems to me that I am in his house; and the thought is unendurable.
So I have had them collect everything belonging to him and to his
daughter--everything, in fact, which did not belong to the chateau in
former years. The servants will put it all into a cart and carry it to
him.”

The young marquis gave fervent thanks to Heaven that he had arrived
before it was too late. Had his father’s project been executed, he would
have been obliged to bid farewell to all his hopes.

“You surely will not do this, Monsieur le Duc?” said he, earnestly.

“And why, pray? Who will prevent me from doing it?”

“No one, most assuredly. But you will decide, on reflection, that a
man who has not conducted himself _too_ badly has a right to some
consideration.”

The duke seemed greatly astonished.

“Consideration!” he exclaimed. “This rascal has a right to some
consideration! Well, this is one of the poorest of jokes. What! I give
him--that is to say--you give him a hundred thousand francs, and that
will not content him! He is entitled to consideration! You, who are
after the daughter, may give it to him if you like, but I shall do as I
like!”

“Very well; but, Monsieur, I would think twice, if I were in your place.
Lacheneur has surrendered Sairmeuse. That is all very well; but how can
you authenticate your claim to the property? What would you do if, in
case you imprudently irritated him, he should change his mind? What
would become of your right to the estate?”

M. Sairmeuse actually turned green.

“Zounds!” he exclaimed. “I had not thought of that. Here, you fellows,
take all these things back again, and that quickly!”

And as they were obeying his order:

“Now,” he remarked, “let us hasten to Courtornieu. They have already
sent for us twice. It must be business of the utmost importance which
demands our attention.”



CHAPTER XIII

The Chateau de Courtornieu is, next to Sairmeuse, the most magnificent
habitation in the _arrondissement_ of Montaignac.

The approach to the castle was by a long and narrow road, badly paved.
When the carriage containing Martial and his father turned from the
public highway into this rough road, the jolting aroused the duke from
the profound revery into which he had fallen on leaving Sairmeuse.

The marquis thought that he had caused this unusual fit of abstraction.

“It is the result of my adroit manoeuvre,” he said to himself, not
without secret satisfaction. “Until the restitution of Sairmeuse is
legalized, I can make my father do anything I wish; yes, anything. And
if it is necessary, he will even invite Lacheneur and Marie-Anne to his
table.”

He was mistaken. The duke had already forgotten the affair; his most
vivid impressions lasted no longer than an indentation in the sand.

He lowered the glass in front of the carriage, and, after ordering the
coachman to drive more slowly:

“Now,” said he to his son, “let us talk a little. Are you really in love
with that little Lacheneur?”

Martial could not repress a start. “Oh! in love,” said he, lightly,
“that would perhaps be saying too much. Let me say that she has taken my
fancy; that will be sufficient.”

The duke regarded his son with a bantering air.

“Really, you delight me!” he exclaimed. “I feared that this love-affair
might derange, at least for the moment, certain plans that I have
formed--for I have formed certain plans for you.”

“The devil!”

“Yes, I have my plans, and I will communicate them to you later in
detail. I will content myself today by recommending you to examine
Mademoiselle Blanche de Courtornieu.”

Martial made no reply. This recommendation was entirely unnecessary. If
Mlle. Lacheneur had made him forget Mlle. de Courtornieu that morning
for some moments, the remembrance of Marie-Anne was now effaced by the
radiant image of Blanche.

“Before discussing the daughter,” resumed the duke, “let us speak of the
father. He is one of my strongest friends; and I know him thoroughly.
You have heard men reproach me for what they style my prejudices, have
you not? Well, in comparison with the Marquis de Courtornieu, I am only
a Jacobin.”

“Oh! my father!”

“Really, nothing could be more true. If I am behind the age in which
I live, he belongs to the reign of Louis XIV. Only--for there is an
only--the principles which I openly avow, he keeps locked up in his
snuff-box--and trust him for not forgetting to open it at the opportune
moment. He has suffered cruelly for his opinions, in the sense of having
so often been obliged to conceal them. He concealed them, first, under
the consulate, when he returned from exile. He dissimulated them even
more courageously under the Empire--for he played the part of a kind of
chamberlain to Bonaparte, this dear marquis. But, chut! do not remind
him of that proof of heroism; he has deplored it bitterly since the
battle of Lutzen.”

This was the tone in which M. de Sairmeuse was accustomed to speak of
his best friends.

“The history of his fortune,” he continued, “is the history of his
marriages--I say _marriages_, because he has married a number of times,
and always advantageously. Yes, in a period of fifteen years he has had
the misfortune of losing three wives, each richer than the other. His
daughter is the child of his third and last wife, a Cisse Blossac--she
died in 1809. He comforted himself after each bereavement by purchasing
a quantity of lands or bonds. So that now he is as rich as you are,
Marquis, and his influence is powerful and widespread. I forgot one
detail, however, he believes, they tell me, in the growing power of the
clergy, and has become very devout.”

He checked himself; the carriage had stopped before the entrance of
the Chateau de Courtornieu, and the marquis came forward to receive his
guests in person. A nattering distinction, which he seldom lavished upon
his visitors. The marquis was long rather than tall, and very solemn
in deportment. The head that surmounted his angular form was remarkably
small, a characteristic of his race, and covered with thin, glossy black
hair, and lighted by cold, round black eyes.

The pride that becomes a gentleman, and the humility that befits a
Christian, were continually at war with each other in his countenance.

He pressed the hands of M. de Sairmeuse and Martial, overwhelming them
with compliments uttered in a thin, rather nasal voice, which, issuing
from his immense body, was as astonishing as the sound of a flute
issuing from the pipes of an orphicleide would be.

“At last you have come,” he said; “we were waiting for you before
beginning our deliberations upon a very grave, and also very delicate
matter. We are thinking of addressing a petition to His Majesty. The
nobility, who have suffered so much during the Revolution, have a right
to expect ample compensation. Our neighbors, to the number of sixteen,
are now assembled in my cabinet, transformed for the time into a council
chamber.”

Martial shuddered at the thought of all the ridiculous and tiresome
conversation he would probably be obliged to hear; and his father’s
recommendation occurred to him.

“Shall we not have the honor of paying our respects to Mademoiselle de
Courtornieu?”

“My daughter must be in the drawing-room with our cousin,” replied
the marquis, in an indifferent tone; “at least, if she is not in the
garden.”

This might be construed into, “Go and look for her if you choose.” At
least Martial understood it in that way; and when they entered the hall,
he allowed his father and the marquis to go upstairs without him.

A servant opened the door of the drawing-room for him--but it was empty.

“Very well,” said he; “I know my way to the garden.”

But he explored it in vain; no one was to be found.

He decided to return to the house and march bravely into the presence of
the dreaded enemy. He had turned to retrace his steps when, through the
foliage of a bower of jasmine, he thought he could distinguish a white
dress.

He advanced softly, and his heart quickened its throbbing when he saw
that he was right.

Mlle. Blanche de Courtornieu was seated on a bench beside an old lady,
and was engaged in reading a letter in a low voice.

She must have been greatly preoccupied, since she had not heard
Martial’s footsteps approaching.

He was only ten paces from her, so near that he could distinguish
the shadow of her long eyelashes. He paused, holding his breath, in a
delicious ecstasy.

“Ah! how beautiful she is!” he thought. Beautiful? no. But pretty, yes;
as pretty as heart could desire, with her great velvety blue eyes
and her pouting lips. She was a blonde, but one of those dazzling and
radiant blondes found only in the countries of the sun; and from her
hair, drawn high upon the top of her head, escaped a profusion of
ravishing, glittering ringlets, which seemed almost to sparkle in the
play of the light breeze.

One might, perhaps, have wished her a trifle larger. But she had the
winning charm of all delicate and _mignonnes_ women; and her figure was
of exquisite roundness, and her dimpled hands were those of an infant.

Alas! these attractive exteriors are often deceitful, as much and even
more so, than the appearances of a man like the Marquis de Courtornieu.

The apparently innocent and artless young girl possessed the parched,
hollow soul of an experienced woman of the world, or of an old courtier.
She had been so petted at the convent, in the capacity of only daughter
of a _grand seigneur_ and millionnaire; she had been surrounded by so
much adulation, that all her good qualities had been blighted in the bud
by the poisonous breath of flattery.

She was only nineteen; and still it was impossible for any person to
have been more susceptible to the charms of wealth and of satisfied
ambition. She dreamed of a position at court as a school-girl dreams of
a lover.

If she had deigned to notice Martial--for she had remarked him--it was
only because her father had told her that this young man would lift his
wife to the highest sphere of power. Thereupon she had uttered a “very
well, we will see!” that would have changed an enamoured suitor’s love
into disgust.

Martial advanced a few steps, and Mlle. Blanche, on seeing him, sprang
up with a pretty affectation of intense timidity.

Bowing low before her, he said, gently, and with profound deference:

“Monsieur de Courtornieu, Mademoiselle, was so kind as to tell me where
I might have the honor of finding you. I had not courage to brave those
formidable discussions inside; but----”

He pointed to the letter the young girl held in her hand, and added:

“But I fear that I am _de trop_.”

“Oh! not in the least, Monsieur le Marquis, although this letter which
I have just been reading has, I confess, interested me deeply. It was
written by a poor child in whom I have taken a great interest--whom I
have sent for sometimes when I was lonely--Marie-Anne Lacheneur.”

Accustomed from his infancy to the hypocrisy of drawing-rooms, the young
marquis had taught his face not to betray his feelings.

He could have laughed gayly with anguish at his heart; he could have
preserved the sternest gravity when inwardly convulsed with merriment.

And yet, this name of Marie-Anne upon the lips of Mlle. de Courtornieu,
caused his glance to waver.

“They know each other!” he thought.

In an instant he was himself again; but Mlle. Blanche had perceived his
momentary agitation.

“What can it mean?” she wondered, much disturbed.

Still, it was with the perfect assumption of innocence that she
continued:

“In fact, you must have seen her, this poor Marie-Anne, Monsieur le
Marquis, since her father was the guardian of Sairmeuse?”

“Yes, I have seen her, Mademoiselle,” replied Martial, quietly.

“Is she not remarkably beautiful? Her beauty is of an unusual type, it
quite takes one by surprise.”

A fool would have protested. The marquis was not guilty of this folly.

“Yes, she is very beautiful,” said he.

This apparent frankness disconcerted Mlle. Blanche a trifle; and it was
with an air of hypocritical compassion that she murmured:

“Poor girl! What will become of her? Here is her father, reduced to
delving in the ground.”

“Oh! you exaggerate, Mademoiselle; my father will always preserve
Lacheneur from anything of that kind.”

“Of course--I might have known that--but where will he find a husband
for Marie-Anne?”

“One has been found already. I understand that she is to marry a youth
in the neighborhood, who has some property--a certain Chanlouineau.”

The artless school-girl was more cunning than the marquis. She had
satisfied herself that she had just grounds for her suspicions; and she
experienced a certain anger on finding him so well informed in regard to
everything that concerned Mlle. Lacheneur.

“And do you believe that this is the husband of whom she had dreamed?
Ah, well! God grant that she may be happy; for we were very fond of her,
very--were we not, Aunt Medea?”

Aunt Medea was the old lady seated beside Mlle. Blanche.

“Yes, very,” she replied.

This aunt, or cousin, rather, was a poor relation whom M. de Courtornieu
had sheltered, and who was forced to pay dearly for her bread; since
Mlle. Blanche compelled her to play the part of echo.

“It grieves me to see these friendly relations, which were so dear
to me, broken,” resumed Mlle. de Courtornieu. “But listen to what
Marie-Anne has written.”

She drew from her belt where she had placed it, Mlle. Lacheneur’s letter
and read:


“‘My dear blanche--You know that the Duc de Sairmeuse has returned. The
news fell upon us like a thunder-bolt. My father and I had become
too much accustomed to regard as our own the deposit which had been
intrusted to our fidelity; we have been punished for it. At least, we
have done our duty, and now all is ended. She whom you have called your
friend, will be, hereafter, only a poor peasant girl, as her mother was
before her.’”


The most subtle observer would have supposed that Mlle. Blanche was
experiencing the keenest emotion. One would have sworn that it was only
by intense effort that she succeeded in restraining her tears--that they
were even trembling behind her long lashes.

The truth was, that she was thinking only of discovering, upon Martial’s
face, some indication of his feelings. But now that he was on guard, his
features might have been marble for any sign of emotion they betrayed.
So she continued:


“‘I should utter an untruth if I said that I have not suffered on
account of this sudden change. But I have courage; I shall learn how to
submit. I shall, I hope, have strength to forget, for I _must_ forget!
The remembrances of past felicity would render my present misery
intolerable.’”


Mlle. de Courtornieu suddenly folded up the letter.

“You have heard it, Monsieur,” said she. “Can you understand such pride
as that? And they accuse us, daughters of the nobility, of being proud!”

Martial made no response. He felt that his altered voice would betray
him. How much more would he have been moved, if he had been allowed to
read the concluding lines:


“One must live, my dear Blanche!” added Marie-Anne, “and I feel no false
shame in asking you to aid me. I sew very nicely, as you know, and I
could earn my livelihood by embroidery if I knew more people. I will
call to-day at Courtornieu to ask you to give me a list of ladies to
whom I can present myself on your recommendation.”


But Mlle. de Courtornieu had taken good care not to allude to the
touching request. She had read the letter to Martial as a test. She
had not succeeded; so much the worse. She rose and accepted his arm to
return to the house.

She seemed to have forgotten her friend, and she was chatting gayly.
When they approached the chateau, she was interrupted by a sound of
voices raised to the highest pitch.

It was the address to the King which was agitating the council convened
in M. de Courtornieu’s cabinet.

Mlle. Blanche paused.

“I am trespassing upon your kindness, Monsieur. I am boring you with my
silly chat when you should undoubtedly be up there.”

“Certainly not,” he replied, laughing. “What should I do there? The role
of men of action does not begin until the orators have concluded.”

He spoke so energetically, in spite of his jesting tone, that Mlle. de
Courtornieu was fascinated. She saw before her, she believed, a man
who, as her father had said, would rise to the highest position in the
political world.

Unfortunately, her admiration was disturbed by a ring of the great bell
that always announces visitors.

She trembled, let go her hold on Martial’s arm, and said, very
earnestly:

“Ah, no matter. I wish very much to know what is going on up there. If
I ask my father, he will laugh at my curiosity, while you, Monsieur, if
you are present at the conference, you will tell me all.”

A wish thus expressed was a command. The marquis bowed and obeyed.

“She dismisses me,” he said to himself as he ascended the staircase,
“nothing could be more evident; and that without much ceremony. Why the
devil does she wish to get rid of me?”

Why? Because a single peal of the bell announced a visitor for Mlle.
Blanche; because she was expecting a visit from her friend; and
because she wished at any cost to prevent a meeting between Martial and
Marie-Anne.

She did not love him, and yet an agony of jealousy was torturing her.
Such was her nature.

Her presentiments were realized. It was, indeed, Mlle. Lacheneur who was
awaiting her in the drawing-room.

The poor girl was paler than usual; but nothing in her manner betrayed
the frightful anguish she had suffered during the past two or three
days.

And her voice, in asking from her former friend a list of “customers,”
 was as calm and as natural as in other days, when she was asking her to
come and spend an afternoon at Sairmeuse.

So, when the two girls embraced each other, their roles were reversed.

It was Marie-Anne who had been crushed by misfortune; it was Mlle.
Blanche who wept.

But, while writing a list of the names of persons in the neighborhood
with whom she was acquainted, Mlle. de Courtornieu did not neglect
this favorable opportunity for verifying the suspicions which had been
aroused by Martial’s momentary agitation.

“It is inconceivable,” she remarked to her friend, “that the Duc de
Sairmeuse should allow you to be reduced to such an extremity.”

Marie-Anne’s nature was so royal, that she did not wish an unjust
accusation to rest even upon the man who had treated her father so
cruelly.

“The duke is not to blame,” she replied, gently; “he offered us a very
considerable sum, this morning, through his son.”

Mlle. Blanche started as if a viper had stung her.

“So you have seen the marquis, Marie-Anne?”

“Yes.”

“Has he been to your house?”

“He was going there, when he met me in the grove on the waste.”

She blushed as she spoke; she turned crimson at the thought of Martial’s
impertinent gallantry.

This girl who had just emerged from a convent was terribly experienced;
but she misunderstood the cause of Marie-Anne’s confusion. She could
dissimulate, however, and when Marie-Anne went away, Mlle. Blanche
embraced her with every sign of the most ardent affection. But she was
almost suffocated with rage.

“What!” she thought; “they have met but once, and yet they are so
strongly impressed with each other. Do they love each other already?”



CHAPTER XIV

If Martial had faithfully reported to Mlle. Blanche all that he heard in
the Marquis de Courtornieu’s cabinet, he would probably have astonished
her a little.

He, himself, if he had sincerely confessed his impressions and his
reflections, would have been obliged to admit that he was greatly
amazed.

But this unfortunate man, who, in days to come, would be compelled to
reproach himself bitterly for the excess of his fanaticism, refused
to confess this truth even to himself. His life was to be spent in
defending prejudices which his own reason condemned.

Forced by Mlle. Blanche’s will into the midst of a discussion, he was
really disgusted with the ridiculous and intense greediness of M. de
Courtornieu’s noble guests.

Decorations, fortune, honors, power--they desired everything.

They were satisfied that their pure devotion deserved the most
munificent rewards. It was only the most modest who declared that he
would be content with the epaulets of a lieutenant-general.

Many were the recriminations, stinging words, and bitter reproaches.

The Marquis de Courtornieu, who acted as president of the council, was
nearly exhausted with exclaiming:

“Be calm, gentlemen, be calm! A little moderation, if you please!”

“All these men are mad,” thought Martial, with difficulty restraining
an intense desire to laugh; “they are insane enough to be placed in a
mad-house.”

But he was not obliged to render a report of the _seance_. The
deliberations were soon fortunately interrupted by a summons to dinner.

Mlle. Blanche, when the young marquis rejoined her, quite forgot to
question him about the doings of the council.

In fact, what did the hopes and plans of these people matter to her.

She cared very little about them or about the people themselves, since
they were below her father in rank, and most of them were not as rich.

An absorbing thought--a thought of her future, and of her happiness,
filled her mind to the exclusion of all other subjects.

The few moments that she had passed alone, after Marie-Anne’s departure,
she had spent in grave reflection.

Martial’s mind and person pleased her. In him were combined all the
qualifications which any ambitious woman would desire in a husband--and
she decided that he should be _her_ husband. Probably she would not have
arrived at this conclusion so quickly, had it not been for the feeling
of jealousy aroused in her heart. But from the very moment that she
could believe or suspect that another woman was likely to dispute the
possession of Martial with her, she desired him.

From that moment she was completely controlled by one of those
strange passions in which the heart has no part, but which take entire
possession of the brain and lead to the worst of follies.

Let the woman whose pulse has never quickened its beating under the
influence of this counterfeit of love, cast the first stone.

That she could be vanquished in this struggle for supremacy; that there
could be any doubt of the result, were thoughts which never once entered
the mind of Mlle. Blanche.

She had been told so often, it had been repeated again and again, that
the man whom she would choose must esteem himself fortunate above all
others.

She had seen her father besieged by so many suitors for her hand.

“Besides,” she thought, smiling proudly, as she surveyed her reflection
in the large mirrors; “am I not as pretty as Marie-Anne?”

“Far prettier!” murmured the voice of vanity; “and you possess what your
rival does not: birth, wit, the genius of coquetry!”

She did, indeed, possess sufficient cleverness and patience to assume
and to sustain the character which seemed most likely to dazzle and to
fascinate Martial.

As to maintaining this character _after_ marriage, if it did not please
her to do so, that was another matter!

The result of all this was that during dinner Mlle. Blanche exercised
all her powers of fascination upon the young marquis.

She was so evidently desirous of pleasing him that several of the guests
remarked it.

Some were even shocked by such a breach of conventionality. But Blanche
de Courtornieu could do as she chose; she was well aware of that. Was
she not the richest heiress for miles and miles around? No slander can
tarnish the brilliancy of a fortune of more than a million in hard cash.

“Do you know that those two young people will have a joint income of
between seven and eight hundred thousand francs!” said one old viscount
to his neighbor.

Martial yielded unresistingly to the charm of his position.

How could he suspect unworthy motives in a young girl whose eyes were so
pure, whose laugh rang out with the crystalline clearness of childhood!

Involuntarily he compared her with the grave and thoughtful Marie-Anne,
and his imagination floated from one to the other, inflamed by the
strangeness of the contrast.

He occupied a seat beside Mlle. Blanche at table; and they chatted
gayly, amusing themselves at the expense of the other guests, who were
again conversing upon political matters, and whose enthusiasm waxed
warmer and warmer as course succeeded course.

Champagne was served with the dessert; and the company drank to the
allies whose victorious bayonets had forced a passage for the King to
return to Paris; they drank to the English, to the Prussians, and to the
Russians, whose horses were trampling the crops under foot.

The name of d’Escorval heard, above the clink of the glasses, suddenly
aroused Martial from his dream of enchantment.

An old gentleman had just risen, and proposed that active measures
should be taken to rid the neighborhood of the Baron d’Escorval.

“The presence of such a man dishonors our country,” said he, “he is a
frantic Jacobin, and admitted to be dangerous, since Monsieur Fouche
has him upon his list of suspected persons; and he is even now under the
surveillance of the police.”

This discourse could not have failed to arouse intense anxiety in M.
d’Escorval’s breast had he seen the ferocity expressed on almost every
face.

Still no one spoke; hesitation could be read in every eye.

Martial, too, had turned so white that Mlle. Blanche remarked his pallor
and thought he was ill.

In fact, a terrible struggle was going on in the soul of the young
marquis; a conflict between his honor and passion.

Had he not longed only a few hours before to find some way of driving
Maurice from the country?

Ah, well! the opportunity he so ardently desired now presented itself.
It was impossible to imagine a better one. If the proposed step was
taken the Baron d’Escorval and his family would be forced to leave
France forever!

The company hesitated; Martial saw it, and felt that a single word from
him, for or against, would decide the matter.

After a few minutes of frightful uncertainty, honor triumphed.

He rose and declared that the proposed measure was bad--impolitic.

“Monsieur d’Escorval,” he remarked, “is one of those men who diffuse
around them a perfume of honesty and justice. Have the good sense to
respect the consideration which is justly his.”

As he had foreseen, his words decided the matter. The cold and haughty
manner which he knew so well how to assume, his few but incisive words,
produced a great effect.

“It would evidently be a great mistake!” was the general cry.

Martial reseated himself; Mlle. Blanche leaned toward him.

“You have done well,” she murmured; “you know how to defend your
friends.”

“Monsieur d’Escorval is not my friend,” replied Martial, in a voice
which revealed the struggle through which he had passed. “The injustice
of the proposed measure incensed me, that is all.”

Mlle. de Courtornieu was not to be deceived by an explanation like this.
Still she added:

“Then your conduct is all the more grand, Monsieur.”

But such was not the opinion of the Duc de Sairmeuse. On returning to
the chateau some hours later he reproached his son for his intervention.

“Why the devil did you meddle with the matter?” inquired the duke. “I
would not have liked to take upon myself the odium of the proposition,
but since it had been made----”

“I was anxious to prevent such an act of useless folly!”

“Useless folly! Zounds! Marquis, you carry matters with a high hand. Do
you think that this d----d baron adores you? What would you say if you
heard that he was conspiring against us?”

“I should answer with a shrug of the shoulders.”

“You would! Very well; do me the favor to question Chupin.”



CHAPTER XV

It was only two weeks since the Duc de Sairmeuse had returned to France;
he had not yet had time to shake the dust of exile from his feet, and
already his imagination saw enemies on every side.

He had been at Sairmeuse only two days, and yet he unhesitatingly
accepted the venomous reports which Chupin poured into his ears.

The suspicions which he was endeavoring to make Martial share were
cruelly unjust.

At the moment when the duke accused the baron of conspiring against the
house of Sairmeuse, that unfortunate man was weeping at the bedside of
his son, who was, he believed, at the point of death.

Maurice was indeed dangerously ill.

His excessively nervous organization had succumbed before the rude
assaults of destiny.

When, in obedience to M. Lacheneur’s imperative order, he left the grove
on the Reche, he lost the power of reflecting calmly and deliberately
upon the situation.

Marie-Anne’s incomprehensible obstinacy, the insults he had received
from the marquis, and Lacheneur’s feigned anger were mingled in
inextricable confusion, forming one immense, intolerable misfortune, too
crushing for his powers of resistance.

The peasants who met him on his homeward way were struck by his singular
demeanor, and felt convinced that some great catastrophe had just
befallen the house of the Baron d’Escorval.

Some bowed; others spoke to him, but he did not see or hear them.

Force of habit--that physical memory which mounts guard when the mind is
far away--brought him back to his home.

His features were so distorted with suffering that Mme. d’Escorval, on
seeing him, was seized with a most sinister presentiment, and dared not
address him.

He spoke first.

“All is over!” he said, hoarsely, “but do not be worried, mother; I have
some courage, as you shall see.”

He did, in fact, seat himself at the table with a resolute air. He ate
even more than usual; and his father noticed, without alluding to it,
that he drank much more wine than usual.

He was very pale, his eyes glittered, his gestures were excited, and his
voice was husky. He talked a great deal, and even jested.

“Why will he not weep,” thought Mme. d’Escorval; “then I should not be
so much alarmed, and I could try to comfort him.”

This was Maurice’s last effort. When dinner was over he went to his
room, and when his mother, who had gone again and again to listen at his
door, finally decided to enter his chamber, she found him lying upon the
bed, muttering incoherently.

She approached him. He did not appear to recognize or even to see her.
She spoke to him. He did not seem to hear. His face was scarlet, his
lips were parched. She took his hand; it was burning; and still he was
shivering, and his teeth were chattering as if with cold.

A mist swam before the eyes of the poor woman; she feared she was about
to faint; but, summoning all her strength, she conquered her weakness
and, dragging herself to the staircase, she cried:

“Help! help! My son is dying!”

With a bound M. d’Escorval reached his son’s chamber, looked at him
and dashed out again, summoned a servant, and ordered him to gallop to
Montaignac and bring a physician without a moment’s delay.

There was, indeed, a doctor at Sairmeuse, but he was the most stupid
of men--a former surgeon in the army, who had been dismissed for
incompetency. The peasants shunned him as they would the plague; and in
case of sickness always sent for the cure. M. d’Escorval followed their
example, knowing that the physician from Montaignac could not arrive
until nearly morning.

Abbe Midon had never frequented the medical schools, but since he had
been a priest the poor so often asked advice of him that he applied
himself to the study of medicine, and, aided by experience, he had
acquired a knowledge of the art which would have won him a diploma from
the faculty anywhere.

At whatever hour of the day or night parishioners came to ask his
assistance, he was always ready--his only answer: “Let us go at once.”

And when the people of the neighborhood met him on the road with his
little box of medicine slung over his shoulder, they took off their hats
respectfully and stood aside to let him pass. Those who did not respect
the priest honored the man.

For M. d’Escorval, above all others, Abbe Midon would make haste. The
baron was his friend; and a terrible apprehension seized him when he saw
Mme. d’Escorval at the gate watching for him. By the way in which
she rushed to meet him, he thought she was about to announce some
irreparable misfortune. But no--she took his hand, and, without uttering
a word, she led him to her son’s chamber.

The condition of the poor youth was really very critical; the abbe
perceived this at a glance, but it was not hopeless.

“We will get him out of this,” he said, with a smile that reawakened
hope.

And with the coolness of an old practitioner, he bled him freely, and
ordered applications of ice to his head.

In a moment all the household were busied in fulfilling the cure’s
orders. He took advantage of the opportunity to draw the baron aside in
the embrasure of a window.

“What has happened?” he asked.

“A disappointment in love,” M. d’Escorval replied, with a despairing
gesture. “Monsieur Lacheneur has refused the hand of his daughter, which
I asked in behalf of my son. Maurice was to have seen Marie-Anne to-day.
What passed between them I do not know. The result you see.”

The baroness re-entered the room, and the two men said no more. A truly
funereal silence pervaded the apartment, broken only by the moans of
Maurice.

His excitement instead of abating had increased in violence. Delirium
peopled his brain with phantoms; and the name of Marie-Anne, Martial de
Sairmeuse and Chanlouineau dropped so incoherently from his lips that it
was impossible to read his thoughts.

How long that night seemed to M. d’Escorval and his wife, those only
know who have counted each second beside the sick-bed of some loved one.

Certainly their confidence in the companion in their vigil was great;
but he was not a regular physician like the other, the one whose coming
they awaited.

Just as the light of the morning made the candles turn pale, they heard
the furious gallop of a horse, and soon the doctor from Montaignac
entered.

He examined Maurice carefully, and, after a short conference with the
priest:

“_I_ see no immediate danger,” he declared. “All that can be done
has been done. The malady must be allowed to take its course. I will
return.”

He did return the next day and many days after, for it was not until a
week had passed that Maurice was declared out of danger.

Then he confided to his father all that had taken place in the grove
on the Reche. The slightest detail of the scene had engraved itself
indelibly upon his memory. When the recital was ended:

“Are you quite sure,” asked his father, “that you correctly understood
Marie-Anne’s reply? Did she tell you that if her father gave his consent
to your marriage, she would refuse hers?”

“Those were her very words.”

“And still she loves you?”

“I am sure of it.”

“You were not mistaken in Monsieur Lacheneur’s tone when he said to
you: ‘Go, you little wretch! do you wish to render all my precautions
useless?’”

“No.”

M. d’Escorval sat for a moment in silence.

“This passes comprehension,” he murmured at last. And so low that his
son could not hear him, he added: “I will see Lacheneur to-morrow; this
mystery must be explained.”



CHAPTER XVI

The cottage where M. Lacheneur had taken refuge was situated on a hill
overlooking the water.

It was, as he had said, a small and humble dwelling, but it was rather
less miserable than the abodes of most of the peasants of the district.

It was only one story high, but it was divided into three rooms, and the
roof was covered with thatch.

In front was a tiny garden, in which a few fruit-trees, some withered
cabbages, and a vine which covered the cottage to the roof, managed to
find subsistence.

This garden was a mere nothing, but even this slight conquest over
the sterility of the soil had cost Lacheneur’s deceased aunt almost
unlimited courage and patience.

For more than twenty years the poor woman had never, for a single day,
failed to throw upon her garden three or four basketfuls of richer soil,
which she was obliged to bring more than half a league.

It had been more than a year since she died; but the little pathway
which her patient feet had worn in the performance of this daily task
was still distinctly visible.

This was the path which M. d’Escorval, faithful to his resolution, took
the following day, in the hope of wresting from Marie-Anne’s father the
secret of his inexplicable conduct.

He was so engrossed in his own thoughts that he failed to notice the
overpowering heat as he climbed the rough hill-side in the full glare of
the noonday sun.

When he reached the summit, however, he paused to take breath; and while
wiping the perspiration from his brow, he turned to look back on the
road which he had traversed.

It was the first time he had visited the spot, and he was surprised at
the extent of the landscape which stretched before him.

From this point, which is the most elevated in the surrounding country,
one can survey the entire valley of the Oiselle, and discern, in the
distance, the redoubtable citadel of Montaignac, built upon an almost
inaccessible rock.

This last circumstance, which the baron was afterward doomed to recall
in the midst of the most terrible scenes, did not strike him then.
Lacheneur’s house absorbed all his attention.

His imagination pictured vividly the sufferings of this unfortunate man,
who, only two days before, had relinquished the splendors of the Chateau
de Sairmeuse to repair to this wretched abode.

He rapped at the door of the cottage.

“Come in!” said a voice.

The baron lifted the latch and entered.

The room was small, with un-white-washed walls, but with no other floor
than the ground; no ceiling save the thatch that formed the roof.

A bed, a table and two wooden benches constituted the entire furniture.

Seated upon a stool, near the tiny window, sat Marie-Anne, busily at
work upon a piece of embroidery.

She had abandoned her former mode of dress, and her costume was that
worn by the peasant girls.

When M. d’Escorval entered she rose, and for a moment they remained
silently standing, face to face, she apparently calm, he visibly
agitated.

He was looking at Marie-Anne; and she seemed to him transfigured. She
was much paler and considerably thinner; but her beauty had a strange
and touching charm--the sublime radiance of heroic resignation and of
duty nobly fulfilled.

Still, remembering his son, he was astonished to see this tranquillity.

“You do not ask me for news of Maurice,” he said, reproachfully.

“I had news of him this morning, Monsieur, as I have had every day. I
know that he is improving; and that, since day before yesterday, he has
been allowed to take a little nourishment.”

“You have not forgotten him, then?”

She trembled; a faint blush suffused throat and forehead, but it was in
a calm voice that she replied:

“Maurice knows that it would be impossible for me to forget him, even if
I wished to do so.”

“And yet you have told him that you approve your father’s decision!”

“I told him so, Monsieur, and I shall have the courage to repeat it.”

“But you have made Maurice wretched, unhappy, child; he has almost
died.”

She raised her head proudly, sought M. d’Escorval’s eyes, and when she
had found them:

“Look at me, Monsieur. Do you think that I, too, do not suffer?”

M. d’Escorval was abashed for a moment; but recovering himself, he took
Marie-Anne’s hand, and pressing it affectionately, he said:

“So Maurice loves you; you love him; you suffer; he has nearly died, and
still you reject him!”

“It must be so, Monsieur.”

“You say this, my dear child--you say this, and you undoubtedly believe
it. But I, who have sought to discover the necessity of this immense
sacrifice, have failed to find it. Explain to me, then, why this must be
so, Marie-Anne. Who knows but you are frightened by chimeras, which my
experience can scatter with a breath? Have you no confidence in me? Am
I not an old friend? It may be that your father, in his despair,
has adopted extreme resolutions. Speak, let us combat them together.
Lacheneur knows how devotedly I am attached to him. I will speak to him;
he will listen to _me_.”

“_I_ can tell you nothing, Monsieur.”

“What! you are so cruel as to remain inflexible when a father entreats
you on his knees--a father who says to you: ‘Marie-Anne, you hold in
your hands the happiness, the life, the reason of my son----’”

Tears glittered in Marie-Anne’s eyes, but she drew away her hand.

“Ah! it is you who are cruel, Monsieur; it is you who are without pity.
Do you not see what I suffer, and that it is impossible for me to endure
further torture? No, I have nothing to tell you; there is nothing
you can say to my father. Why do you seek to impair my courage when I
require it all to struggle against my despair? Maurice must forget me;
he must never see me again. This is fate; and he must not fight against
it. It would be folly. We are parted forever. Beseech Maurice to leave
the country, and if he refuses, you, who are his father, must command
him to do so. And you, too, Monsieur, in Heaven’s name, flee from us.
We shall bring misfortune upon you. Never return here; our house is
accursed. The fate that overshadows us will ruin you also.”

She spoke almost wildly. Her voice was so loud that it penetrated an
adjoining room.

The communicating door opened and M. Lacheneur appeared upon the
threshold.

At the sight of M. d’Escorval he uttered an oath. But there was more
sorrow and anxiety than anger in his manner, as he said:

“You, Monsieur, you here!”

The consternation into which Marie-Anne’s words had thrown M. d’Escorval
was so intense that it was with great difficulty he stammered out a
response.

“You have abandoned us entirely; I was anxious about you. Have you
forgotten our old friendship? I come to you----”

The brow of the former master of Sairmeuse remained overcast.

“Why did you not inform me of the honor that the baron had done me,
Marie-Anne?” he said sternly.

She tried to speak, but could not; and it was the baron who replied:

“Why, I have but just come, my dear friend.”

M. Lacheneur looked suspiciously, first at his daughter, then at the
baron.

“What did they say to each other while they were alone?” he was
evidently wondering.

But, however great may have been his disquietude, he seemed to master
it; and it was with his old-time affability of manner that he invited M.
d’Escorval to follow him into the adjoining room.

“It is my reception-room and my cabinet combined,” he said, smiling.

This room, which was much larger than the first, was as scantily
furnished; but it contained several piles of small books and an infinite
number of tiny packages.

Two men were engaged in arranging and sorting these articles.

One was Chanlouineau.

M. d’Escorval did not remember that he had ever seen the other, who was
a young man.

“This is my son, Jean, Monsieur,” said Lacheneur. “He has changed since
you last saw him ten years ago.”

It was true. It had been, at least, ten years since the baron had seen
Lacheneur’s son.

How time flies! He had left him a boy; he found him a man.

Jean was just twenty; but his haggard features and his precocious beard
made him appear much older.

He was tall and well formed, and his face indicated more than average
intelligence.

Still he did not impress one favorably. His restless eyes were always
invading yours; and his smile betrayed an unusual degree of shrewdness,
amounting almost to cunning.

As his father presented him, he bowed profoundly; but he was very
evidently out of temper.

M. Lacheneur resumed:

“Having no longer the means to maintain Jean in Paris, I have made him
return. My ruin will, perhaps, be a blessing to him. The air of great
cities is not good for the son of a peasant. Fools that we are, we
send them there to teach them to rise above their fathers. But they do
nothing of the kind. They think only of degrading themselves.”

“Father,” interrupted the young man; “father, wait, at least, until we
are alone!”

“Monsieur d’Escorval is not a stranger.” Chanlouineau evidently sided
with the son, since he made repeated signs to M. Lacheneur to be silent.

Either he did not see them, or he pretended not to see them, for he
continued:

“I must have wearied you, Monsieur, by telling you again and again: ‘I
am pleased with my son. He has a commendable ambition; he is working
faithfully; he will succeed.’ Ah! I was a poor, foolish father! The
friend who carried Jean the order to return has enlightened me, to my
sorrow. This model young man you see here left the gaming-house only to
run to public balls. He was in love with a wretched little ballet-girl
in some low theatre; and to please this creature, he also went upon the
stage, with his face painted red and white.”

“To appear upon the stage is not a crime.”

“No; but it is a crime to deceive one’s father and to affect virtues
which one does not possess! Have I ever refused you money? No.
Notwithstanding that, you have contracted debts everywhere, and you owe
at least twenty thousand francs.”

Jean hung his head; he was evidently angry, but he feared his father.

“Twenty thousand francs!” repeated M. Lacheneur. “I had them a fortnight
ago; now I have nothing. I can hope to obtain this sum only through
the generosity of the Duc de Sairmeuse and his son.” These words from
Lacheneur’s lips astonished the baron.

Lacheneur perceived it, and it was with every appearance of sincerity
and good faith that he resumed:

“Does what _I say_ surprise you? I understand why. My anger at first
made me give utterance to all sorts of absurd threats. But I am calm
now, and I realize my injustice. What could I expect the duke to do? To
make me a present of Sairmeuse? He was a trifle brusque, I confess, but
that is his way; at heart he is the best of men.”

“Have you seen him again?”

“No; but I have seen his son. I have even been with him to the chateau
to designate the articles which I desire to keep. Oh! he refused me
nothing. Everything was placed at my disposal--everything. I selected
what I wished--furniture, clothing, linen. It is all to be brought here;
and I shall be quite a _grand seigneur_.”

“Why not seek another house? This----”

“This pleases me, Monsieur. Its situation suits me perfectly.”

In fact, why should not the Sairmeuse have regretted their odious
conduct? Was it impossible that Lacheneur, in spite of his indignation,
should conclude to accept honorable separation? Such were M.
d’Escorval’s reflections.

“To say that the marquis has been kind is saying too little,” continued
Lacheneur. “He has shown us the most delicate attentions. For example,
having noticed how much Marie-Anne regrets the loss of her flowers,
he has declared that he is going to send her plants to stock our small
garden, and that they shall be renewed every month.”

Like all passionate men, M. Lacheneur overdid his part. This last remark
was too much; it awakened a sinister suspicion in M. d’Escorval’s mind.

“Good God!” he thought, “does this wretched man meditate some crime?”

He glanced at Chanlouineau, and his anxiety increased. On hearing the
names of the marquis and of Marie-Anne, the robust farmer had turned
livid. “It is decided,” said Lacheneur, with an air of the lost
satisfaction, “that they will give me the ten thousand francs bequeathed
to me by Mademoiselle Armande. Moreover, I am to fix upon such a sum as
I consider a just recompense for my services. And that is not all; they
have offered me the position of manager at Sairmeuse; and I was to be
allowed to occupy the gamekeeper’s cottage, where I lived so long. But
on reflection I refused this offer. After having enjoyed for so long
a time a fortune which did not belong to me, I am anxious to amass a
fortune of my own.”

“Would it be indiscreet in me to inquire what you intend to do?”

“Not the least in the world. I am going to turn pedler.”

M. d’Escorval could not believe his ears. “Pedler?” he repeated.

“Yes, Monsieur. Look, there is my pack in that corner.”

“But this is absurd!” exclaimed M. d’Escorval. “People can scarcely earn
their daily bread in this way.”

“You are wrong, Monsieur. I have considered the subject carefully; the
profits are thirty per cent. And if besides, there will be three of us
to sell goods, for I shall confide one pack to my son, and another to
Chanlouineau.”

“What! Chanlouineau?”

“He has become my partner in the enterprise.”

“And his farm--who will take care of that?”

“He will employ day-laborers.”

And then, as if wishing to make M. d’Escorval understand that his visit
had lasted quite long enough, Lacheneur began arranging the little
packages which were destined to fill the pack of the travelling
merchant.

But the baron was not to be gotten rid of so easily, now that his
suspicions had become almost a certainty.

“_I_ must speak with you,” he said, brusquely.

M. Lacheneur turned.

“_I_ am very busy,” he replied, with a very evident reluctance.

“_I_ ask only five minutes. But if you have not the time to spare
to-day, I will return to-morrow--day after to-morrow--and every day
until I can see you in private.”

Lacheneur saw plainly that it would be impossible to escape this
interview, so, with the gesture of a man who resigns himself to a
necessity, addressing his son and Chanlouineau, he said:

“Go outside for a few moments.”

They obeyed, and as soon as the door had closed behind them, Lacheneur
said:

“I know very well, Monsieur, the arguments you intend to advance; and
the reason of your coming. You come to ask me again for Marie-Anne.
I know that my refusal has nearly killed Maurice. Believe me, I have
suffered cruelly at the thought; but my refusal is none the less
irrevocable. There is no power in the world capable of changing my
resolution. Do not ask my motives; I shall not reveal them; but rest
assured that they are sufficient.”

“Are we not your friends?”

“You, Monsieur!” exclaimed Lacheneur, in tones of the most lively
affection, “you! ah! you know it well! You are the best, the only
friends, I have here below. I should be the basest and the most
miserable of men if I did not guard the recollection of all your
kindnesses until my eyes close in death. Yes, you are my friends; yes, I
am devoted to you--and it is for that very reason that I answer: no, no,
never!”

There could no longer be any doubt. M. d’Escorval seized Lacheneur’s
hands, and almost crushing them in his grasp:

“Unfortunate man!” he exclaimed, hoarsely, “what do you intend to do? Of
what terrible vengeance are you dreaming?”

“I swear to you----”

“Oh! do not swear. You cannot deceive a man of my age and of my
experience. I divine your intentions--you hate the Sairmeuse family more
mortally than ever.”

“I?”

“Yes, you; and if you pretend to forget it, it is only that they may
forget it. These people have offended you too cruelly not to fear you;
you understand this, and you are doing all in your power to reassure
them. You accept their advances--you kneel before them--why? Because
they will be more completely in your power when you have lulled their
suspicions to rest, and then you can strike them more surely----”

He paused; the communicating door opened, and Marie-Anne appeared upon
the threshold.

“Father,” said she, “here is the Marquis de Sairmeuse.”

This name, which Marie-Anne uttered in a voice of such perfect
composure, in the midst of this excited discussion, possessed such a
powerful significance, that M. d’Escorval stood as if petrified.

“He dares to come here!” he thought. “How can it be that he does not
fear the walls will fall and crush him?”

M. Lacheneur cast a withering glance at his daughter. He suspected her
of a ruse which would force him to reveal his secret. For a second, the
most furious passion contracted his features.

But, by a prodigious effort of will, he succeeded in regaining his
composure. He sprang to the door, pushed Marie-Anne aside, and leaning
out, he said:

“Deign to excuse me, Monsieur, if I take the liberty of asking you to
wait a moment; I am just finishing some business, and I will be with you
in a moment.”

Neither agitation nor anger could be detected in his voice; but, rather,
a respectful deference, and a feeling of profound gratitude.

Having said this, he closed the door and turned to M. d’Escorval.

The baron, still standing with folded arms, had witnessed this scene
with the air of a man who distrusts the evidence of his own senses; and
yet he understood the meaning of it only too well.

“So this young man comes here?” he said to Lacheneur.

“Almost every day--not at this hour, usually, but a trifle later.”

“And you receive him? you welcome him?”

“Certainly, Monsieur. How can I be insensible to the honor he confers
upon me? Moreover, we have subjects of mutual interest to discuss. We
are now occupied in legalizing the restitution of Sairmeuse. I can,
also, give him much useful information, and many hints regarding the
management of the property.”

“And do you expect to make me, your old friend, believe that a man of
your superior intelligence is deceived by the excuses the marquis makes
for these frequent visits? Look me in the eye, and then tell me, if you
dare, that you believe these visits are addressed to you!”

Lacheneur’s eye did not waver.

“To whom else could they be addressed?” he inquired.

This obstinate serenity disappointed the baron’s expectations. He could
not have received a heavier blow.

“Take care, Lacheneur,” he said, sternly. “Think of the situation in
which you place your daughter, between Chanlouineau, who wishes to make
her his wife, and Monsieur de Sairmeuse, who desires to make her----”

“Who desires to make her his mistress--is that what you mean? Oh, say
the word. But what does that matter? I am sure of Marie-Anne.”

M. d’Escorval shuddered.

“In other words,” said he, in bitter indignation, “you make your
daughter’s honor and reputation your stake in the game you are playing.”

This was too much. Lacheneur could restrain his furious passion no
longer.

“Well, yes!” he exclaimed, with a frightful oath, “yes, you have spoken
the truth. Marie-Anne must be, and will be, the instrument of my plans.
A man situated as I am is free from the considerations that restrain
other men. Fortune, friends, life, honor--I have been forced to
sacrifice all. Perish my daughter’s virtue--perish my daughter
herself--what do they matter, if I can but succeed?”

He was terrible in his fanaticism; and in his mad excitement he clinched
his hands as if he were threatening some invisible enemy; his eyes were
wild and bloodshot.

The baron seized him by the coat as if to prevent his escape.

“You admit it, then?” he said. “You wish to revenge yourself on the
Sairmeuse family, and you have made Chanlouineau your accomplice?”

But Lacheneur, with a sudden movement, freed himself.

“I admit nothing,” he replied. “And yet I wish to reassure you----”

He raised his hand as if to take an oath, and in a solemn voice, he
said:

“Before God, who hears my words, by all that I hold sacred in this
world, by the memory of my sainted wife who lies beneath the sod, I
swear that I am plotting nothing against the Sairmeuse family; that
I had no thought of touching a hair of their heads. I use them only
because they are absolutely indispensable to me. They will aid me
without injuring themselves.”

Lacheneur, this time, spoke the truth. His hearer felt it; still he
pretended to doubt. He thought by retaining his own self-possession,
and exciting the anger of this unfortunate man still more, he might,
perhaps, discover his real intentions. So it was with an air of
suspicion that he said:

“How can one believe this assurance after the avowal you have just
made?”

Lacheneur saw the snare; he regained his self-possession as if by magic.

“So be it, Monsieur, refuse to believe me. But you will wring from me
only one more word on this subject. I have said too much already. I know
that you are guided solely by friendship for me; my gratitude is great,
but I cannot reply to your question. The events of the past few days
have dug a deep abyss between you and me. Do not endeavor to pass it.
Why should we ever meet again? I must say to you, what I said only
yesterday to Abbe Midon. If you are my friend, you will never come here
again--never--by night or by day, or under any pretext whatever. Even if
they tell you that I am dying, do not come. This house is fatal. And if
you meet me, turn away; shun me as you would a pestilence whose touch is
deadly!”

The baron was silent. This was in substance what Marie-Anne had said to
him, only under another form.

“But there is still a wiser course that you might pursue. Everything
here is certain to augment the sorrow and despair which afflicts your
son. There is not a path, nor a tree, nor a flower which does not
cruelly remind him of his former happiness. Leave this place; take him
with you, and go far away.”

“Ah! how can I do this? Fouche has virtually imprisoned me here.”

“All the more reason why you should listen to my advice. You were a
friend of the Emperor, hence you are regarded with suspicion; you are
surrounded by spies. Your enemies are watching for an opportunity
to ruin you. The slightest pretext would suffice to throw you into
prison--a letter, a word, an act capable of being misconstrued. The
frontier is not far off; go, and wait in a foreign land for happier
times.”

“That is something which I will not do,” said M. d’Escorval, proudly.

His words and accent showed the folly of further discussion. Lacheneur
understood this only too well, and seemed to despair.

“Ah! you are like Abbe Midon,” he said, sadly; “you will not believe.
Who knows how much your coming here this morning will cost you? It is
said that no one can escape his destiny. But if some day the hand of the
executioner is laid upon your shoulder, remember that I warned you, and
do not curse me.”

He paused, and seeing that even this sinister prophecy produced no
impression upon the baron, he pressed his hand as if to bid him an
eternal farewell, and opened the door to admit the Marquis de Sairmeuse.

Martial was, perhaps, annoyed at meeting M. d’Escorval; but he
nevertheless bowed with studied politeness, and began a lively
conversation with M. Lacheneur, telling him that the articles he had
selected at the chateau were on their way.

M. d’Escorval could do no more. To speak with Marie-Anne was impossible:
Chanlouineau and Jean would not let him go out of their sight.

He reluctantly departed, and oppressed by cruel forebodings, he
descended the hill which he had climbed an hour before so full of hope.

What should he say to Maurice?

He had reached the little grove of pines when a hurried footstep behind
him made him turn.

The Marquis de Sairmeuse was following him, and motioned him to
stop. The baron paused, greatly surprised; Martial, with that air of
ingenuousness which he knew so well how to assume, and in an almost
brusque tone, said:

“I hope, Monsieur, that you will excuse me for having followed you, when
you hear what I have to say. I am not of your party; I loathe what you
adore; but I have none of the passion nor the malice of your enemies.
For this reason I tell you that if I were in your place I would take
a journey. The frontier is but a few miles away; a good horse, a short
gallop, and you have crossed it. A word to the wise is--salvation!”

And without waiting for any response, he turned and retraced his steps.

M. d’Escorval was amazed and confounded.

“One might suppose there was a conspiracy to drive me away!” he
murmured. “But I have good reason to distrust the disinterestedness of
this young man.”

Martial was already far off. Had he been less preoccupied, he would
have perceived two figures in the wood. Mlle. Blanche de Courtornieu,
followed by the inevitable Aunt Medea, had come to play the spy.



CHAPTER XVII

The Marquis de Courtornieu idolized his daughter. Everyone spoke of that
as an incontestable and uncontested fact.

When persons spoke to him of his daughter, they always said:

“You, who adore your daughter----”

And when he spoke of himself, _he_ said:

“I who adore Blanche.”

The truth was, that he would have given a good deal, even a third of his
fortune, to be rid of her.

This smiling young girl, who seemed such an artless child, had gained
an absolute control over him. She forced him to bow like a reed to her
every caprice--and Heaven knows she had enough of them!

In the hope of making his escape, he had thrown her Aunt Medea; but in
less than three months that poor woman had been completely subjugated,
and did not serve to divert his daughter’s attention from him, even for
a moment.

Sometimes the marquis revolted, but nine times out of ten he paid dearly
for his attempts at rebellion. When Mlle. Blanche turned her cold and
steel-like eyes upon him with a certain peculiar expression, his courage
evaporated. Her weapon was irony; and knowing his weak points, she
struck with wonderful precision.

It is easy to understand how devoutly he prayed and hoped that some
honest young man, by speedily marrying his daughter, would free him from
this cruel bondage.

But where was he to find this liberator?

The marquis had announced everywhere his intention of bestowing a dowry
of a million upon his daughter. Of course this had brought a host of
eager suitors, not only from the immediate neighborhood, but from parts
remote.

But, unfortunately, though many of them would have suited M. de
Courtornieu well enough, not a single one had been so fortunate as to
please Mlle. Blanche.

Her father presented some suitor; she received him graciously, lavished
all her charms upon him; but as soon as his back was turned, she
disappointed all her father’s hopes by rejecting him.

“He is too small,” she said, “or too large. His rank is not equal to
ours. I think him stupid. He is a fool--his nose is so ugly.”

From these summary decisions there was no appeal. Arguments and
persuasions were useless. The condemned man no longer existed.

Still, as this view of aspirants to her hand amused her, she encouraged
her father in his efforts. He was beginning to despair, when fate
dropped the Duc de Sairmeuse and son at his very door. When he saw
Martial, he had a presentiment of his approaching release.

“He will be my son-in-law,” he thought.

The marquis believed it best to strike the iron while it was hot. So,
the very next day, he broached the subject to the duke.

His overtures were favorably received.

Possessed with the desire of transforming Sairmeuse into a little
principality, the duke could not fail to be delighted with an alliance
with one of the oldest and wealthiest families in the neighborhood.

The conference was short.

“Martial, my son, possesses, in his own right, an income of at least six
hundred thousand francs,” said the duke.

“I shall give my daughter at least--yes, at least fifteen hundred
thousand francs as her marriage portion,” declared the marquis.

“His Majesty is favorably disposed toward me. I can obtain any important
diplomatic position for Martial.”

“In case of trouble, I have many friends among the opposition.”

The treaty was thus concluded; but M. de Courtornieu took good care not
to speak of it to his daughter. If he told her how much he desired
the match, she would be sure to oppose it. Non-interference seemed
advisable.

The correctness of his judgment was fully demonstrated. One morning
Mlle. Blanche made her appearance in his cabinet.

“Your capricious daughter has decided, papa, that she would like to
become the Marquise de Sairmeuse,” said she, peremptorily.

It cost M. de Courtornieu quite an effort to conceal his delight; but he
feared if she discovered his satisfaction that the game would be lost.

He presented several objections; they were quickly disposed of; and, at
last, he ventured to say:

“Then the marriage is half decided; one of the parties consents. It only
remains to ascertain if----”

“The other will consent,” declared the vain heiress.

And, in fact, for several days Mlle. Blanche had been applying herself
assiduously and quite successfully to the work of fascination which was
to bring Martial to her feet.

After having made an advance, with studied frankness and simplicity,
sure of the effect she had produced, she now proceeded to beat a
retreat--a manoeuvre so simple that it was almost sure to succeed.

Until now she had been gay, _spirituette_, and coquettish; gradually,
she became quiet and reserved. The giddy school-girl had given place to
the shrinking virgin.

With what perfection she played her part in the divine comedy of first
love! Martial could not fail to be fascinated by the modest artlessness
and chaste fears of the heart which seemed to be waking for him. When he
appeared, Mlle. Blanche blushed and was silent. At a word from him
she became confused. He could only occasionally catch a glimpse of her
beautiful eyes through the shelter of their long lashes.

Who had taught her this refinement of coquetry? They say that the
convent is an excellent teacher.

But what she had not learned was that the most clever often become the
dupes of their own imagination; and that great _comediennes_ generally
conclude by shedding real tears.

She learned this one evening, when a laughing remark made by the Duc de
Sairmeuse revealed the fact that Martial was in the habit of going to
Lacheneur’s house every day.

What she experienced now could not be compared with the jealousy, or
rather anger, which had previously agitated her.

This was an acute, bitter, and intolerable sorrow. Before, she had been
able to retain her composure; now, it was impossible.

That she might not betray herself, she left the drawing-room
precipitately and hastened to her own room, where she burst into a fit
of passionate sobbing.

“Can it be that he does not love me?” she murmured.

This thought made her cold with terror. For the first time this haughty
heiress distrusted her own power.

She reflected that Martial’s position was so exalted that he could
afford to despise rank; that he was so rich that wealth had no
attractions for him; and that she herself might not be so pretty and so
charming as flatterers had led her to suppose.

Still Martial’s conduct during the past week--and Heaven knows with
what fidelity her memory recalled each incident--was well calculated to
reassure her.

He had not, it is true, formally declared himself, but it was evident
that he was paying his addresses to her. His manner was that of the most
respectful, but the most infatuated of lovers.

Her reflections were interrupted by the entrance of her maid, bringing a
large bouquet of roses which had just been sent by Martial.

She took the flowers, and while arranging them in a large Japanese vase,
she bedewed them with the first real sincere tears she had shed since
her entrance into the world.

She was so pale and sad, so unlike herself when she appeared the next
morning at breakfast, that Aunt Medea was alarmed.

Mlle. Blanche had prepared an excuse, and she uttered it in such sweet
tones that the poor lady was as much amazed as if she had witnessed a
miracle.

M. de Courtornieu was no less astonished.

“Of what new freak is this doleful face the preface?” he wondered.

He was still more alarmed when, immediately after breakfast, his
daughter asked a moment’s conversation with him.

She followed him into his study, and as soon as they were alone, without
giving her father time to seat himself, Mlle. Blanche entreated him to
tell her all that had passed between the Duc de Sairmeuse and himself,
and asked if Martial had been informed of the intended alliance, and
what he had replied.

Her voice was meek, her eyes tearful; her manner indicated the most
intense anxiety.

The marquis was delighted.

“My wilful daughter has been playing with fire,” he thought, stroking
his chin caressingly; “and upon my word, she has burned herself.”

“Yesterday, my child,” he replied, “the Duc de Sairmeuse formally
demanded your hand on behalf of his son; your consent is all that is
lacking. So rest easy, my beautiful, lovelorn damsel--you will be a
duchess.”

She hid her face in her hands to conceal her blushes.

“You know my decision, father,” she faltered, in an almost inaudible
voice; “we must make haste.”

He started back, thinking he had not heard her words aright.

“Make haste!” he repeated.

“Yes, father. I have fears.”

“What fears, in Heaven’s name?”

“I will tell you when everything is settled,” she replied, as she made
her escape from the room.

She did not doubt the reports which had reached her ears, of Martial’s
frequent visits to Marie-Anne, but she wished to see for herself.

So, as soon as she left her father, she obliged Aunt Medea to dress
herself, and without vouchsafing a single word of explanation, took her
with her to the Reche, and stationed herself where she could command a
view of M. Lacheneur’s house.

It chanced to be the very day on which M. d’Escorval came to ask an
explanation from his friend. She saw him come; then, after a little,
Martial made his appearance.

She had not been mistaken--now she could go home satisfied.

But no. She resolved to count the seconds which Martial passed with
Marie-Anne.

M. d’Escorval did not remain long; she saw Martial hasten out after him,
and speak to him.

She breathed again. His visit had not lasted a half hour, and doubtless
he was going away. Not at all. After a moment’s conversation with the
baron, he returned to the house.

“What are we doing here?” demanded Aunt Medea.

“Let me alone!” replied Mlle. Blanche, angrily; “hold your tongue!”

She heard the sound of wheels, the tramp of horses’ hoofs, blows of the
whip, and oaths.

The wagons bearing the furniture and clothing belonging to M. Lacheneur
were coming. This noise Martial must have heard within the house, for
he came out, and after him came M. Lacheneur, Jean, Chanlouineau, and
Marie-Anne.

Everyone was soon busy in unloading the wagons, and positively, from the
movements of the young Marquis de Sairmeuse, one would have sworn that
he was giving orders; he came and went, hurrying to and fro, talking to
everybody, not even disdaining to lend a hand occasionally.

“He, a nobleman, makes himself at home in that wretched hovel!” Mlle.
Blanche said to herself. “How horrible! Ah! this dangerous creature will
do with him whatever she desires.”

All this was nothing compared with what was to come. A third wagon
appeared, drawn by a single horse, and laden with pots of flowers and
shrubs.

This sight drew a cry of rage from Mlle. de Courtornieu which must have
carried terror to Aunt Medea’s heart.

“Flowers!” she exclaimed, in a voice hoarse with passion. “He sends
flowers to her as he does to me--only he sends me a bouquet, while for
her he despoils the gardens of Sairmeuse.”

“What are you saying about flowers?” inquired the impoverished relative.

Mlle. Blanche replied that she had not made the slightest allusion to
flowers. She was suffocating--and yet she compelled herself to remain
there three mortal hours--all the time that was required to unload the
furniture.

The wagons had been gone some time, when Martial again appeared upon the
threshold.

Marie-Anne had accompanied him to the door, and they were talking
together. It seemed impossible for him to make up his mind to depart.

He did so, at last, however; but he left slowly and with evident
reluctance. Marie-Anne, remaining in the door, gave him a friendly
gesture of farewell.

“I wish to speak to this creature!” exclaimed Mlle. Blanche. “Come,
aunt, at once!”

Had Marie-Anne, at that moment, been within the reach of Mlle. de
Courtornieu’s voice, she would certainly have learned the secret of her
former friend’s anger and hatred.

But fate willed it otherwise. At least three hundred yards of rough
ground separated the place where Mlle. Blanche had stationed herself,
from the Lacheneur cottage.

It required a moment to cross this space; and that was time enough to
change all the girl’s intentions.

She had not traversed a quarter of the distance before she bitterly
regretted having shown herself at all. But to retrace her steps now was
impossible, for Marie-Anne, who was still standing upon the threshold,
had seen her approaching.

There remained barely time to regain her self-control, and to compose
her features. She profited by it.

She had her sweetest smile upon her lips as she greeted Marie-Anne.
Still she was embarrassed; she did not know what excuse to give for her
visit, and to gain time she pretended to be quite out of breath.

“Ah! it is not very easy to reach you, dear Marie-Anne,” she said, at
last; “you live _upon_ the summit of a veritable mountain.”

Mlle. Lacheneur said not a word. She was greatly surprised, and she did
not attempt to conceal the fact.

“Aunt Medea pretended to know the road,” continued Mlle. Blanche, “but
she led me astray; did you not, aunt?”

As usual, the impecunious relative assented, and her niece resumed:

“But at last we are here. I could not, my dearest, resign myself to
hearing nothing from you, especially after all your misfortunes. What
have you been doing? Did my recommendation procure for you the work you
desired?”

Marie-Anne could not fail to be deeply touched by this kindly interest
on the part of her former friend. So, with perfect frankness, and
without any false shame, she confessed that all her efforts had been
fruitless. It had even seemed to her that several ladies had taken
pleasure in treating her unkindly.

But Mlle. Blanche was not listening. A few steps from her stood the
flowers brought from Sairmeuse; and their perfume rekindled her anger.

“At least,” she interrupted, “you have here what will almost make you
forget the gardens of Sairmeuse. Who sent you these beautiful flowers?”

Marie-Anne turned crimson. She did not speak for a moment, but at last
she replied, or rather stammered:

“It is--an attention from the Marquis de Sairmeuse.”

“So she confesses it!” thought Mlle. de Courtornieu, amazed at what she
was pleased to consider an outrageous piece of impudence.

But she succeeded in concealing her rage beneath a loud burst of
laughter; and it was in a tone of raillery that she said:

“Take care, my dear friend; I am going to call you to account. It is
from my fiance that you are accepting flowers.”

“What! the Marquis de Sairmeuse?”

“Has demanded the hand of your friend. Yes, my darling; and my father
has given it to him. It is a secret as yet; but I see no danger in
confiding in your friendship.”

She believed that she had inflicted a mortal wound upon Marie-Anne’s
heart; but though she watched her closely, she failed to detect the
slightest trace of emotion upon her face.

“What dissimulation!” she thought. Then aloud, and with affected gayety,
she resumed:

“And the country folks will see two weddings at about the same time,
since you, also, are going to be married, my dear.”

“I!”

“Yes, you, you little deceiver! Everybody knows that you are engaged to
a young man in the neighborhood, named--wait--I know--Chanlouineau.”

Thus the report that annoyed Marie-Anne so much reached her from every
side.

“Everybody is for once mistaken,” said she, energetically. “I shall
never be that young man’s wife.”

“But why? They speak well of him, personally, and he is quite rich.”

“Because,” faltered Marie-Anne, “because----”

Maurice d’Escorval’s name trembled upon her lips; but unfortunately she
did not utter it, prevented by a strange expression on the face of her
friend. How often one’s destiny depends upon a circumstance apparently
as trivial as this!

“Impudent, worthless creature!” thought Mlle. Blanche.

Then, in cold and sneering tones, that betrayed her hatred unmistakably,
she said:

“You are wrong, believe me, to refuse this offer. This Chanlouineau
will, at all events, save you from the painful necessity of laboring
with your own hands, and of going from door to door in quest of work
which is refused you. But, no matter; I”--she laid great stress upon
this word--“I will be more generous than your old acquaintances. I have
a great deal of embroidery to be done. I shall send it to you by my
maid, and you two may agree upon the price. We must go. Good-by, my
dear. Come, Aunt Medea.”

She departed, leaving Marie-Anne petrified with surprise, sorrow, and
indignation.

Although less experienced than Mlle. Blanche, she comprehended that this
strange visit concealed some mystery--but what?

For more than a minute she stood motionless, gazing after her departing
guests; then she started suddenly as a hand was laid gently upon her
shoulder.

She trembled, and, turning quickly, found herself face to face with her
father.

Lacheneur’s face was whiter than his linen, and a sinister light
glittered in his eye.

“I was there,” said he, pointing to the door, “and--I heard all.”

“Father!”

“What! would you try to defend her after she came here to crush you with
her insolent good fortune--after she overwhelmed you with her ironical
pity and with her scorn? I tell you they are all like this--these girls,
whose heads have been turned by flattery, and who believe that in
their veins flows a different blood from ours. But patience! The day of
reckoning is near at hand!”

Those whom he threatened would have shuddered had they seen him at that
moment, so terrible was the rage revealed by his accent, so formidable
did he appear.

“And you, my beloved daughter, my poor Marie-Anne, you did not
understand the insults she heaped upon you. You are wondering why she
should have treated you with such disdain. Ah, well! I will tell you:
she imagines that the Marquis de Sairmeuse is your lover.”

Marie-Anne tottered beneath the terrible blow, and a nervous spasm shook
her from head to foot.

“Can this be possible?” she exclaimed. “Great God! what shame! what
humiliation!”

“And why should this astonish you?” said Lacheneur, coldly. “Have you
not expected this ever since the day when you, my devoted daughter,
consented, for the sake of my plans, to submit to the attentions of this
marquis, whom you loathe as much as I despise?”

“But Maurice! Maurice will despise me! I can bear anything, yes,
everything but that.”

M. Lacheneur made no reply. Marie-Anne’s despair was heart-breaking;
he felt that he could not bear to witness it, that it would shake his
resolution, and he re-entered the house.

But his penetration was not at fault. While waiting to find a revenge
which would be worthy of her, Mlle. Blanche armed herself with a weapon
of which jealousy and hatred so often avail themselves--calumny.

Two or three abominable stories which she concocted, and which she
forced Aunt Medea to circulate everywhere, did not produce the desired
effect.

Marie-Anne’s reputation was, of course, ruined by them; but Martial’s
visits, instead of ceasing, became longer and more frequent.
Dissatisfied with his progress, and fearful that he was being duped, he
even watched the house.

So it happened that, one evening, when he was quite sure that Lacheneur,
his son, and Chanlouineau were absent, Martial saw a man leave the house
and hasten across the fields.

He rushed after him, but the man escaped him.

He believed, however, that he recognized Maurice d’Escorval.



CHAPTER XVIII

After his son’s confession, M. d’Escorval was prudent enough to make no
allusion to the hopes he, himself, entertained.

“My poor Maurice,” he thought, “is heart-broken, but resigned. It is
better for him to remain without hope than to be exposed to the danger
of another disappointment.”

But passion is not always blind. What the baron concealed, Maurice
divined; and he clung to this faint hope as tenaciously as a drowning
man clings to the plank which is his only hope of salvation.

If he asked his parents no questions it was only because he was
convinced that they would not tell him the truth.

But he watched all that went on in the house with that subtleness of
penetration which fever so often imparts.

Not one of his father’s movements escaped his vigilant eye and ear.

Consequently, he heard him put on his boots, ask for his hat, and select
a cane from among those standing in the vestibule. He also heard the
outer gate grate upon its hinges.

“My father is going out,” he said to himself.

And weak as he was, he succeeded in dragging himself to the window in
time to satisfy himself of the truth of his conjectures.

“If my father is going out,” he thought, “it can only be to visit
Monsieur Lacheneur---then he has not relinquished all hope.”

An arm-chair was standing nearby; he sank into it, intending to watch
for his father’s return; by doing so, he might know his destiny a few
moments sooner.

Three long hours passed before the baron returned.

By his father’s dejected manner he plainly saw that all hope was lost.
He was sure of it; as sure as the criminal who reads the fatal verdict
in the solemn face of the judge.

He had need of all his energy to regain his couch. For a moment he felt
that he was dying.

But he was ashamed of this weakness, which he judged unworthy of him. He
determined to know what had passed--to know the details.

He rang, and told the servant that he wished to speak to his father. M.
d’Escorval promptly made his appearance.

“Well?” cried Maurice.

M. d’Escorval felt that denial was useless.

“Lacheneur is deaf to my remonstrances and to my entreaties,” he
replied, sadly. “Nothing remains for you but to submit, my son. I
shall not tell you that time will assuage the sorrow that now seems
insupportable--you would not believe me. But I do say to you, that you
are a man, and that you must prove your courage. I say even more:
fight against thoughts of Marie-Anne as a traveller on the verge of a
precipice fights against the thought of vertigo.”

“Have you seen Marie-Anne, father? Have you spoken to her?”

“I found her even more inflexible than Lacheneur.”

“They reject me, and they receive Chanlouineau, perhaps.”

“Chanlouineau is living there.”

“My God! And Martial de Sairmeuse?”

“He is their familiar guest. I saw him there.” That each of these
responses fell upon Maurice like a thunder-bolt was only too evident.

But M. d’Escorval had armed himself with the impassable courage of
a surgeon who does not relax his hold on his instruments because the
patient groans and writhes in agony.

M. d’Escorval wished to extinguish the last ray of hope in the heart of
his son.

“It is evident that Monsieur Lacheneur has lost his reason!” exclaimed
Maurice.

The baron shook his head despondently. “I thought so myself, at first,”
 he murmured.

“But what does he say in justification of his conduct? He must say
something.”

“Nothing; _he_ refuses any explanation.”

“And you, father, with all your knowledge of human nature, with all your
wide experience, have not been able to fathom his intentions?”

“I have my suspicions,” M. d’Escorval replied; “but only suspicions.
It is possible that Lacheneur, listening to the voice of hatred, is
dreaming of a terrible revenge. Who knows if he does not think of
organizing some conspiracy, of which he is to be the leader? These
suppositions would explain everything. Chanlouineau is his aider and
abettor; and he pretends to be reconciled to the Marquis de Sairmeuse in
order to get information through him----”

The blood had returned to the pale cheeks of Maurice.

“Such a conspiracy would not explain Monsieur Lacheneur’s obstinate
rejection of my suit.”

“Alas! yes, my poor boy. It is through Marie-Anne that Lacheneur exerts
such an influence over Chanlouineau and the Marquis de Sairmeuse. If she
became your wife to-day, they would desert him tomorrow. Then, too, it
is precisely because he loves us that he is determined we shall not be
mixed up in an enterprise the success of which is extremely doubtful.
But these are mere conjectures.”

“Then I see that it is necessary to submit, to be resigned; forget, I
cannot,” faltered Maurice.

He said this because he wished to reassure his father; but he thought
exactly the opposite.

“If Lacheneur is organizing a conspiracy,” he said, to himself, “he
must need assistance. Why should I not offer mine? If I aid him in
his preparations, if I share his hopes and his dangers, it will be
impossible for him to refuse me the hand of his daughter. Whatever he
may desire to undertake, I can surely be of greater assistance than
Chanlouineau.”

From that moment Maurice thought only of doing everything possible to
hasten his convalescence. This was so rapid, so extraordinarily rapid,
as to astonish Abbe Midon, who had taken the place of the physician from
Montaignac.

“I never would have believed that Maurice could have been thus
consoled,” said Mme. d’Escorval, delighted to see her son’s wonderful
improvement in health and spirits.

But the baron made no response. He regarded this almost miraculous
recovery with distrust; he was assailed by a vague suspicion of the
truth.

He questioned his son, but skilfully as he did it, he could draw nothing
from him.

Maurice had decided to say nothing to his parents. What good would it do
to trouble them? Besides, he feared remonstrance and opposition, and he
was resolved to carry out his plans, even if he was compelled to leave
the paternal roof.

In the second week of September the abbe declared that Maurice might
resume his ordinary life, and that, as the weather was pleasant, it
would be well for him to spend much of his time in the open air.

In his delight, Maurice embraced the worthy priest.

“What happiness!” he exclaimed; “then I can hunt once more!”

He really cared but little for the chase; but he deemed it expedient
to pretend a great passion for it, since it would furnish him with an
excuse for frequent and protracted absences.

Never had he felt more happy than on the morning when, with his gun upon
his shoulder, he crossed the Oiselle and started for the abode of M.
Lacheneur. On reaching the little grove on the Reche, he paused for a
moment at a place which commanded a view of the cottage. While he stood
there, he saw Jean Lacheneur and Chanlouineau leave the house, each
laden with a pedler’s pack.

Maurice was therefore sure that M. Lacheneur and Marie-Anne were alone
in the house.

He hastened to the cottage and entered without stopping to rap.

Marie-Anne and her father were kneeling on the hearth, upon which a huge
fire was blazing.

On hearing the door open, they turned; and at the sight of Maurice, they
both sprang up, blushing and confused.

“What brings you here?” they exclaimed in the same breath.

Under other circumstances, Maurice d’Escorval would have been dismayed
by such a hostile greeting, but now he scarcely noticed it.

“You have no business to return here against my wishes, and after what I
have said to you, Monsieur d’Escorval,” said Lacheneur, rudely.

Maurice smiled, he was perfectly cool, and not a detail of the scene
before him had escaped his notice. If he had felt any doubts before,
they were now dissipated. He saw upon the fire a large kettle of
melted lead, and several bullet-moulds stood on the hearth, beside the
andirons.

“If I venture to present myself at your house, Monsieur,” said Maurice,
gravely and impressively, “it is because I know all. I have discovered
your revengeful project. You are looking for men to aid you, are you
not? Very well! look me in the face, in the eyes, and tell me if I am
not one of those whom a leader is glad to enroll among his followers.”

M. Lacheneur was terribly agitated.

“I do not know what you mean,” he faltered, forgetting his feigned
anger; “I have no projects.”

“Would you assert this upon oath? Why are you casting these bullets? You
are clumsy conspirators. You should lock your door; someone else might
have entered.”

And adding example to precept, he turned and pushed the bolt.

“This is only an imprudence,” he continued; “but to reject a soldier who
comes to you voluntarily would be a fault for which your associate would
have a right to call you to account. I have no desire, understand me,
to force myself into your confidence. No, I give myself to you blindly,
body and soul. Whatever your cause may be, I declare it mine; what you
wish, I wish; I adopt your plans; your enemies are my enemies; command,
I will obey. I ask only one favor, that of fighting, of triumphing, or
of dying by your side.”

“Oh! refuse, father!” exclaimed Marie-Anne; “refuse. To accept this
offer would be a crime!”

“A crime! And why, if you please?”

“Because our cause is not your cause; because its success is doubtful;
because dangers surround us on every side.”

A scornful exclamation from Maurice interrupted her.

“And it is you who think to dissuade me by pointing out the dangers that
threaten you, the dangers that you are braving----”

“Maurice!”

“So if imminent peril menaced me, instead of coming to my aid you would
desert me? You would hide yourself, saying, ‘Let him perish, so that I
be saved!’ Speak! Would you do this?”

She averted her face and made no reply. She could not force herself to
utter an untruth; and she was unwilling to answer: “I would act as you
are acting.” She waited for her father’s decision.

“If I should comply with your request, Maurice,” said M. Lacheneur, “in
less than three days you would curse me, and ruin us by some outburst
of anger. You love Marie-Anne. Could you see, unmoved, the frightful
position in which she is placed? Remember, she must not discourage the
addresses either of Chanlouineau or of the Marquis de Sairmeuse. You
regard me--oh, I know as well as you do that it is a shameful and odious
role that I impose upon her--that she is compelled to play a part
in which she will lose a young girl’s most precious possession--her
reputation.”

Maurice did not wince. “So be it,” he said, calmly. “Marie-Anne’s fate
will be that of all women who have devoted themselves to the political
advancement of the man whom they love, be he father, brother, or lover.
She will be slandered, insulted, calumniated. What does it matter? She
may continue her task. I consent to it, for I shall never doubt her, and
I shall know how to hold my peace. If we succeed, she shall be my wife;
if we fail----”

The gesture which concluded the sentence said more strongly than any
protestations, that he was ready, resigned to anything.

M. Lacheneur was greatly moved.

“At least give me time for reflection,” said he.

“There is no necessity for further reflection, Monsieur.”

“But you are only a child, Maurice; and your father is my friend.”

“What of that?”

“Rash boy! do you not understand that by compromising yourself you also
compromise Baron d’Escorval? You think you are risking only your own
head; you are endangering your father’s life----”

But Maurice violently interrupted him.

“There has been too much parleying already!” he exclaimed; “there have
been too many remonstrances. Answer me in a word! Only understand this:
if you reject me, I will return to my father’s house, and with this gun
which I hold in my hand I will blow out my brains.”

This was no idle threat. It was evident that what he said, that would he
do. His listeners were so convinced of this, that Marie-Anne turned to
her father with clasped hands and a look of entreaty.

“You are one of us, then,” said M. Lacheneur, sternly; “but do not
forget that you forced me to consent by threats; and whatever may happen
to you or yours, remember that you would have it so.”

But these gloomy words produced no impression upon Maurice; he was wild
with joy.

“Now,” continued M. Lacheneur, “I must tell you my hopes, and acquaint
you with the cause for which I am laboring----”

“What does that matter to me?” Maurice exclaimed, gayly; and, springing
toward Marie-Anne, he seized her hand and raised it to his lips, crying,
with the joyous laugh of youth:

“My cause--here it is!”

Lacheneur turned away. Perhaps he recollected that a sacrifice of his
pride was all that was necessary to assure the happiness of these poor
children.

But if a feeling of remorse entered his mind, he drove it away, and with
increased sternness, he said:

“Still, Monsieur d’Escorval, it is necessary for you to understand our
agreement.”

“Make known your conditions, sir.”

“First, your visits here--after certain rumors that I have put in
circulation--would arouse suspicion. You must come here only at night,
and then only at hours that have been agreed upon in advance--never when
you are not expected.”

The attitude of Maurice expressed his entire consent.

“Moreover, you must find some way to cross the river without having
recourse to the ferryman, who is a dangerous fellow.”

“We have an old skiff. I will persuade my father to have it repaired.”

“Very well. Will you also promise me to avoid the Marquis de Sairmeuse?”

“I will.”

“Wait a moment; we must be prepared for any emergency. It may be
that, in spite of our precautions, you will meet him here. Monsieur de
Sairmeuse is arrogance itself; and he hates you. You detest him, and you
are very hasty. Swear to me that if he provokes you, you will ignore his
insults.”

“But I should be considered a coward, Monsieur!”

“Probably. Will you swear?”

Maurice hesitated, but an imploring look from Marie-Anne decided him.

“I swear!” he said, gravely.

“As far as Chanlouineau is concerned, it would be better not to let him
know of our agreement--but I will take care of this matter.”

M. Lacheneur paused and reflected for a moment, as if striving to
discover if he had forgotten anything.

“Nothing remains, Maurice,” he resumed, “but to give you a last and very
important piece of advice. Do you know my son?”

“Certainly; we were formerly the best of comrades during our vacations.”

“Very well. When you know my secret--for I shall confide it to you
without reserve--beware of Jean.”

“What, sir?”

“Beware of Jean. I repeat it.”

And he blushed deeply, as he added:

“Ah! it is a painful avowal for a father; but I have no confidence in my
own son. He knows no more in regard to my plans than I told him on the
day of his arrival. I deceive him, because I fear he might betray us.
Perhaps it would be wise to send him away; but in that case, what would
people say? Most assuredly they would say that I was very avaricious of
my own blood, while I was very ready to risk the lives of others. Still
I may be mistaken; I may misjudge him.”

He sighed, and added:

“Beware!”



CHAPTER XIX

So it was really Maurice d’Escorval whom the Marquis de Sairmeuse had
seen leaving Lacheneur’s house.

Martial was not certain of it, but the very possibility made his heart
swell with anger.

“What part am I playing here, then?” he exclaimed, indignantly.

He had been so completely blinded by passion that he would not have been
likely to discover the real condition of affairs even if no pains had
been taken to deceive him.

Lacheneur’s formal courtesy and politeness he regarded as sincere.
He believed in the studied respect shown him by Jean; and the almost
servile obsequiousness of Chanlouineau did not surprise him in the
least.

And since Marie-Anne welcomed him politely, he concluded that his suit
was progressing favorably.

Having himself forgotten, he supposed that everyone else had ceased to
remember.

Moreover, he was of the opinion that he had acted with great generosity,
and that he was entitled to the deep gratitude of the Lacheneur family;
for M. Lacheneur had received the legacy bequeathed him by Mlle.
Armande, and an indemnity, besides all the furniture he had chosen to
take from the chateau, a total of at least sixty thousand francs.

“He must be hard to please, if he is not satisfied!” growled the duke,
enraged at such prodigality, though it did not cost him a penny.

Martial had supposed himself the only visitor at the cottage on the
Reche; and when he discovered that such was not the case, he became
furious.

“Am I, then, the dupe of a shameless girl?” he thought.

He was so incensed, that for more than a week he did not go to
Lacheneur’s house.

His father concluded that his ill-humor and gloom was caused by
some misunderstanding with Marie-Anne; and he took advantage of this
opportunity to gain his son’s consent to an alliance with Blanche de
Courtornieu.

A victim to the most cruel doubts and fears, Martial, goaded to the last
extremity, exclaimed:

“Very well! I will marry Mademoiselle Blanche.”

The duke did not allow such a good resolution to grow cold.

In less than forty-eight hours the engagement was made public; the
marriage contract was drawn up, and it was announced that the wedding
would take place early in the spring.

A grand banquet was given at Sairmeuse in honor of the betrothal--a
banquet all the more brilliant since there were other victories to be
celebrated.

The Duc de Sairmeuse had just received, with his brevet of
lieutenant-general, a commission placing him in command of the military
department of Montaignac.

The Marquis de Courtornieu had also received an appointment, making him
provost-marshal of the same district.

Blanche had triumphed. After this public betrothal Martial was bound to
her.

For a fortnight, indeed, he scarcely left her side. In her society
there was a charm whose sweetness almost made him forget his love for
Marie-Anne.

But unfortunately the haughty heiress could not resist the temptation
to make a slighting allusion to Marie-Anne, and to the lowliness of
the marquis’s former tastes. She found an opportunity to say that she
furnished Marie-Anne with work to aid her in earning a living.

Martial forced himself to smile; but the indignity which Marie-Anne had
received aroused his sympathy and indignation.

And the next day he went to Lacheneur’s house.

In the warmth of the greeting that awaited him there, all his anger
vanished, all his suspicions evaporated. Marie-Anne’s eyes beamed with
joy on seeing him again; he noticed it.

“Oh! I shall win her yet!” he thought.

All the household were really delighted at his return; the son of the
commander of the military forces at Montaignac, and the prospective
son-in-law of the provost-marshal, Martial was a most valuable
instrument.

“Through him, we shall have an eye and an ear in the enemy’s camp,” said
Lacheneur. “The Marquis de Sairmeuse will be our spy.”

He was, for he soon resumed his daily visits to the cottage. It was now
December, and the roads were terrible; but neither rain, snow, nor mud
could keep Martial from the cottage.

He made his appearance generally as early as ten o’clock, seated himself
upon a stool in the shadow of a tall fireplace, and he and Marie-Anne
talked by the hour.

She seemed greatly interested in matters at Montaignac, and he told her
all that he knew in regard to affairs there.

Sometimes they were alone.

Lacheneur, Chanlouineau, and Jean were tramping about the country with
their merchandise. Business was prospering so well that M. Lacheneur had
purchased a horse in order to extend his journeys.

But Martial’s conversation was generally interrupted by visitors. It was
really surprising to see how many peasants came to the house to speak to
M. Lacheneur. There was an interminable procession of them. And to each
of these peasants Marie-Anne had something to say in private. Then she
offered each man refreshments--the house seemed almost like a common
drinking-saloon.

But what can daunt the courage of a lover? Martial endured all this
without a murmur. He laughed and jested with the comers and goers; he
shook hands with them; sometimes he even drank with them.

He gave many other proofs of moral courage. He offered to assist M.
Lacheneur in making up his accounts; and once--it happened about the
middle of February--seeing Chanlouineau worrying over the composition of
a letter, he actually offered to act as his amanuensis.

“The d----d letter is not for me, but for an uncle of mine who is about
to marry off his daughter,” said Chanlouineau.

Martial took a seat at the table, and, at Chanlouineau’s dictation, but
not without many erasures, indited the following epistle:


“My dear friend--We are at last agreed, and the marriage has been
decided upon. We are now busy with preparations for the wedding, which
will take place on ----. We invite you to give us the pleasure of your
company. We count upon you, and be assured that the more friends you
bring with you the better we shall be pleased.”


Had Martial seen the smile upon Chanlouineau’s lips when he requested
him to leave the date for the wedding a blank, he would certainly have
suspected that he had been caught in a snare. But he was in love.

“Ah! Marquis,” remarked his father one day, “Chupin tells me you are
always at Lacheneur’s. When will you recover from your _penchant_ for
that little girl?”

Martial did not reply. He felt that he was at that “little girl’s”
 mercy. Each glance of hers made his heart throb wildly. By her side
he was a willing captive. If she had asked him to make her his wife he
would not have said no.

But Marie-Anne had not this ambition. All her thoughts, all her wishes
were for her father’s success.

Maurice and Marie-Anne had become M. Lacheneur’s most intrepid
auxiliaries. They were looking forward to such a magnificent reward.

Such feverish activity as Maurice displayed! All day long he hurried
from hamlet to hamlet, and in the evening, as soon as dinner was over,
he made his escape from the drawing-room, sprang into his boat, and
hastened to the Reche.

M. d’Escorval could not fail to remark the long and frequent absences
of his son. He watched him, and soon became absolutely certain that
Lacheneur had, to use the baron’s own expression, seduced him.

Greatly alarmed, he decided to go and see his former friend, and fearing
another repulse, he begged Abbe Midon to accompany him.

It was on the 4th of March, at about half-past four o’clock, that M.
d’Escorval and the cure started for the Reche. They were so anxious
and troubled in mind that they scarcely exchanged a dozen words as they
wended their way onward.

A strange sight met their eyes as they emerged from the grove on the
Reche.

Night was falling, but it was still light enough for them to distinguish
objects only a short distance from them.

Before Lacheneur’s house stood a group of about a dozen persons, and M.
Lacheneur was speaking and gesticulating excitedly.

What was he saying? Neither the baron nor the priest could distinguish
his words, but when he ceased, the most vociferous acclamations rent the
air.

Suddenly a match glowed between his fingers; he set fire to a bundle of
straw and tossed it upon the thatched roof of his cottage, crying out in
a terrible voice:

“The die is cast! This will prove to you that I shall not draw back!”

Five minutes later the house was in flames.

In the distance the baron and his companion saw the windows of the
citadel at Montaignac illuminated by a red glare, and upon every
hill-side glowed the light of other incendiary fires.

The country was responding to Lacheneur’s signal.



CHAPTER XX

Ah! ambition is a fine thing!

The Duc de Sairmeuse and the Marquis de Courtornieu were past middle
age; their lives had been marked by many storms and vicissitudes; they
were the possessors of millions, and the owners of the most sumptuous
residences in the province. Under these circumstances one might
have supposed that they would desire to end their days in peace and
quietness.

It would have been easy for them to create a life of happiness by doing
good to those around them, and by preparing for their last hours a
chorus of benedictions and of regrets.

But no. They longed to have a hand in managing the ship of state; they
were not content to be simply passengers.

And the duke, appointed to the command of the military forces, and the
marquis, made presiding judge of the court at Montaignac, were both
obliged to leave their beautiful homes and take up their abode in rather
dingy quarters in town.

They did not murmur at the change; their vanity was satisfied.

Louis XVIII. was on the throne; their prejudices were triumphant; they
were happy.

It is true that dissatisfaction was rife on every side, but had they not
hundreds and thousands of allies at hand to suppress it?

And when wise and thoughtful persons spoke of “discontent,” the duke and
his associates regarded them as visionaries.

On the 4th of March, 1816, the duke was just sitting down to dinner when
a loud noise was heard in the vestibule.

He rose--but at that very instant the door was flung open and a man
entered, panting and breathless.

This man was Chupin, the former poacher, whom M. de Sairmeuse had
elevated to the position of head gamekeeper.

It was evident that something extraordinary had happened.

“What is it?” inquired the duke.

“They are coming!” cried Chupin; “they are already on the way!”

“Who? who?”

By way of response, Chupin handed the duke a copy of the letter written
by Martial under Chanlouineau’s dictation.

M. de Sairmeuse read:


“My dear friend--We are at last agreed, and the marriage is decided. We
are now busy in preparing for the wedding, which will take place on the
4th of March.”


The date was no longer blank; but still the duke did not comprehend.

“Well, what of it?” he demanded.

Chupin tore his hair.

“They are on the way,” he repeated. “I speak of the peasants--they
intend to take possession of Montaignac, dethrone Louis XVIII.,
bring back the Emperor, or at least the son of the Emperor--miserable
wretches! they have deceived me. I suspected this outbreak, but I did
not think it was so near at hand.”

This terrible blow, so entirely unexpected, stupefied the duke for a
moment.

“How many are there?” he demanded.

“Ah! how do I know, Monsieur? Two thousand, perhaps--perhaps ten
thousand.”

“All the towns-people are with us.”

“No, Monsieur, no. The rebels have accomplices here. All the retired
officers stand ready to assist them.”

“Who are the leaders of the movement?”

“Lacheneur, Abbe Midon, Chanlouineau, Baron d’Escorval----”

“Enough!” cried the duke.

Now that danger was certain, his coolness returned; and his herculean
form, a trifle bowed by the weight of years, rose to its full height.

He gave the bell-rope a violent pull; a valet appeared.

“My uniform,” commanded M. de Sairmeuse; “my pistols! Quick!”

The servant was about to obey, when the duke exclaimed:

“Wait! Let someone take a horse, and go and tell my son to come here
without a moment’s delay. Take one of the swiftest horses. The messenger
ought to go to Sairmeuse and return in two hours.”

Chupin endeavored to attract the duke’s attention by pulling the skirt
of his coat. M. de Sairmeuse turned:

“What is it?”

The old poacher put his finger on his lip, recommending silence, but as
soon as the valet had left the room, he said:

“It is useless to send for the marquis.”

“And why, you fool?”

“Because, Monsieur, because--excuse me--I----”

“Zounds! will you speak, or will you not?”

Chupin regretted that he had gone so far.

“Because the marquis----”

“Well?”

“He is engaged in it.”

The duke overturned the table with a terrible blow of his clinched fist.

“You lie, wretch!” he thundered, with the most horrible oaths.

He was so formidable in his anger that the old poacher sprang to the
door and turned the knob, ready to take flight.

“May I lose my head if I do not speak the truth,” he insisted. “Ah!
Lacheneur’s daughter is a regular sorceress. All the gallants of the
neighborhood are in the ranks; Chanlouineau, young d’Escorval, your
son----”

M. de Sairmeuse was pouring forth a torrent of curses upon Marie-Anne
when his valet re-entered the room.

He suddenly checked himself, put on his uniform, and ordering Chupin to
follow him, hastened from the house.

He was still hoping that Chupin had exaggerated the danger; but when
he reached the Place d’Arms, which commanded an extended view of the
surrounding country, his illusions were put to flight.

Signal-lights gleamed upon every side. Montaignac seemed surrounded by a
circle of flame.

“These are the signals,” murmured Chupin. “The rebels will be here
before two o’clock in the morning.”

The duke made no response, but hastened to consult M. de Courtornieu.

He was striding toward his friend’s house when, on hastily turning
a corner, he saw two men talking in a doorway, and on seeing the
glittering of the duke’s epaulets, both of them took flight.

The duke instinctively started in pursuit, overtook one man, and seizing
him by the collar, he asked, sternly:

“Who are you? What is your name?”

The man was silent, and his captor shook him so roughly that two
pistols, which had been hidden under his long coat, fell to the ground.

“Ah, brigand!” exclaimed M. de Sairmeuse, “so you are one of the
conspirators against the King!”

Then, without another word, he dragged the man to the citadel, gave
him in charge of the astonished soldiers, and again started for M. de
Courtornieu’s house.

He expected the marquis would be terrified; not in the least; he seemed
delighted.

“At last there comes an opportunity for us to display our devotion and
our zeal--and without danger! We have good walls, strong gates, and
three thousand soldiers at our command. These peasants are fools! But
be grateful for their folly, my dear duke, and run and order out the
Montaignac chasseurs----”

But suddenly a cloud overspread his face; he knit his brows, and added:

“The devil! I am expecting Blanche this evening. She was to leave
Courtornieu after dinner. Heaven grant that she may meet with no
misfortune on the way!”



CHAPTER XXI

The Duc de Sairmeuse and the Marquis de Courtornieu had more time before
them than they supposed.

The rebels were advancing, but not so rapidly as Chupin had said.

Two circumstances, which it was impossible to foresee, disarranged
Lacheneur’s plans.

Standing beside his burning house, Lacheneur counted the signal fires
that blazed out in answer to his own.

Their number corresponded to his expectations; he uttered a cry of joy.

“All our friends keep their word!” he exclaimed. “They are ready; they
are even now on their way to the rendezvous. Let us start at once, for
we must be there first!”

They brought him his horse, and his foot was already in the stirrup,
when two men sprang from the neighboring grove and darted toward him.
One of them seized the horse by the bridle.

“Abbe Midon!” exclaimed Lacheneur, in profound astonishment; “Monsieur
d’Escorval!”

And foreseeing, perhaps, what was to come, he added, in a tone of
concentrated fury:

“What do you two men want with me?”

“We wish to prevent the accomplishment of an act of madness!” exclaimed
M. d’Escorval. “Hatred has crazed you, Lacheneur!”

“You know nothing of my projects!”

“Do you think that I do not suspect them? You hope to capture
Montaignac-----”

“What does that matter to you?” interrupted Lacheneur, violently.

But M. d’Escorval would not be silenced.

He seized the arm of his former friend, and in a voice loud enough to be
heard distinctly by everyone present, he continued:

“Foolish man! You have forgotten that Montaignac is a fortified city,
protected by deep moats and high walls! You have forgotten that behind
these fortifications is a garrison commanded by a man whose energy and
valor are beyond all question--the Duc de Sairmeuse.”

Lacheneur struggled to free himself from his friend’s grasp.

“Everything has been arranged,” he replied, “and they are expecting us
at Montaignac. You would be as sure of this as I am myself, if you had
seen the light gleaming on the windows of the citadel. And look, you
can see it yet. This light tells me that two or three hundred retired
officers will come to open the gates of the city for us as soon as we
make our appearance.”

“And after that! If you take Montaignac, what will you do then? Do
you suppose that the English will give you back your Emperor? Is not
Napoleon II. the prisoner of the Austrians? Have you forgotten that
the allied sovereigns have left one hundred and fifty thousand soldiers
within a day’s march of Paris?”

Sullen murmurs were heard among Lacheneur’s followers.

“But all this is nothing,” continued the baron. “The chief danger lies
in the fact that there are as many traitors as dupes in an undertaking
of this sort.”

“Whom do you call dupes, Monsieur?”

“All those who take their illusions for realities, as you have done; all
those who, because they desire anything very much, really believe that
it will come to pass. Do you really suppose that neither the Duc de
Sairmeuse nor the Marquis de Courtornieu has been warned of it?”

Lacheneur shrugged his shoulders.

“Who could have warned them?”

But his tranquillity was feigned; the look which he cast upon Jean
proved it.

And it was in the coldest possible tone that he added:

“It is probable that at this very hour the duke and the marquis are in
the power of our friends.”

The cure now attempted to join his efforts to those of the baron.

“You will not go, Lacheneur,” he said. “You will not remain deaf to
the voice of reason. You are an honest man; think of the frightful
responsibility you assume! What! upon these frail hopes, you dare to
peril the lives of hundreds of brave men? I tell you that you will not
succeed; you will be betrayed; I am sure you will be betrayed!”

An expression of horror contracted Lacheneur’s features. It was evident
to all that he was deeply moved.

It is impossible to say what might have happened had it not been for the
intervention of Chanlouineau.

This sturdy peasant came forward, brandishing his gun.

“We are wasting too much time in foolish prattling,” he exclaimed with a
fierce oath.

Lacheneur started as if he had been struck by a whip. He rudely freed
himself and leaped into the saddle.

“Forward!” he ordered.

But the baron and the priest did not yet despair; they sprang to the
horse’s head.

“Lacheneur,” cried the priest, “beware! The blood you are about to spill
will fall upon your head, and upon the heads of your children!”

Appalled by these prophetic words, the little band paused.

Then someone issued from the ranks, clad in the costume of a peasant.

“Marie-Anne!” exclaimed the abbe and the baron in the same breath.

“Yes, I,” responded the young girl, removing the large hat which had
partially concealed her face; “I wish to share the dangers of those who
are dear to me--share in their victory or their defeat. Your counsel
comes too late, gentlemen. Do you see those lights on the horizon?
They tell us that the people of these communes are repairing to the
cross-roads at the Croix d’Arcy, the general rendezvous. Before two
o’clock fifteen hundred men will be gathered there awaiting my father’s
commands. Would you have him leave these men, whom he has called from
their peaceful firesides, without a leader? Impossible!”

She evidently shared the madness of her lover and father, even if she
did not share all their hopes.

“No, there must be no more hesitation, no more parleying,” she
continued. “Prudence now would be the height of folly. There is no more
danger in a retreat than in an advance. Do not try to detain my father,
gentlemen; each moment of delay may, perhaps, cost a man’s life. And
now, my friends, forward!”

A loud cheer answered her, and the little band descended the hill.

But M. d’Escorval could not allow his own son, whom he saw in the ranks,
to depart thus.

“Maurice!” he cried.

The young man hesitated, but at last approached.

“You will not follow these madmen, Maurice?” said the baron.

“I must follow them, father.”

“I forbid it.”

“Alas! father, I cannot obey you. I have promised--I have sworn. I am
second in command.”

His voice was sad, but it was determined.

“My son!” exclaimed M. d’Escorval; “unfortunate child!--it is to certain
death that you are marching--to certain death.”

“All the more reason that I should not break my word, father.”

“And your mother, Maurice, the mother whom you forget!”

A tear glistened in the young man’s eye.

“My mother,” he replied, “would rather weep for her dead son than
keep him near her dishonored, and branded with the names of coward and
traitor. Farewell! my father.”

M. d’Escorval appreciated the nobility of soul that Maurice displayed
in his conduct. He extended his arms, and pressed his beloved son
convulsively to his heart, feeling that it might be for the last time.

“Farewell!” he faltered, “farewell!”

Maurice soon rejoined his comrades, whose acclamations were growing
fainter and fainter in the distance; but the baron stood motionless,
overwhelmed with sorrow.

Suddenly he started from his revery.

“A single hope remains, Abbe!” he cried.

“Alas!” murmured the priest.

“Oh--I am not mistaken. Marie-Anne just told us the place of rendezvous.
By running to Escorval and harnessing the cabriolet, we might be able to
reach the Croix d’Arcy before this party arrive there. Your voice, which
touched Lacheneur, will touch the heart of his accomplices. We will
persuade these poor, misguided men to return to their homes. Come, Abbe;
come quickly!”

And they departed on the run.



CHAPTER XXII

The clock in the tower of Sairmeuse was striking the hour of eight when
Lacheneur and his little band of followers left the Reche.

An hour later, at the Chateau de Courtornieu, Mlle. Blanche, after
finishing her dinner, ordered the carriage to convey her to Montaignac.
Since her father had taken up his abode in town they met only on Sunday;
on that day either Blanche went to Montaignac, or the marquis paid a
visit to the chateau.

Hence this proposed journey was a deviation from the regular order of
things. It was explained, however, by grave circumstances.

It was six days since Martial had presented himself at Courtornieu; and
Blanche was half crazed with grief and rage.

What Aunt Medea was forced to endure during this interval, only poor
dependents in rich families can understand.

For the first three days Mlle. Blanche succeeded in preserving a
semblance of self-control; on the fourth she could endure it no longer,
and in spite of the breach of “_les convenances_” which it involved, she
sent a messenger to Sairmeuse to inquire for Martial. Was he ill--had he
gone away?

The messenger was informed that the marquis was perfectly well, but,
as he spent the entire day, from early morn to dewy eve, in hunting, he
went to bed every evening as soon as supper was over.

What a horrible insult! Still, she was certain that Martial, on hearing
what she had done, would hasten to her to make his excuses. Vain hope!
He did not come; he did not even condescend to give one sign of life.

“Ah! doubtless he is with her,” she said to Aunt Medea. “He is on his
knees before that miserable Marie-Anne--his mistress.”

For she had finished by believing--as is not unfrequently the case--the
very calumnies which she herself had invented.

In this extremity she decided to make her father her confidant; and she
wrote him a note announcing her coming.

She wished her father to compel Lacheneur to leave the country. This
would be an easy matter for him, since he was armed with discretionary
authority at an epoch when lukewarm devotion afforded an abundant excuse
for sending a man into exile.

Fully decided upon this plan, Blanche became calmer on leaving the
chateau; and her hopes overflowed in incoherent phrases, to which poor
Aunt Medea listened with her accustomed resignation.

“At last I shall be rid of this shameless creature!” she exclaimed. “We
will see if he has the audacity to follow her! Will he follow her? Oh,
no; he dare not!”

When the carriage passed through the village of Sairmeuse, Mlle. Blanche
noticed an unwonted animation.

There were lights in every house, the saloons seemed full of drinkers,
and groups of people were standing upon the public square and upon the
doorsteps.

But what did this matter to Mlle. de Courtornieu! It was not until they
were a mile or so from Sairmeuse that she was startled from her revery.

“Listen, Aunt Medea,” she said, suddenly. “Do you hear anything?”

The poor dependent listened. Both occupants of the carriage heard shouts
that became more and more distinct with each revolution of the wheels.

“Let us find out the meaning of this,” said Mlle. Blanche.

And lowering one of the carriage-windows, she asked the coachman the
cause of the disturbance.

“I see a great crowd of peasants on the hill; they have torches and----”

“Blessed Jesus!” interrupted Aunt Medea, in alarm.

“It must be a wedding,” added the coachman, whipping up his horses.

It was not a wedding, but Lacheneur’s little band, which had been
augmented to the number of about five hundred. Lacheneur should have
been at the Croix d’Arcy two hours before. But he had shared the fate of
most popular chiefs. When an impetus had been given to the movement he
was no longer master of it.

Baron d’Escorval had made him lose twenty minutes; he was delayed four
times as long in Sairmeuse. When he reached that village, a little
behind time, he found the peasants scattered through the wine-shops,
drinking to the success of the enterprise.

To tear them from their merry-making was a long and difficult task.

And to crown all, when they were finally induced to resume their line of
march, it was impossible to persuade them to extinguish the pine knots
which they had lighted to serve as torches.

Prayers and threats were alike unavailing. “They wished to see their
way,” they said.

Poor deluded creatures! They had not the slightest conception of the
difficulties and the perils of the enterprise they had undertaken.

They were going to capture a fortified city, defended by a numerous
garrison, as if they were bound on a pleasure jaunt.

Gay, thoughtless, and animated by the imperturbable confidence of a
child, they were marching along, arm in arm, singing patriotic songs.

On horseback, in the centre of the band, M. Lacheneur felt his hair
turning white with anguish.

Would not this delay ruin everything? What would the others, who were
waiting at the Croix d’Arcy, think! What were they doing at this very
moment?

“Onward! onward!” he repeated.

Maurice, Chanlouineau, Jean, Marie-Anne, and about twenty of the old
soldiers of the Empire, understood and shared Lacheneur’s despair. They
knew the terrible danger they were incurring, and they, too, repeated:

“Faster! Let us march faster!”

Vain exhortation! It pleased these people to go slowly.

Suddenly the entire band stopped. Some of the peasants, chancing to look
back, had seen the lamps of Mlle. de Courtornieu’s carriage gleaming in
the darkness.

It came rapidly onward, and soon overtook them. The peasants recognized
the coachman’s livery, and greeted the vehicle with shouts of derision.

M. de Courtornieu, by his avariciousness, had made even more enemies
than the Duc de Sairmeuse; and all the peasants who thought they had
more or less reason to complain of his extortions were delighted at this
opportunity to frighten him.

For, that they were not thinking of vengeance, is conclusively proved by
the sequel.

Hence great was their disappointment when, on opening the carriage-door,
they saw within the vehicle only Mlle. Blanche and Aunt Medea, who
uttered the most piercing shrieks.

But Mlle. de Courtornieu was a brave woman.

“Who are you?” she demanded, haughtily, “and what do you desire?”

“You will know to-morrow,” replied Chanlouineau. “Until then, you are
our prisoner.”

“I see that you do not know who I am, boy.”

“Excuse me. I do know who you are, and, for this very reason, I request
you to descend from your carriage. She must leave the carriage, must she
not, Monsieur d’Escorval?”

“Very well! I declare that I will not leave my carriage; tear me from it
if you dare!”

They would certainly have dared had it not been for Marie-Anne, who
checked some peasants as they were springing toward the carriage.

“Let Mademoiselle de Courtornieu pass without hinderance,” said she.

But this permission might produce such serious consequences that
Chanlouineau found courage to resist.

“That cannot be, Marie-Anne,” said he; “she will warn her father. We
must keep her as a hostage; her life may save the life of our friends.”

Mlle. Blanche had not recognized her former friend, any more than she
had suspected the intentions of this crowd of men.

But Marie-Anne’s name, uttered with that of d’Escorval enlightened her
at once.

She understood it all, and trembled with rage at the thought that she
was at the mercy of her rival. She resolved to place herself under no
obligation to Marie-Anne Lacheneur.

“Very well,” said she, “we will descend.”

Her former friend checked her.

“No,” said she, “no! This is not the place for a young girl.”

“For an honest young girl, you should say,” replied Blanche, with a
sneer.

Chanlouineau was standing only a few feet from the speaker with his
gun in his hand. If a man had uttered those words he would have been
instantly killed. Marie-Anne did not deign to notice them.

“Mademoiselle will turn back,” she said, calmly; “and as she can reach
Montaignac by the other road, two men will accompany her as far as
Courtornieu.”

She was obeyed. The carriage turned and rolled away, but not so quickly
that Marie-Anne failed to hear Blanche cry:

“Beware, Marie! I will make you pay dearly for your insulting
patronage!”

The hours were flying by. This incident had occupied ten minutes
more--ten centuries--and the last trace of order had disappeared.

M. Lacheneur could have wept with rage. He called Maurice and
Chanlouineau.

“I place you in command,” said he; “do all that you can to hurry these
idiots onward. I will ride as fast as I can to the Croix d’Arcy.”

He started, but he was only a short distance in advance of his followers
when he saw two men running toward him at full speed. One was clad in
the attire of a well-to-do bourgeois; the other wore the old uniform of
captain in the Emperor’s guard.

“What has happened?” Lacheneur cried, in alarm.

“All is discovered!”

“Great God!”

“Major Carini has been arrested.”

“By whom? How?”

“Ah! there was a fatality about it! Just as we were perfecting our
arrangements to capture the Duc de Sairmeuse, the duke surprised us. We
fled, but the cursed noble pursued us, overtook Carini, seized him by
the collar, and dragged him to the citadel.”

Lacheneur was overwhelmed; the abbe’s gloomy prophecy again resounded in
his ears.

“So I warned my friends, and hastened to warn you,” continued the
officer. “The affair is an utter failure!”

He was only too correct; and Lacheneur knew it even better than he did.
But, blinded by hatred and anger, he would not acknowledge that the
disaster was irreparable.

“Let Mademoiselle de Counornieu pass without hinderance.”

He affected a calmness which he did not in the least feel.

“You are easily discouraged, gentlemen,” he said, bitterly. “There is,
at least, one more chance.”

“The devil! Then you have resources of which we are ignorant?”

“Perhaps--that depends. You have just passed the Croix d’Arcy; did you
tell any of those people what you have just told me?”

“Not a word.”

“How many men are there at the rendezvous?”

“At least two thousand.”

“And what is their mood?”

“They are burning to begin the struggle. They are cursing our slowness,
and told me to entreat you to make haste.”

“In that case our cause is not lost,” said Lacheneur, with a threatening
gesture. “Wait here until the peasants come up, and say to them that
you were sent to tell them to make haste. Bring them on as quickly
as possible, and have confidence in me; I will be responsible for the
success of the enterprise.”

He said this, then putting spurs to his horse, galloped away. He
had deceived the men. He had no other resources. He did not have the
slightest hope of success. It was an abominable falsehood. But, if this
edifice, which he had erected with such care and labor, was to totter
and fall, he desired to be buried beneath its ruins. They would be
defeated; he was sure of it, but what did that matter? In the conflict
he would seek death and find it.

Bitter discontent pervaded the crowd at the Croix d’Arcy; and after
the passing of the officers, who had hastened to warn Lacheneur of the
disaster at Montaignac, the murmurs of dissatisfaction were changed to
curses.

These peasants, nearly two thousand in number, were indignant at not
finding their leader awaiting them at the rendezvous.

“Where is he?” they asked. “Who knows but he is afraid at the last
moment? Perhaps he is concealing himself while we are risking our lives
and the bread of our children here.”

And already the epithets of mischief-maker and traitor were flying from
lip to lip, and increasing the anger in every breast.

Some were of the opinion that the crowd should disperse; others wished
to march against Montaignac without Lacheneur, and that, immediately.

But these deliberations were interrupted by the furious gallop of a
horse.

A carriage appeared, and stopped in the centre of the open space.

Two men alighted; Baron d’Escorval and Abbe Midon.

They were in advance of Lacheneur. They thought they had arrived in
time.

Alas! here, as on the Reche, all their efforts, all their entreaties,
and all their threats were futile.

They had come in the hope of arresting the movement; they only
precipitated it.

“We have gone too far to draw back,” exclaimed one of the neighboring
farmers, who was the recognized leader in Lacheneur’s absence. “If death
is before us, it is also behind us. To attack and conquer--that is our
only hope of salvation. Forward, then, at once. That is the only way of
disconcerting our enemies. He who hesitates is a coward! Forward!”

A shout of approval from two thousand throats replied:

“Forward!”

They unfurled the tri-color, that much regretted flag that reminded
them of so much glory, and so many great misfortunes; the drums began to
beat, and with shouts of: “Vive Napoleon II.!” the whole column took up
its line of march.

Pale, with clothing in disorder, and voices husky with fatigue and
emotion, M. d’Escorval and the abbe followed the rebels, imploring them
to listen to reason.

They saw the precipice toward which these misguided creatures were
rushing, and they prayed God for an inspiration to check them.

In fifty minutes the distance separating the Croix d’Arcy from
Montaignac is traversed.

Soon they see the gate of the citadel, which was to have been opened for
them by their friends within the walls.

It is eleven o’clock, and yet this gate stands open.

Does not this circumstance prove that their friends are masters of the
town, and that they are awaiting them in force?

They advance, so certain of success that those who have guns do not even
take the trouble to load them.

M. d’Escorval and the abbe alone foresee the catastrophe.

The leader of the expedition is near them, they entreat him not to
neglect the commonest precautions, they implore him to send some two
men on in advance to reconnoitre; they, themselves, offer to go, on
condition that the peasants will await their return before proceeding
farther.

But their prayers are unheeded.

The peasants pass the outer line of fortifications in safety. The head
of the advancing column reaches the drawbridge.

The enthusiasm amounts to delirium; who will be the first to enter is
the only thought.

Alas! at that very moment a pistol is fired.

It is a signal, for instantly, and on every side, resounds a terrible
fusillade.

Three or four peasants fall, mortally wounded. The rest pause, frozen
with terror, thinking only of escape.

The indecision is terrible; but the leader encourages his men, there are
a few of Napoleon’s old soldiers in the ranks. A struggle begins, all
the more frightful by reason of the darkness!

But it is not the cry of “Forward!” that suddenly rends the air.

The voice of a coward sends up the cry of panic:

“We are betrayed! Let him save himself who can!”

This is the end of all order. A wild fear seizes the throng; and these
men flee madly, despairingly, scattered as withered leaves are scattered
by the power of the tempest.



CHAPTER XXIII

Chupin’s stupefying revelations and the thought that Martial, the heir
of his name and dukedom, should degrade himself so low as to enter into
a conspiracy with vulgar peasants, drove the Duc de Sairmeuse nearly
wild.

But the Marquis de Courtornieu’s coolness restored the duke’s
_sang-froid_.

He ran to the barracks, and in less than half an hour five hundred
foot-soldiers and three hundred of the Montaignac chasseurs were under
arms.

With these forces at his disposal it would have been easy enough
to suppress this movement without the least bloodshed. It was only
necessary to close the gates of the city. It was not with fowling-pieces
and clubs that these poor peasants could force an entrance into a
fortified town.

But such moderation did not suit a man of the duke’s violent
temperament, a man who was ever longing for struggle and excitement, a
man whose ambition prompted him to display his zeal.

He had ordered the gate of the citadel to be left open, and had
concealed some of his soldiers behind the parapets of the outer
fortifications.

He then stationed himself where he could command a view of the approach
to the citadel, and deliberately chose his moment for giving the signal
to fire.

Still, a strange thing happened. Of four hundred shots, fired into a
dense crowd of fifteen hundred men, only three had hit the mark.

More humane than their chief, nearly all the soldiers had fired in the
air.

But the duke had not time to investigate this strange occurrence now.
He leaped into the saddle, and placing himself at the head of about
five hundred men, cavalry and infantry, he started in pursuit of the
fugitives.

The peasants had the advantage of their pursuers by about twenty
minutes.

Poor simple creatures!

They might easily have made their escape. They had only to disperse,
to scatter; but, unfortunately, the thought never once occurred to the
majority of them. A few ran across the fields and gained their homes
in safety; the others, frantic and despairing, overcome by the strange
vertigo that seizes the bravest in moments of panic, fled like a flock
of frightened sheep.

Fear lent them wings, for did they not hear each moment shots fired at
the laggards?

But there was one man, who, at each of these detonations, received, as
it were, his death-wound--this man was Lacheneur.

He had reached the Croix d’Arcy just as the firing at Montaignac began.
He listened and waited. No discharge of musketry replied to the first
fusillade. There might have been butchery, but combat, no.

Lacheneur understood it all; and he wished that every ball had pierced
his own heart.

He put spurs to his horse and galloped to the crossroads. The place was
deserted. At the entrance of one of the roads stood the cabriolet which
had brought M. d’Escorval and the abbe.

At last M. Lacheneur saw the fugitives approaching in the distance. He
dashed forward, to meet them, trying by mingled curses and insults to
stay their flight.

“Cowards!” he vociferated, “traitors! You flee--and you are ten against
one! Where are you going? To your own homes. Fools! you will find
the gendarmes there only awaiting your coming to conduct you to the
scaffold. Is it not better to die with your weapons in your hands?
Come--right about. Follow me! We may still conquer. Reinforcements are
at hand; two thousand men are following me!”

He promised them two thousand men; had he promised them ten thousand,
twenty thousand--an army and cannon, it would have made no difference.

Not until they reached the wide-open space of the cross-roads, where
they had talked so confidently scarcely an hour before, did the most
intelligent of the throng regain their senses, while the others fled in
every direction.

About a hundred of the bravest and most determined of the conspirators
gathered around M. Lacheneur. In the little crowd was the abbe, gloomy
and despondent. He had been separated from the baron. What had been his
fate? Had he been killed or taken prisoner? Was it possible that he had
made his escape?

The worthy priest dared not go away. He waited, hoping that his
companion might rejoin him, and deemed himself fortunate in finding
the carriage still there. He was still waiting when the remnant of the
column confided to Maurice and Chanlouineau came up.

Of the five hundred men that composed it on its departure from
Sairmeuse, only fifteen remained, including the two retired officers.

Marie-Anne was in the centre of this little party.

M. Lacheneur and his friends were trying to decide what course it was
best for them to pursue. Should each man go his way? or should they
unite, and by an obstinate resistance, give all their comrades time to
reach their homes?

The voice of Chanlouineau put an end to all hesitation.

“I have come to fight,” he exclaimed, “and I shall sell my life dearly.”

“We will make a stand then!” cried the others.

But Chanlouineau did not follow them to the spot which they had
considered best adapted to the prolonged defence; he called Maurice and
drew him a little aside.

“You, Monsieur d’Escorval,” he said, almost roughly, “are going to leave
here and at once.”

“I--I came here, Chanlouineau, as you did, to do my duty.”

“Your duty, Monsieur, is to serve Marie-Anne. Go at once, and take her
with you.”

“I shall remain,” said Maurice, firmly.

He was going to join his comrades when Chanlouineau stopped him.

“You have no right to sacrifice your life here,” he said, quietly. “Your
life belongs to the woman who has given herself to you.”

“Wretch! how dare you!”

Chanlouineau sadly shook his head.

“What is the use of denying it?” said he.

“It was so great a temptation that only an angel could have resisted
it. It was not your fault, nor was it hers. Lacheneur was a bad father.
There was a day when I wished either to kill myself or to kill you, I
knew not which. Ah! only once again will you be as near death as you
were that day. You were scarcely five paces from the muzzle of my gun.
It was God who stayed my hand by reminding me of her despair. Now that I
am to die, as well as Lacheneur, someone must care for Marie-Anne.
Swear that you will marry her. You may be involved in some difficulty on
account of this affair; but I have here the means of saving you.”

A sound of firing interrupted him; the soldiers of the Duc de Sairmeuse
were approaching.

“Good God!” exclaimed Chanlouineau, “and Marie-Anne!”

They rushed in pursuit of her, and Maurice was the first to discover
her, standing in the centre of the open space clinging to the neck of
her father’s horse. He took her in his arms, trying to drag her away.

“Come!” said he, “come!”

But she refused.

“Leave me, leave me!” she entreated.

“But all is lost!”

“Yes, I know that all is lost--even honor. Leave me here. I must remain;
I must die, and thus hide my shame. I must, it shall be so!”

Just then Chanlouineau appeared.

Had he divined the secret of her resistance? Perhaps; but without
uttering a word, he lifted her in his strong arms as if she had been a
child and bore her to the carriage guarded by Abbe Midon.

“Get in,” he said, addressing the priest, “and quick--take Mademoiselle
Lacheneur. Now, Maurice, in your turn!”

But already the duke’s soldiers were masters of the field. Seeing a
group in the shadow, at a little distance, they rushed to the spot.

The heroic Chanlouineau seized his gun, and brandishing it like a club,
held the enemy at bay, giving Maurice time to spring into the carriage,
catch the reins and start the horse off at a gallop.

All the cowardice and all the heroism displayed on that terrible night
will never be really known.

Two minutes after the departure of Marie-Anne and of Maurice,
Chanlouineau was still battling with the foe.

A dozen or more soldiers were in front of him. Twenty shots had been
fired, but not a ball had struck him. His enemies always believed him
invulnerable.

“Surrender!” cried the soldiers, amazed by such valor; “surrender!”

“Never! never!”

He was truly formidable; he brought to the support of his marvellous
courage a superhuman strength and agility. No one dared come within
reach of those brawny arms that revolved with the power and velocity of
the sails of a wind-mill.

Then it was that a soldier, confiding his musket to the care of a
companion, threw himself flat upon his belly, and crawling unobserved
around behind this obscure hero, seized him by the legs. He tottered
like an oak beneath the blow of the axe, struggled furiously, but taken
at such a disadvantage was thrown to the ground, crying, as he fell:

“Help! friends, help!”

But no one responded to this appeal.

At the other end of the open space those upon whom he called had, after
a desperate struggle, yielded.

The main body of the duke’s infantry was near at hand.

The rebels heard the drums beating the charge; they could see the
bayonets gleaming in the sunlight.

Lacheneur, who had remained in the same spot, utterly ignoring the shot
that whistled around him, felt that his few remaining comrades were
about to be exterminated.

In that supreme moment the whole past was revealed to him as by a flash
of lightning. He read and judged his own heart. Hatred had led him to
crime. He loathed himself for the humiliation which he had imposed
upon his daughter. He cursed himself for the falsehoods by which he had
deceived these brave men, for whose death he would be accountable.

Enough blood had flowed; he must save those who remained.

“Cease firing, my friends,” he commanded; “retreat!”

They obeyed--he could see them scatter in every direction.

He too could flee; was he not mounted upon a gallant steed which would
bear him beyond the reach of the enemy?

But he had sworn that he would not survive defeat. Maddened with
remorse, despair, sorrow, and impotent rage, he saw no refuge save in
death.

He had only to wait for it; it was fast approaching; he preferred to
rush to meet it. Gathering up the reins, he dashed the rowels in his
steed and, alone, charged upon the enemy.

The shock was rude, the ranks opened, there was a moment of confusion.

But Lacheneur’s horse, its chest cut open by the bayonets, reared, beat
the air with his hoofs, then fell backward, burying his rider beneath
him.

And the soldiers marched on, not suspecting that beneath the body of the
horse the brave rider was struggling to free himself.

It was half-past one in the morning--the place was deserted.

Nothing disturbed the silence save the moans of a few wounded men, who
called upon their comrades for succor.

But before thinking of the wounded, M. de Sairmeuse must decide upon the
course which would be most likely to redound to his advantage and to his
political glory.

Now that the insurrection had been suppressed, it was necessary to
exaggerate its magnitude as much as possible, in order that his reward
should be in proportion to the service supposed to have been rendered.

Some fifteen or twenty rebels had been captured; but that was not a
sufficient number to give the victory the _eclat_ which he desired. He
must find more culprits to drag before the provost-marshal or before a
military commission.

He, therefore, divided his troops into several detachments, and sent
them in every direction with orders to explore the villages, search all
isolated houses, and arrest all suspected persons.

His task here having been completed, he again recommended the most
implacable severity, and started on a brisk trot for Montaignac.

He was delighted; certainly he blessed--as had M. de Courtornieu--these
honest and artless conspirators; but one fear, which he vainly tried to
dismiss, impaired his satisfaction.

His son, the Marquis de Sairmeuse, was he, or was he not, implicated in
this conspiracy?

He could not, he would not, believe it; and yet the recollection of
Chupin’s assurance troubled him.

On the other hand, what could have become of Martial? The servant who
had been sent to warn him--had he met him? Was the marquis returning?
And by which road? Could it be possible that he had fallen into the
hands of the peasants?

The duke’s relief was intense when, on returning home, after a
conference with M. de Courtornieu, he learned that Martial had arrived
about a quarter of an hour before.

“The marquis went at once to his own room on dismounting from his
horse,” added the servant.

“Very well,” replied the duke. “I will seek him there.”

Before the servants he said, “Very well;” but secretly, he exclaimed:
“Abominable impertinence! What! I am on horseback at the head of my
troops, my life imperilled, and my son goes quietly to bed without even
assuring himself of my safety!”

He reached his son’s room, but found the door closed and locked on the
inside. He rapped.

“Who is there?” demanded Martial.

“It is I; open the door.”

Martial drew the bolt; M. de Sairmeuse entered, but the sight that met
his gaze made him tremble.

Upon the table was a basin of blood, and Martial, with chest bared, was
bathing a large wound in his right breast.

“You have been fighting!” exclaimed the duke, in a husky voice.

“Yes.”

“Ah! then you were, indeed----”

“I was where? what?”

“At the convocation of these miserable peasants who, in their parricidal
folly, have dared to dream of the overthrow of the best of princes!”

Martial’s face betrayed successively profound surprise, and a more
violent desire to laugh.

“I think you must be jesting, Monsieur,” he replied.

The young man’s words and manner reassured the duke a little, without
entirely dissipating his suspicions.

“Then, these vile rascals attacked you?” he exclaimed.

“Not at all. I have been simply obliged to fight a duel.”

“With whom? Name the scoundrel who has dared to insult you!”

A faint flush tinged Martial’s cheek; but it was in his usual careless
tone that he replied:

“Upon my word, no; I shall not give his name. You would trouble him,
perhaps; and I really owe the fellow a debt of gratitude. It happened
upon the highway; he might have assassinated me without ceremony, but he
offered me open combat. Besides, he was wounded far more severely than
I.”

All M. de Sairmeuse’s doubts had returned.

“And why, instead of summoning a physician, are you attempting to dress
this wound yourself?”

“Because it is a mere trifle, and because I wish to keep it a secret.”

The duke shook his head.

“All this is scarcely plausible,” he remarked, “especially after the
assurance of your complicity, which I have received.”

“Ah!” said he; “and from whom? From your spy-in-chief, no doubt--that
rascal Chupin. It surprises me to see that you can hesitate for a moment
between the word of your son and the stories of such a wretch.”

“Do not speak ill of Chupin, Marquis; he is a very useful man. Had it
not been for him, we should have been taken unawares. It was through him
that I learned of this vast conspiracy organized by Lacheneur----”

“What! is it Lacheneur--”

“Who is at the head of the movement? yes, Marquis. Ah! your usual
discernment has failed you in this instance. What, you have been a
constant visitor at this house, and you have suspected nothing? And you
contemplate a diplomatic career! But this is not all. You know now for
what purpose the money which you so lavishly bestowed upon them has been
employed. They have used it to purchase guns, powder, and ammunition.”

The duke had become satisfied of the injustice of his suspicions; but he
was now endeavoring to irritate his son.

It was a fruitless effort. Martial knew very well that he had been
duped, but he did not think of resenting it.

“If Lacheneur has been captured,” he thought; “if he should be condemned
to death and if I should save him, Marie-Anne would refuse me nothing.”



CHAPTER XXIV

Having penetrated the mystery that enveloped his son’s frequent absence,
the Baron d’Escorval had concealed his fears and his chagrin from his
wife.

It was the first time that he had ever had a secret from the faithful
and courageous companion of his existence.

Without warning her, he went to beg Abbe Midon to follow him to the
Reche, to the house of M. Lacheneur.

The silence, on his part, explains Mme. d’Escorval’s astonishment when,
on the arrival of the dinner-hour, neither her son nor her husband
appeared.

Maurice was sometimes late; but the baron, like all great workers, was
punctuality itself. What extraordinary thing could have happened?

Her surprise became uneasiness when she learned that her husband had
departed in company with Abbe Midon. They had harnessed the horse
themselves, and instead of driving through the court-yard as usual, they
had driven through the stable-yard into a lane leading to the public
road.

What did all this mean? Why these strange precautions?

Mme. d’Escorval waited, oppressed by vague forebodings.

The servants shared her anxiety. The baron was so equable in temper, so
kind and just to his inferiors, that his servants adored him, and would
have gone through a fiery furnace for him.

So, about ten o’clock, they hastened to lead to their mistress a peasant
who was returning from Sairmeuse.

This man, who was slightly intoxicated, told the strangest and most
incredible stories.

He said that all the peasantry for ten leagues around were under arms,
and that the Baron d’Escorval was the leader of the revolt.

He did not doubt the final success of the movement, declaring that
Napoleon II., Marie-Louise, and all the marshals of the Empire were
concealed in Montaignac.

Alas! it must be confessed that Lacheneur had not hesitated to utter the
grossest falsehoods in his anxiety to gain followers.

Mme. d’Escorval could not be deceived by these ridiculous stories, but
she could believe, and she did believe that the baron was the prime
mover in this insurrection.

And this belief, which would have carried consternation to the hearts of
so many women, reassured her.

She had entire, absolute, and unlimited faith in her husband. She
believed him superior to all other men--infallible, in short. The moment
he said: “This is so!” she believed it implicitly.

Hence, if her husband had organized a movement that movement was
right. If he had attempted it, it was because he expected to succeed.
Therefore, it was sure to succeed.

Impatient, however, to know the result, she sent the gardener to
Sairmeuse with orders to obtain information without awakening suspicion,
if possible, and to hasten back as soon as he could learn anything of a
positive nature.

He returned in about two hours, pale, frightened, and in tears.

The disaster had already become known, and had been related to him with
the most terrible exaggerations. He had been told that hundreds of
men had been killed, and that a whole army was scouring the country,
massacring defenceless peasants and their families.

While he was telling his story, Mme. d’Escorval felt that she was going
mad.

She saw--yes, positively, she saw her son and her husband, dead--or
still worse, mortally wounded upon the public highway--they were lying
with their arms crossed upon their breasts, livid, bloody, their eyes
staring wildly--they were begging for water--a drop of water.

“I will find them!” she exclaimed, in frenzied accents. “I will go to
the field of battle, I will seek for them among the dead, until I find
them. Light some torches, my friends, and come with me, for you will aid
me, will you not? You loved them; they were so good! You would not leave
their dead bodies unburied! oh! the wretches! the wretches who have
killed them!”

The servants were hastening to obey when the furious gallop of a horse
and the sound of carriage-wheels were heard upon the drive.

“Here they are!” exclaimed the gardener; “here they are!”

Mme. d’Escorval, followed by the servants, rushed to the door just in
time to see a cabriolet enter the court-yard, and the horse, panting,
exhausted, and flecked with foam, miss his footing, and fall.

Abbe Midon and Maurice had already leaped to the ground and were lifting
out an apparently lifeless body.

Even Marie-Anne’s great energy had not been able to resist so many
successive shocks; the last trial had overwhelmed her. Once in the
carriage, all immediate danger having disappeared, the excitement which
had sustained her fled. She became unconscious, and all the efforts of
Maurice and of the priest had failed to restore her.

But Mme. d’Escorval did not recognize Mlle. Lacheneur in the masculine
habiliments in which she was clothed.

She only saw that it was not her husband whom they had brought with
them; and a convulsive shudder shook her from head to foot.

“Your father, Maurice!” she exclaimed, in a stifled voice; “and your
father!”

The effect was terrible. Until that moment, Maurice and the cure had
comforted themselves with the hope that M. d’Escorval would reach home
before them.

Maurice tottered, and almost dropped his precious burden. The abbe
perceived it, and at a sign from him, two servants gently lifted
Marie-Anne, and bore her to the house.

Then the cure approached Mme. d’Escorval.

“Monsieur will soon be here, Madame,” said he, at hazard; “he fled
first----”

“Baron d’Escorval could not have fled,” she interrupted. “A general
does not desert when face to face with the enemy. If a panic seizes his
soldiers, he rushes to the front, and either leads them back to combat,
or takes his own life.”

“Mother!” faltered Maurice; “mother!”

“Oh! do not try to deceive me. My husband was the organizer of this
conspiracy--his confederates beaten and dispersed must have proved
themselves cowards. God have mercy upon me; my husband is dead!”

In spite of the abbe’s quickness of perception, he could not understand
such assertions on the part of the baroness; he thought that sorrow and
terror must have destroyed her reason.

“Ah! Madame,” he exclaimed, “the baron had nothing to do with this
movement; far from it----”

He paused; all this was passing in the court-yard, in the glare of the
torches which had been lighted up by the servants. Anyone in the public
road could hear and see all. He realized the imprudence of which they
were guilty.

“Come, Madame,” said he, leading the baroness toward the house; “and
you, also, Maurice, come!”

It was with the silent and passive submission of great misery that Mme.
d’Escorval obeyed the cure.

Her body alone moved in mechanical obedience; her mind and heart were
flying through space to the man who was her all, and whose mind and
heart were even then, doubtless, calling to her from the dread abyss
into which he had fallen.

But when she had passed the threshold of the drawing-room, she trembled
and dropped the priest’s arm, rudely recalled to the present reality.

She recognized Marie-Anne in the lifeless form extended upon the sofa.

“Mademoiselle Lacheneur!” she faltered, “here in this costume--dead!”

One might indeed believe the poor girl dead, to see her lying there
rigid, cold, and as white as if the last drop of blood had been drained
from her veins. Her beautiful face had the immobility of marble; her
half-opened, colorless lips disclosed teeth convulsively clinched, and a
large dark-blue circle surrounded her closed eyelids.

Her long black hair, which she had rolled up closely to slip under her
peasant’s hat, had become unbound, and flowed down in rich masses over
her shoulders and trailed upon the floor.

“She is only in a state of syncope; there is no danger,” declared the
abbe, after he had examined Marie-Anne. “It will not be long before she
regains consciousness.”

And then, rapidly but clearly, he gave the necessary directions to the
servants, who were astonished at their mistress.

Mme. d’Escorval looked on with eyes dilated with terror. She seemed
to doubt her own sanity, and incessantly passed her hand across her
forehead, thickly beaded with cold sweat.

“What a night!” she murmured. “What a night!”

“I must remind you, Madame,” said the priest, sympathizingly, but
firmly, “that reason and duty alike forbid you thus to yield to
despair! Wife, where is your energy? Christian, what has become of your
confidence in a just and beneficial God?”

“Oh! I have courage, Monsieur,” faltered the wretched woman. “I am
brave!”

The abbe led her to a large arm-chair, where he forced her to seat
herself, and in a gentler tone, he resumed:

“Besides, why should you despair, Madame? Your son, certainly, is with
you in safety. Your husband has not compromised himself; he has done
nothing which I myself have not done.”

And briefly, but with rare precision, he explained the part which he and
the baron had played during this unfortunate evening.

But this recital, instead of reassuring the baroness, seemed to increase
her anxiety.

“I understand you,” she interrupted, “and I believe you. But I also know
that all the people in the country round about are convinced that my
husband commanded the insurrectionists. They believe it, and they will
say it.”

“And what of that?”

“If he has been arrested, as you give me to understand, he will be
summoned before a court-martial. Was he not the friend of the Emperor?
That is a crime, as you very well know. He will be convicted and
sentenced to death.”

“No, Madame, no! Am I not here? I will appear before the tribunal, and I
shall say: ‘Here I am! I have seen and I know all.’”

“But they will arrest you, alas, Monsieur, because you are not a priest
according to the hearts of these cruel men. They will throw you in
prison, and you, will meet him upon the scaffold.”

Maurice had been listening, pale and trembling.

But on hearing these last words, he sank upon his knees, hiding his face
in his hands:

“Ah! I have killed my father!” he exclaimed.

“Unhappy child! what do you say?”

The priest motioned him to be silent; but he did not see him, and he
pursued:

“My father was ignorant even of the existence of this conspiracy of
which Monsieur Lacheneur was the guiding spirit; but I knew it--I wished
him to succeed, because on his success depended the happiness of my
life. And then--wretch that I was!--when I wished to attract to our
ranks some timid or wavering accomplice, I used the loved and respected
name of d’Escorval. Ah, I was mad! I was mad!”

Then, with a despairing gesture, he added:

“And yet, even now, I have not the courage to curse my folly! Oh,
mother, mother, if you knew----”

His sobs interrupted him. Just then a faint moan was heard.

Marie-Anne was regaining consciousness. Already she had partially risen
from the sofa, and sat regarding this terrible scene with an air of
profound wonder, as if she did not understand it in the least.

Slowly and gently she put back her hair from her face, and opened and
closed her eyes, which seemed dazzled by the light of the candles.

She endeavored to speak, to ask some question, but Abbe Midon commanded
silence by a gesture.

Enlightened by the words of Mme. d’Escorval and by the confession of
Maurice, the abbe understood at once the extent of the frightful danger
that menaced the baron and his son.

How was this danger to be averted? What must be done?

He had no time for explanation or reflection; with each moment, a chance
of salvation fled. He must decide and act without delay.

The abbe was a brave man. He darted to the door, and called the servants
who were standing in the hall and on the staircase.

When they were gathered around him:

“Listen to me, intently,” said he, in that quick and imperious voice
that impresses one with the certainty of approaching peril, “and
remember that your master’s life depends, perhaps, upon your discretion.
We can rely upon you, can we not?”

Every hand was raised as if to call upon God to witness their fidelity.

“In less than an hour,” continued the priest, “the soldiers sent in
pursuit of the fugitives will be here. Not a word must be uttered in
regard to what has passed this evening. Everyone must be led to suppose
that I went away with the baron and returned alone. Not one of you
must have seen Mademoiselle Lacheneur. We are going to find a place of
concealment for her. Remember, my friends, if there is the slightest
suspicion of her presence here, all is lost. If the soldiers question
you, endeavor to convince them that Monsieur Maurice has not left the
house this evening.”

He paused, trying to think if he had forgotten any precaution that human
prudence could suggest, then added:

“One word more; to see you standing about at this hour of the night will
awaken suspicion at once. But this is what I desire. We will plead in
justification, the alarm that you feel at the absence of the baron, and
also the indisposition of madame--for madame is going to retire--she
will thus escape interrogation. And you, Maurice, run and change your
clothes; and, above all, wash your hands, and sprinkle some perfume upon
them.”

All present were so impressed with the imminence of the danger, that
they were more than willing to obey the priest’s orders.

Marie-Anne, as soon as she could be moved, was carried to a tiny room
under the roof. Mme. d’Escorval retired to her own apartment, and the
servants went back to the office.

Maurice and the abbe remained alone in the drawing-room, silent and
appalled by horrible forebodings.

The unusually calm face of the priest betrayed his terrible anxiety.
He now felt convinced that Baron d’Escorval was a prisoner, and all his
efforts were now directed toward removing any suspicion of complicity
from Maurice.

“This was,” he reflected, “the only way to save the father.”

A violent peal of the bell attached to the gate interrupted his
meditations.

He heard the footsteps of the gardener as he hastened to open it, heard
the gate turn upon its hinges, then the measured tramp of soldiers in
the court-yard.

A loud voice commanded:

“Halt!”

The priest looked at Maurice and saw that he was as pale as death.

“Be calm,” he entreated; “do not be alarmed. Do not lose your
self-possession--and do not forget my instructions.”

“Let them come,” replied Maurice. “I am prepared!”

The drawing-room door was flung violently open, and a young man,
wearing the uniform of a captain of grenadiers, entered. He was scarcely
twenty-five years of age, tall, fair-haired, with blue eyes and little
waxed mustache. His whole person betokened an excessive elegance
exaggerated to the verge of the ridiculous. His face ordinarily must
have indicated extreme self-complacency; but at the present moment it
wore a really ferocious expression.

Behind him, in the passage, were a number of armed soldiers.

He cast a suspicious glance around the room, then, in a harsh voice:

“Who is the master of this house?” he demanded.

“The Baron d’Escorval, my father, who is absent,” replied Maurice.

“Where is he?”

The abbe, who, until now, had remained seated, rose.

“On hearing of the unfortunate outbreak of this evening,” he replied,
“the baron and myself went to these peasants, in the hope of inducing
them to relinquish their foolish undertaking. They would not listen to
us. In the confusion that ensued, I became separated from the baron; I
returned here very anxious, and am now awaiting his return.”

The captain twisted his mustache with a sneering air.

“Not a bad invention!” said he. “Only I do not believe a word of this
fiction.”

A light gleamed in the eyes of the priest, his lips trembled, but he
held his peace.

“Who are you?” rudely demanded the officer.

“I am the cure of Sairmeuse.”

“Honest men ought to be in bed at this hour. And you are racing about
the country after rebellious peasants. Really, I do not know what
prevents me from ordering your arrest.”

That which did prevent him was the priestly robe, all powerful under the
Restoration. With Maurice he was more at ease.

“How many are there in this family?”

“Three; my father, my mother--ill at this moment--and myself.”

“And how many servants?”

“Seven--four men and three women.”

“You have neither received nor concealed anyone this evening?”

“No one.”

“It will be necessary to prove this,” said the captain. And turning
toward the door:

“Corporal Bavois!” he called.

This man was one of those old soldiers who had followed the Emperor
over all Europe. Two small, ferocious gray eyes lighted his tanned,
weather-beaten face, and an immense hooked nose surmounted a heavy,
bristling mustache.

“Bavois,” commanded the officer, “you will take half a dozen men and
search this house from top to bottom. You are an old fox that knows a
thing or two. If there is any hiding-place here, you will be sure to
discover it; if anyone is concealed here, you will bring the person to
me. Go, and make haste!”

The corporal departed on his mission; the captain resumed his questions.

“And now,” said he, turning to Maurice, “what have you been doing this
evening?”

The young man hesitated for an instant; then, with well-feigned
indifference, replied:

“I have not put my head outside the door this evening.”

“Hum! that must be proved. Let me see your hands.”

The soldier’s tone was so offensive that Maurice felt the angry blood
mount to his forehead. Fortunately, a warning glance from the abbe made
him restrain his wrath.

He offered his hands to the inspection of the captain, who examined them
carefully, outside and in, and finally smelled them.

“Ah! these hands are too white and smell too sweet to have been dabbling
in powder.”

He was evidently surprised that this young man should have had so little
courage as to remain in the shelter of the fireside while his father was
leading the peasants on to battle.

“Another thing,” said he, “you must have weapons here.”

“Yes, hunting rifles.”

“Where are they?”

“In a small room on the ground-floor.”

“Take me there.”

They conducted him to the room, and on finding that none of the
double-barrelled guns had been used for some days, he seemed
considerably annoyed.

He appeared furious when the corporal came and told him that he had
searched everywhere, but had found nothing of a suspicious character.

“Send for the servants,” was his next order.

But all the servants faithfully repeated the lesson which the abbe had
given them.

The captain saw that he was not likely to discover the mystery, although
he was well satisfied that one existed.

Swearing that they should pay dearly for it, if they were deceiving him,
he again called Bavois.

“I must continue my search,” said he. “You, with two men, will remain
here, and render a strict account of all that you see and hear. If
Monsieur d’Escorval returns, bring him to me at once; do not allow him
to escape. Keep your eyes open, and good luck to you!”

He added a few words in a low voice, then left the room as abruptly as
he had entered it.

The departing footsteps of the soldiers were soon lost in the stillness
of the night, and then the corporal gave vent to his disgust in a
frightful oath.

“_Hein_!” said he, to his men, “you have heard that cadet. Listen,
watch, arrest, report. So he takes us for spies! Ah! if our old leader
knew to what base uses his old soldiers were degraded!”

The two men responded by a sullen growl.

“As for you,” pursued the old trooper, addressing Maurice and the abbe,
“I, Bavois, corporal of grenadiers, declare in my name and in that of my
two men, that you are as free as birds, and that we shall arrest no one.
More than that, if we can aid you in any way, we are at your service.
The little fool that commanded us this evening thought we were fighting.
Look at my gun; I have not fired a shot from it; and my comrades fired
only blank cartridges.”

The man might possibly be sincere, but it was scarcely probable.

“We have nothing to conceal,” replied the cautious priest.

The old corporal gave a knowing wink.

“Ah! you distrust me! You are wrong; and I am going to prove it.
Because, you see, though it is easy to gull that fool who just left
here, it is not so easy to deceive Corporal Bavois. Very well! it was
scarcely prudent to leave in the court-yard a gun that certainly had not
been charged for firing at swallows.”

The cure and Maurice exchanged a glance of consternation. Maurice now
recollected, for the first time, that when he sprang from the carriage
to lift out Marie-Anne, he propped his loaded gun against the wall. It
had escaped the notice of the servants.

“Secondly,” pursued Bavois, “there is someone concealed in the attic. I
have excellent ears. Thirdly, I arranged it so that no one should enter
the sick lady’s room.”

Maurice needed no further proof. He extended his hand to the corporal,
and, in a voice trembling with emotion, he said:

“You are a brave man!”

A few moments later, Maurice, the abbe, and Mme. d’Escorval were again
assembled in the drawing-room, deliberating upon the measures which must
be taken, when Marie-Anne appeared.

She was still frightfully pale; but her step was firm, her manner quiet
and composed.

“I must leave this house,” she said to the baroness. “Had I been
conscious, I would never have accepted hospitality which is likely to
bring dire misfortune on your family. Alas! your acquaintance with
me has cost you too many tears and too much sorrow already. Do
you understand now why I wished you to regard us as strangers? A
presentiment told me that my family would be fatal to yours!”

“Poor child!” exclaimed Mme. d’Escorval; “where will you go?”

Marie-Anne lifted her beautiful eyes to the heaven in which she placed
her trust.

“I do not know, Madame,” she replied; “but duty commands me to go. I
must learn what has become of my father and my brother, and share their
fate.”

“What!” exclaimed Maurice; “still this thought of death. You, who no
longer----”

He paused; a secret which was not his own had almost escaped his lips.
But visited by a sudden inspiration, he threw himself at his mother’s
feet.

“Oh, my mother! my dearest mother, do not allow her to depart. I may
perish in my attempt to save my father. She will be your daughter
then--she whom I have loved so much. You will encircle her with your
tender and protecting love----”

Marie-Anne remained.



CHAPTER XXV

The secret which approaching death had wrestled from Marie-Anne in the
fortification at the Croix d’Arcy, Mme. d’Escorval was ignorant of when
she joined her entreaties to those of her son to induce the unfortunate
girl to remain.

But the fact occasioned Maurice scarcely an uneasiness.

His faith in his mother was complete, absolute; he was sure that she
would forgive when she learned the truth.

Loving and chaste wives and mothers are always most indulgent to those
who have been led astray by the voice of passion.

Such noble women can, with impunity, despise and brave the prejudices of
hypocrites.

These reflections made Maurice feel more tranquil in regard to
Marie-Anne’s future, and he now thought only of his father.

Day was breaking; he declared that he would assume some disguise and go
to Montaignac at once.

On hearing these words, Mme. d’Escorval turned and hid her face in the
sofa-cushions to stifle her sobs.

She was trembling for her husband’s life, and now her son must
precipitate himself into danger. Perhaps before the sun sank to rest,
she would have neither husband nor son.

And yet she did not say “no.” She felt that Maurice was only fulfilling
a sacred duty. She would have loved him less had she supposed him
capable of cowardly hesitation. She would have dried her tears, if
necessary, to bid him “go.”

Moreover, what was not preferable to the agony of suspense which they
had been enduring for hours?

Maurice had reached the door when the abbe stopped him.

“You must go to Montaignac,” said he, “but it would be folly to disguise
yourself. You would certainly be recognized, and the saying: ‘He who
conceals himself is guilty,’ will assuredly be applied to you. You must
go openly, with head erect, and you must even exaggerate the assurance
of innocence. Go straight to the Duc de Sairmeuse and the Marquis de
Courtornieu. I will accompany you; we will go in the carriage.”

Maurice seemed undecided.

“Obey these counsels, my son,” said Mme. d’Escorval; “the abbe knows
much better than we do what is best.”

“I will obey, mother.”

The cure had not waited for this assent to go and give an order for
harnessing the horses. Mme. d’Escorval left the room to write a few
lines to a lady friend, whose husband exerted considerable influence in
Montaignac. Maurice and Marie-Anne were left alone.

It was the first moment of freedom and solitude which they had found
since Marie-Anne’s confession.

They stood for a moment, silent and motionless, then Maurice advanced,
and clasping her in his arms, he whispered:

“Marie-Anne, my darling, my beloved, I did not know that one could love
more fondly than I loved you yesterday; but now--And you--you wish for
death when another precious life depends upon yours.”

She shook her head sadly.

“I was terrified,” she faltered. “The future of shame that I saw--that
I still--alas! see before me, appalled me. Now I am resigned. I will
uncomplainingly endure the punishment for my horrible fault--I will
submit to the insults and disgrace that await me!”

“Insults, to you! Ah! woe to who dares! But will you not now be my wife
in the sight of men, as you are in the sight of God? The failure of your
father’s scheme sets you free!”

“No, no, Maurice, I am not free! Ah! it is you who are pitiless! I see
only too well that you curse me, that you curse the day when we met for
the first time! Confess it! Say it!”

Marie-Anne lifted her streaming eyes to his.

“Ah! I should lie if I said that. My cowardly heart has not that much
courage! I suffer--I am disgraced and humiliated, but----”

He could not finish; he drew her to him, and their lips and their tears
met in one long kiss.

“You love me,” exclaimed Maurice, “you love me in spite of all! We shall
succeed. I will save your father, and mine--I will save your brother!”

The horses were neighing and stamping in the courtyard. The abbe cried:
“Come, let us start.” Mme. d’Escorval entered with a letter, which she
handed to Maurice.

She clasped in a long and convulsive embrace the son whom she feared she
should never see again; then, summoning all her courage, she pushed him
away, uttering only the single word:

“Go!”

He departed; and when the sound of the carriage-wheels had died away
in the distance, Mme. d’Escorval and Marie-Anne fell upon their knees,
imploring the mercy and aid of a just God.

They could only pray. The cure and Maurice could act.

Abbe Midon’s plan, which he explained to young d’Escorval, as the horses
dashed along, was as simple as the situation was terrible.

“If, by confessing your own guilt, you could save your father, I should
tell you to deliver yourself up, and to confess the whole truth. Such
would be your duty. But this sacrifice would be not only useless, but
dangerous. Your confession of guilt would only implicate your father
still more. You would be arrested, but they would not release him, and
you would both be tried and convicted. Let us, then, allow--I will not
say justice, for that would be blasphemy--but these blood-thirsty men,
who call themselves judges, to pursue their course, and attribute all
that you have done to your father. When the trial comes, you will prove
his innocence, and produce alibis so incontestable, that they will be
forced to acquit him. And I understand the people of our country so
well, that I am sure not one of them will reveal our stratagem.”

“And if we should not succeed,” asked Maurice, gloomily, “what could I
do then?”

The question was so terrible that the priest dared not respond to it. He
and Maurice were silent during the remainder of the drive.

They reached the city at last, and Maurice saw how wise the abbe had
been in preventing him from assuming a disguise.

Armed with the most absolute power, the Duc de Sairmeuse and the Marquis
de Courtornieu had closed all the gates of Montaignac save one.

Through this gate all who desired to leave or enter the city were
obliged to pass, and two officers were stationed there to examine
all comers and goers, to question them, and to take their name and
residence.

At the name “d’Escorval,” the two officers evinced such surprise that
Maurice noticed it at once.

“Ah! you know what has become of my father!” he exclaimed.

“The Baron d’Escorval is a prisoner, Monsieur,” replied one of the
officers.

Although Maurice had expected this response, he turned pale.

“Is he wounded?” he asked, eagerly.

“He has not a scratch. But enter, sir, and pass on.”

From the anxious looks of these officers one might have supposed that
they feared they should compromise themselves by conversing with the son
of so great a criminal.

The carriage rolled beneath the gate-way; but it had not traversed two
hundred yards of the Grand Rue before the abbe and Maurice had remarked
several posters and notices affixed to the walls.

“We must see what this is,” they said, in a breath.

They stopped near one of these notices, before which a reader had
already stationed himself; they descended from the carriage, and read
the following order:


“article I.--The inmates of the house in which the elder Lacheneur shall
be found will be handed over to a military commission for trial.

“article II.--Whoever shall deliver the body of the elder Lacheneur,
dead or alive, will receive a reward of twenty thousand francs.”


This was signed Duc de Sairmeuse.

“God be praised!” exclaimed Maurice, “Marie-Anne’s father has escaped!
He had a good horse, and in two hours----”

A glance and a nudge of the elbow from the abbe checked him.

The abbe drew his attention to the man standing near them. This man was
none other than Chupin.

The old scoundrel had also recognized them, for he took off his hat to
the cure, and with an expression of intense covetousness in his eyes, he
said: “Twenty thousand francs! what a sum! A man could live comfortably
all his life on the interest of it.”

The abbe and Maurice shuddered as they re-entered their carriage.

“Lacheneur is lost if this man discovers his retreat,” murmured the
priest.

“Fortunately, he must have crossed the frontier before this,” replied
Maurice. “A hundred to one he is beyond reach.”

“And if you should be mistaken. What, if wounded and faint from loss of
blood, Lacheneur has had only strength to drag himself to the nearest
house and ask the hospitality of its inmates?”

“Oh! even in that case he is safe; I know our peasants. There is not one
who is capable of selling the life of a proscribed man.”

The noble enthusiasm of youth drew a sad smile from the priest.

“You forget the dangers to be incurred by those who shelter him. Many a
man who would not soil his hands with the price of blood might deliver
up a fugitive from fear.”

They were passing through the principal street, and they were struck
with the mournful aspect of the place--the little city which was
ordinarily so bustling and gay--fear and consternation evidently reigned
there. The shops were closed; the shutters of the houses had not been
opened. A lugubrious silence pervaded the town. One might have supposed
that there was general mourning, and that each family had lost one of
its members.

The manner of the few persons seen upon the thoroughfare was anxious and
singular. They hurried on, casting suspicious glances on every side.

Two or three who were acquaintances of the Baron d’Escorval averted
their heads, on seeing his carriage, to avoid the necessity of bowing.

The abbe and Maurice found an explanation of this evident terror on
reaching the hotel to which they had ordered the coachman to take them.

They had designated the Hotel de France, where the baron always stopped
when he visited Montaignac, and whose proprietor was none other than
Laugeron, that friend of Lacheneur, who had been the first to warn him
of the arrival of the Duc de Sairmeuse.

This worthy man, on hearing what guests had arrived, went to the
court-yard to meet them, with his white cap in his hand.

On such a day politeness was heroism. Was he connected with the
conspiracy? It has always been supposed so.

He invited Maurice and the abbe to take some refreshments in a way that
made them understand he was anxious to speak with them, and he
conducted them to a retired room where he knew they would be secure from
observation.

Thanks to one of the Duc de Sairmeuse’s valets de chambre who frequented
the house, the host knew as much as the authorities; he knew even more,
since he had also received information from the rebels who had escaped
capture.

From him the abbe and Maurice received their first positive information.

In the first place, nothing had been heard of Lacheneur, or of his son
Jean; thus far they had escaped the most rigorous pursuit.

In the second place, there were, at this moment, two hundred prisoners
in the citadel, and among them the Baron d’Escorval and Chanlouineau.

And lastly, since morning there had been at least sixty arrests in
Montaignac.

It was generally supposed that these arrests were the work of some
traitor, and all the inhabitants were trembling with fear.

But M. Laugeron knew the real cause. It had been confided to him under
pledge of secrecy by his guest, the duke’s _valet de chambre_.

“It is certainly an incredible story, gentlemen,” he said;
“nevertheless, it is true. Two officers belonging to the Montaignac
militia, on returning from their expedition this morning at daybreak,
on passing the Croix d’Arcy, found a man, clad in the uniform of the
Emperor’s body-guard, lying dead in the fosse.”

Maurice shuddered.

The unfortunate man, he could not doubt, was the brave old soldier who
had spoken to Lacheneur.

“Naturally,” pursued M. Laugeron, “the two officers examined the body of
the dead man. Between his lips they found a paper, which they opened and
read. It was a list of all the conspirators in the village. The brave
man, knowing he was mortally wounded, endeavored to destroy this fatal
list; but the agonies of death prevented him from swallowing it----”

But the abbe and Maurice had not time to listen to the commentaries with
which the hotel proprietor accompanied his recital.

They despatched a messenger to Mme. d’Escorval and to Marie-Anne,
in order to reassure them, and, without losing a moment, and fully
determined to brave all, they went to the house occupied by the Duc de
Sairmeuse.

A crowd had gathered about the door. At least a hundred persons were
standing there; men with anxious faces, women in tears, soliciting,
imploring an audience.

They were the friends and relatives of the unfortunate men who had been
arrested.

Two footmen, in gorgeous livery and pompous in bearing, had all they
could do to keep back the struggling throng.

The abbe, hoping that his priestly dress would win him a hearing,
approached and gave his name. But he was repulsed like the others.

“Monsieur le Duc is busy, and can receive no one,” said the servant.
“Monsieur le Duc is preparing his report for His Majesty.”

And in support of this assertion, he pointed to the horses, standing
saddled in the court-yard, and the couriers who were to bear the
despatches.

The priest sadly rejoined his companions.

“We must wait!” said he.

Intentionally or not, the servants were deceiving these poor people. The
duke, just then, was not troubling himself about despatches. A violent
altercation was going on between the Marquis de Courtornieu and himself.

Each of these noble personages aspired to the leading role--the one
which would be most generously rewarded, undoubtedly. It was a conflict
of ambitions and of wills.

It had begun by the exchange of a few recriminations, and it quickly
reached stinging words, bitter allusions, and at last, even threats.

The marquis declared it necessary to inflict the most frightful--he
said the most _salutary_ punishment upon the offender; the duke, on the
contrary, was inclined to be indulgent.

The marquis declared that since Lacheneur, the prime mover, and his
son, had both eluded pursuit, it was an urgent necessity to arrest
Marie-Anne.

The other declared that the arrest and imprisonment of this young girl
would be impolitic, that such a course would render the authorities
odious, and the rebels more zealous.

As each was firmly wedded to his own opinion, the discussion was heated,
but they failed to convince each other.

“These rebels must be put down with a strong hand!” urged M. de
Courtornieu.

“I do not wish to exasperate the populace,” replied the duke.

“Bah! what does public sentiment matter?”

“It matters a great deal when you cannot depend upon your soldiers. Do
you know what happened last night? There was powder enough burned to win
a battle; there were only fifteen peasants wounded. Our men fired in the
air. You forget that the Montaignac militia is composed, for the most
part, at least of men who formerly fought under Bonaparte, and who are
burning to turn their weapons against us.”

But neither the one nor the other dared to tell the real cause of his
obstinacy.

Mlle. Blanche had been at Montaignac that morning. She had confided her
anxiety and her sufferings to her father; and she made him swear that he
would profit by this opportunity to rid her of Marie-Anne.

On his side, the duke, persuaded that Marie-Anne was his son’s mistress,
wished, at any cost, to prevent her appearance before the tribunal. At
last the marquis yielded.

The duke had said to him: “Very well! let us end this dispute,” at the
same time glancing so meaningly at a pair of pistols that the worthy
marquis felt a disagreeable chilliness creep up his spine.

They then went together to examine the prisoners, preceded by a
detachment of soldiery who drove back the crowd, which gathered again to
await the duke’s return. So all day Maurice watched the aerial
telegraph established upon the citadel, and whose black arms were moving
incessantly.

“What orders are travelling through space?” he said to the abbe; “is it
life or is it death?”



CHAPTER XXVI

“Above all, make haste!” Maurice had said to the messenger charged with
bearing a letter to the baroness.

Nevertheless, the man did not reach Escorval until nightfall.

Beset by a thousand fears, he had taken the unfrequented roads and had
made long circuits to avoid all the people he saw approaching in the
distance.

Mme. d’Escorval tore the letter rather than took it from his hands. She
opened it, read it aloud to Marie-Anne, and merely said:

“Let us go--at once.”

But this was easier said than done.

They kept but three horses at Escorval. One was nearly dead from
its terrible journey of the previous night; the other two were in
Montaignac.

What were the ladies to do? To trust to the kindness of their neighbors
was the only resource open to them.

But these neighbors having heard of the baron’s arrest, firmly refused
to lend their horses. They believed they would gravely compromise
themselves by rendering any service to the wife of a man upon whom the
burden of the most terrible of accusations was resting.

Mme. d’Escorval and Marie-Anne were talking of pursuing their journey
on foot, when Corporal Bavois, enraged at such cowardice, swore by the
sacred name of thunder that this should not be.

“One moment!” said he. “I will arrange the matter.”

He went away, but reappeared about a quarter of an hour afterward,
leading an old plough-horse by the mane. This clumsy and heavy steed he
harnessed into the cabriolet as best he could.

But even this did not satisfy the old trooper’s complaisance.

His duties at the chateau were over, as M. d’Escorval had been arrested,
and nothing remained for Corporal Bavois but to rejoin his regiment.

He declared that he would not allow these ladies to travel at night, and
unattended, on the road where they might be exposed to many disagreeable
encounters, and that he, in company with two grenadiers, would escort
them to their journey’s end.

“And it will go hard with soldier or civilian who ventures to molest
them, will it not, comrades?” he exclaimed.

As usual, the two men assented with an oath.

So, as they pursued their journey, Mme. d’Escorval and Marie-Anne saw
the three men preceding or following the carriage, or oftener walking
beside it.

Not until they reached the gates of Montaignac did the old soldier
forsake his _protegees_, and then, not without bidding them a respectful
farewell, in the name of his companions as well as himself; not without
telling them, if they had need of him, to call upon Bavois, corporal of
grenadiers, company first, stationed at the citadel.

The clocks were striking ten when Mme. d’Escorval and Marie-Anne
alighted at the Hotel de France.

They found Maurice in despair, and even the abbe disheartened. Since
Maurice had written to them, events had progressed with fearful
rapidity.

They knew now the orders which had been forwarded by signals from the
citadel. These orders had been printed and affixed to the walls. The
signals had said:


“Montaignac must be regarded as in a state of siege. The military
authorities have been granted discretionary power. A military commission
will exercise jurisdiction instead of, and in place of, the courts. Let
peaceable citizens take courage; let the evil-disposed tremble! As for
the rabble, the sword of the law is about to strike!”


Only six lines in all--but each word was a menace.

That which filled the abbe’s heart with dismay was the substitution of a
military commission for a court-martial.

This upset all his plans, made all his precautions useless, and
destroyed his hopes of saving his friend.

A court-martial was, of course, hasty and often unjust in its decisions;
but still, it observed some of the forms of procedure practised in
judicial tribunals. It still preserved something of the solemnity of
legal justice, which desires to be enlightened before it condemns.

A military commission would infallibly neglect all legal forms; and
summarily condemn and punish the accused parties, as in time of war a
spy is tried and punished.

“What!” exclaimed Maurice, “they dare to condemn without investigating,
without listening to testimony, without allowing the accused time to
prepare any defence?”

The abbe was silent. This exceeded his most sinister apprehensions. Now,
he believed anything possible.

Maurice spoke of an investigation. It had commenced that day, and it was
still going on by the light of the jailer’s lantern.

That is to say, the Duc de Sairmeuse and the Marquis de Courtornieu were
passing the prisoners in review.

They numbered three hundred, and the duke and his companion had
decided to summon before the commission thirty of the most dangerous
conspirators.

How were they to select them? By what method could they discover the
extent of each prisoner’s guilt? It would have been difficult for them
to explain.

They went from one to another, asking any question that entered their
minds, and after the terrified man replied, according as they thought
his countenance good or bad, they said to the jailer who accompanied
them: “Keep this one until another time,” or, “This one for to-morrow.”

By daylight, they had thirty names upon their list: and the names of the
Baron d’Escorval and Chanlouineau led all the rest.

Although the unhappy party at the Hotel de France could not suspect this
fact, they suffered an agony of fear and dread through the long night
which seemed to them eternal.

As soon as day broke, they heard the beating of the _reveille_ at the
citadel; the hour when they might commence their efforts anew had come.

The abbe announced that he was going alone to the duke’s house, and that
he would find a way to force an entrance.

He had bathed his red and swollen eyes in fresh water, and was prepared
to start on his expedition, when someone rapped cautiously at the door
of the chamber.

Maurice cried: “Come in,” and M. Laugeron instantly entered the room.

His face announced some dreadful misfortune; and the worthy man was
really terrified. He had just learned that the military commission had
been organized.

In contempt of all human laws and the commonest rules of justice, the
presidency of this tribunal of vengeance and of hatred had been bestowed
upon the Duc de Sairmeuse.

And he had accepted it--he who was at the same time to play the part of
participant, witness, and judge.

The other members of the commission were military men.

“And when does the commission enter upon its functions?” inquired the
abbe.

“To-day,” replied the host, hesitatingly; “this morning--in an
hour--perhaps sooner!”

The abbe understood what M. Laugeron meant, but dared not say: “The
commission is assembling, make haste.”

“Come!” he said to Maurice, “I wish to be present when your father is
examined.”

Ah! what would not the baroness have given to follow the priest and her
son? But she could not; she understood this, and submitted.

They set out, and as they stepped into the street they saw a soldier a
little way from them, who made a friendly gesture.

They recognized Corporal Bavois, and paused.

But he, passing them with an air of the utmost indifference, and
apparently without observing them, hastily dropped these words:

“I have seen Chanlouineau. Be of good cheer; he promises to save
Monsieur d’Escorval!”



CHAPTER XXVII

In the citadel of Montaignac, within the second line of fortifications,
stands an old building known as the chapel.

Originally consecrated to worship, the structure had, at the time of
which we write, fallen into disuse. It was so damp that it would not
even serve as an arsenal for an artillery regiment, for the guns rusted
there more quickly than in the open air. A black mould covered the walls
to a height of six or seven feet.

This was the place selected by the Duc de Sairmeuse and the Marquis de
Courtornieu for the assembling of the military commission.

On first entering it, Maurice and the abbe felt a cold chill strike
to their very hearts; and an indefinable anxiety paralyzed all their
faculties.

But the commission had not yet commenced its _seance_; and they had time
to look about them.

The arrangements which had been made in transforming this gloomy hall
into a tribunal, attested the precipitancy of the judges and their
determination to finish their work promptly and mercilessly.

The arrangements denoted an absence of all form; and one could divine at
once the frightful certainty of the result.

Three large tables taken from the mess-room, and covered with
horse-blankets instead of tapestry, stood upon the platform. Some
unpainted wooden chairs awaited the judges; but in the centre glittered
the president’s chair, a superbly carved and gilded fauteuil, sent by
the Duc de Sairmeuse.

Several wooden benches had been provided for the prisoners.

Ropes stretched from one wall to the other divided the chapel into two
parts. It was a precaution against the public.

A superfluous precaution, alas!

The abbe and Maurice had expected to find the crowd too great for the
hall, large as it was, and they found the chapel almost unoccupied.

There were not twenty persons in the building. Standing back in the
shadow of the wall were perhaps a dozen men, pale and gloomy, a sullen
fire smouldering in their eyes, their teeth tightly clinched. They were
army officers retired on half pay. Three men, attired in black, were
conversing in low tones near the door. In a corner stood several
country-women with their aprons over their faces. They were weeping
bitterly, and their sobs alone broke the silence. They were the mothers,
wives, or daughters of the accused men.

Nine o’clock sounded. The rolling of the drum made the panes of the
only window tremble. A loud voice outside shouted, “Present arms!” The
military commission entered, followed by the Marquis de Courtornieu and
several civil functionaries.

The duke was in full uniform, his face a little more crimson, and his
air a trifle more haughty than usual.

“The session is open!” pronounced the Duc de Sairmeuse, the president.

Then, in a rough voice, he added:

“Bring in the culprits.”

He had not even the grace to say “the accused.”

They came in, one by one, to the number of twenty, and took their places
on the benches at the foot of the platform.

Chanlouineau held his head proudly erect, and looked composedly about
him.

Baron d’Escorval was calm and grave; but not more so than when, in days
gone by, he had been called upon to express his opinion in the councils
of the Empire.

Both saw Maurice, who was so overcome that he had to lean upon the abbe
for support. But while the baron greeted his son with a simple bend of
the head, Chanlouineau made a gesture that clearly signified:

“Have confidence in me--fear nothing.”

The attitude of the other prisoners betrayed surprise rather than fear.
Perhaps they were unconscious of the peril they had braved, and the
extent of the danger that now threatened them.

When the prisoners had taken their places, the chief counsel for the
prosecution rose.

His presentation of the case was characterized by intense violence, but
lasted only five minutes. He briefly narrated the facts, exalted the
merits of the government, of the Restoration, and concluded by a demand
that sentence of death should be pronounced upon the culprits.

When he ceased speaking, the duke, addressing the first prisoner upon
the bench, said, rudely:

“Stand up.”

The prisoner rose.

“Your name and age?”

“Eugene Michel Chanlouineau, aged twenty-nine, farmer by occupation.”

“An owner of national lands, probably?”

“The owner of lands which, having been paid for with good money and made
fertile by labor, are rightfully mine.”

The duke did not wish to waste time on discussion.

“You have taken part in this rebellion?” he pursued.

“Yes.”

“You are right in avowing it, for witnesses will be introduced who will
prove this fact conclusively.”

Five grenadiers entered; they were the men whom Chanlouineau had held at
bay while Maurice, the abbe, and Marie-Anne were entering the carriage.

These soldiers declared upon oath that they recognized the accused; and
one of them even went so far as to pronounce a glowing eulogium upon
him, declaring him to be a solid fellow, of remarkable courage.

Chanlouineau’s eyes during this deposition betrayed an agony of anxiety.
Would the soldiers allude to this circumstance of the carriage? No; they
did not allude to it.

“That is sufficient,” interrupted the president.

Then turning to Chanlouineau:

“What were your motives?” he inquired.

“We hoped to free ourselves from a government imposed upon us by
foreigners; to free ourselves from the insolence of the nobility, and to
retain the lands that were justly ours.”

“Enough! You were one of the leaders of the revolt?”

“One of the leaders--yes.”

“Who were the others?”

A faint smile flitted over the lips of the young farmer, as he replied:

“The others were Monsieur Lacheneur, his son Jean, and the Marquis de
Sairmeuse.”

The duke bounded from his gilded arm-chair.

“Wretch!” he exclaimed, “rascal! vile scoundrel!”

He caught up a heavy inkstand that stood upon the table before him: and
one would have supposed that he was about to hurl it at the prisoner’s
head.

Chanlouineau stood perfectly unmoved in the midst of the assembly, which
was excited to the highest pitch by his startling declaration.

“You questioned me,” he resumed, “and I replied. You may gag me if my
responses do not please you. If there were witnesses _for_ me as there
are against me, I could prove the truth of my words. As it is, all the
prisoners here will tell you that I am speaking the truth. Is it not so,
you others?”

With the exception of Baron d’Escorval, there was not one prisoner
who was capable of understanding the real bearing of these audacious
allegations; but all, nevertheless, nodded their assent.

“The Marquis de Sairmeuse was so truly our leader,” exclaimed the daring
peasant, “that he was wounded by a sabre-thrust while fighting by my
side.”

The face of the duke was more purple than that of a man struck with
apoplexy; and his fury almost deprived him of the power of speech.

“You lie, scoundrel! you lie!” he gasped.

“Send for the marquis,” said Chanlouineau, tranquilly, “and see whether
or not he is wounded.”

A refusal on the part of the duke could not fail to arouse suspicion.
But what could he do? Martial had concealed his wound the day before; it
was now impossible to confess that he had been wounded.

Fortunately for the duke, one of the judges relieved him of his
embarrassment.

“I hope, Monsieur, that you will not give this arrogant rebel the
satisfaction he desires. The commission opposes his demand.”

Chanlouineau laughed loudly.

“Very naturally,” he exclaimed. “To-morrow my head will be off, and
you think nothing will then remain to prove what I say. I have another
proof, fortunately--material and indestructible proof--which it is
beyond your power to destroy, and which will speak when my body is six
feet under ground.”

“What is the proof?” demanded another judge, upon whom the duke looked
askance.

The prisoner shook his head.

“I will give it to you when you offer me my life in exchange for it,”
 he replied. “It is now in the hands of a trusty person, who knows its
value. It will go to the King if necessary. We would like to
understand the part which the Marquis de Sairmeuse has played in
this affair--whether he was truly with us, or whether he was only an
instigating agent.”

A tribunal regardful of the immutable rules of justice, or even of its
own honor, would, by virtue of its discretionary powers, have instantly
demanded the presence of the Marquis de Sairmeuse.

But the military commission considered such a course quite beneath its
dignity.

These men arrayed in gorgeous uniforms were not judges charged with the
vindication of a cruel law, but still a law--they were the instruments,
commissioned by the conquerors, to strike the vanquished in the name of
that savage code which may be summed up in two words: “_vae victis_.”

The president, the noble Duc de Sairmeuse, would not have consented to
summon Martial on any consideration. Nor did his associate judges wish
him to do so.

Had Chanlouineau foreseen this? Probably. Yet, why had he ventured so
hazardous a blow?

The tribunal, after a short deliberation, decided that it would not
admit this testimony which had so excited the audience, and stupefied
Maurice and Abbe Midon.

The examination was continued, therefore, with increased bitterness.

“Instead of designating imaginary leaders,” resumed the duke, “you would
do well to name the real instigator of this revolt--not Lacheneur,
but an individual seated upon the other end of the bench, the elder
d’Escorval----”

“Monsieur le Baron d’Escorval was entirely ignorant of the conspiracy, I
swear it by all that I hold most sacred----”

“Hold your tongue!” interrupted the counsel for the prosecution.
“Instead of wearying the patience of the commission by such ridiculous
stories, try to merit its indulgence.”

Chanlouineau’s glance and gesture expressed such disdain that the man
who interrupted him was abashed.

“I wish no indulgence,” he said. “I have played, I have lost; here is
my head. But if you were not more cruel than wild beasts you would take
pity on the poor wretches who surround me. I see at least ten among them
who were not our accomplices, and who certainly did not take up arms.
Even the others did not know what they were doing. No, they did not!”

Having spoken, he resumed his seat, proud, indifferent, and apparently
oblivious to the murmur which ran through the audience, the soldiers of
the guard and even to the platform, at the sound of his vibrant voice.

The despair of the poor peasant women had been reawakened, and their
sobs and moans filled the immense hall.

The retired officers had grown even more pale and gloomy; and tears
streamed down the wrinkled cheeks of several.

“That one is a man!” they were thinking.

The abbe leaned over and whispered in the ear of Maurice:

“Evidently Chanlouineau has some plan. He intends to save your father.
How, I cannot understand.”

The judges were conversing in low tones with considerable animation.

A difficulty had presented itself.

The prisoners, ignorant of the charges which would be brought against
them, and not expecting instant trial, had not thought of procuring a
defender.

And this circumstance, bitter mockery! frightened this iniquitous
tribunal, which did not fear to trample beneath its feet the most sacred
rules of justice.

The judges had decided; their verdict was, as it were, rendered in
advance, and yet they wished to hear a voice raised in defence of those
who were already doomed.

It chanced that three lawyers, retained by the friends of several of the
prisoners, were in the hall.

They were the three men that Maurice, on his entrance, had noticed
conversing near the door of the chapel.

The duke was informed of this fact. He turned to them, and motioned them
to approach; then, pointing to Chanlouineau:

“Will you undertake this culprit’s defence?” he demanded.

For a moment the lawyers made no response. This monstrous _seance_ had
aroused a storm of indignation and disgust within their breasts, and
they looked questioningly at each other.

“We are all disposed to undertake the prisoner’s defence,” at last
replied the eldest of the three; “but we see him for the first time;
we are ignorant of his grounds of defence. We must ask a delay; it is
indispensable, in order to confer with him.”

“The court can grant you no delay,” interrupted M. de Sairmeuse; “will
you accept the defence, yes or no?”

The advocate hesitated, not that he was afraid, for he was a brave man:
but he was endeavoring to find some argument strong enough to trouble
the conscience of these judges.

“I will speak in his behalf,” said the advocate, at last, “but not
without first protesting with all my strength against these unheard-of
modes of procedure.”

“Oh! spare us your homilies, and be brief.”

After Chanlouineau’s examination, it was difficult to improvise there,
on the spur of the moment, a plea in his behalf. Still, his courageous
advocate, in his indignation, presented a score of arguments which would
have made any other tribunal reflect.

But all the while he was speaking the Duc de Sairmeuse fidgeted in his
gilded arm-chair with every sign of angry impatience.

“The plea was very long,” he remarked, when the lawyer had concluded,
“terribly long. We shall never get through with this business if each
prisoner takes up as much time!”

He turned to his colleagues as if to consult them, but suddenly changing
his mind he proposed to the prosecuting counsel that he should unite
all the cases, try all the culprits in a body, with the exception of the
elder d’Escorval.

“This will shorten our task, for, in case we adopt this course, there
will be but two judgments to be pronounced,” he said. “This will not, of
course, prevent each individual from defending himself.”

The lawyers protested against this. A judgment in a lump, like that
suggested by the duke, would destroy all hope of saving a single one of
these unfortunate men from the guillotine.

“How can we defend them,” the lawyers pleaded, “when we know nothing of
the situation of each of the prisoners? we do not even know their names.
We shall be obliged to designate them by the cut of their coats and by
the color of their hair.”

They implored the tribunal to grant them a week for preparation,
four days, even twenty-four hours. Futile efforts! The president’s
proposition was adopted.

Consequently, each prisoner was called to the desk according to the
place which he occupied upon the benches. Each man gave his name, his
age, his abode, and his profession, and received an order to return to
his place.

Six or seven prisoners were actually granted time to say that they were
absolutely ignorant of the conspiracy, and that they had been arrested
while conversing quietly upon the public highway. They begged to be
allowed to furnish proof of the truth of their assertions; they invoked
the testimony of the soldiers who had arrested them.

M. d’Escorval, whose case had been separated from the others, was not
summoned to the desk. He would be interrogated last.

“Now the counsel for the defence will be heard,” said the duke; “but
make haste; lose no time! It is already twelve o’clock.”

Then began a shameful, revolting, and unheard-of scene. The duke
interrupted the lawyers every other moment, bidding them be silent,
questioning them, or jeering at them.

“It seems incredible,” said he, “that anyone can think of defending such
wretches!”

Or again:

“Silence! You should blush with shame for having constituted yourself
the defender of such rascals!”

But the lawyers persevered even while they realized the utter
uselessness of their efforts. But what could they do under such
circumstances? The defence of these twenty-nine prisoners lasted only
one hour and a half.

Before the last word was fairly uttered, the Duc de Sairmeuse gave a
sigh of relief, and in a tone which betrayed his delight, said:

“Prisoner Escorval, stand up.”

Thus called upon, the baron rose, calm and dignified. Terrible as his
sufferings must have been, there was no trace of it upon his noble face.

He had even repressed the smile of disdain which the duke’s paltry
affection in not giving him the title which belonged to him, brought to
his lips.

But Chanlouineau sprang up at the same time, trembling with indignation,
his face all aglow with anger.

“Remain seated,” ordered the duke, “or you shall be removed from the
court-room.”

Chanlouineau, nevertheless, declared that he would speak; that he had
some remarks to add to the plea made by the defending counsel.

Upon a sign from the duke, two gendarmes approached and placed their
hands upon his shoulders. He allowed them to force him back into his
seat though he could easily have crushed them with one pressure of his
brawny arm.

An observer would have supposed that he was furious; secretly, he was
delighted. The aim he had had in view was now attained. In the glance he
cast upon the abbe, the latter could read:

“Whatever happens, watch over Maurice; restrain him. Do not allow him to
defeat my plans by any outbreak.”

This caution was not unnecessary. Maurice was terribly agitated; he
could not see, he felt that he was suffocating, that he was losing his
reason.

“Where is the self-control you promised me?” murmured the priest.

But no one observed the young man’s condition. The attention was rapt,
breathless. So profound was the silence that the measured tread of the
sentinels without could be distinctly heard.

Each person present felt that the decisive moment for which the tribunal
had reserved all its attention and efforts had come.

To convict and condemn the poor peasants, of whom no one would think
twice, was a mere trifle. But to bring low an illustrious man who had
been the counsellor and faithful friend of the Emperor! What glory, and
what an opportunity for the ambitious!

The instinct of the audience spoke the truth. If the tribunal had acted
informally in the case of the obscure conspirators, it had carefully
prepared its suit against the baron.

Thanks to the activity of the Marquis de Courtornieu, the prosecution
had found seven charges against the baron, the least grave of which was
punishable by death.

“Which of you,” demanded M. de Sairmeuse, “will consent to defend this
great culprit?”

“I!” exclaimed three advocates, in a breath.

“Take care,” said the duke, with a malicious smile; “the task is not
light.”

“Not light!” It would have been better to say dangerous. It would have
been better to say that the defender risked his career, his peace, and
his liberty; very probably, his life.

“Our profession has its exigencies,” nobly replied the oldest of the
advocates.

And the three courageously took their places beside the baron, thus
avenging the honor of their robe which had just been miserably sullied,
in a city where, among more than a hundred thousand souls, two pure and
innocent victims of a furious reaction had not--oh, shame!--been able to
find a defender.

“Prisoner,” resumed M. de Sairmeuse, “state your name and profession.”

“Louis Guillaume, Baron d’Escorval, Commander of the Order of the Legion
of Honor, formerly Councillor of State under the Empire.”

“So you avow these shameful services? You confess----”

“Pardon, Monsieur; I am proud of having had the honor of serving my
country, and of being useful to her in proportion to my ability----”

With a furious gesture the duke interrupted him.

“That is excellent!” he exclaimed. “These gentlemen, the commissioners,
will appreciate that. It was, undoubtedly, in the hope of regaining your
former position that you entered into a conspiracy against a magnanimous
prince with these vile wretches!”

“These peasants are not vile wretches, but misguided men, Monsieur.
Moreover, you know--yes, you know as well as I do myself--that I have
had no hand in this conspiracy.”

“You were arrested in the ranks of the conspirators with weapons in your
hands!”

“I was unarmed, Monsieur, as you are well aware; and if I was among
the peasantry, it was only because I hoped to induce them to relinquish
their senseless enterprise.”

“You lie!”

The baron paled beneath the insult, but he made no reply.

There was, however, one man in the assemblage who could no longer endure
this horrible and abominable injustice, and this man was Abbe Midon,
who, only a moment before, had advised Maurice to be calm.

He brusquely quitted his place, and advanced to the foot of the
platform.

“The Baron d’Escorval speaks the truth,” he cried, in a ringing voice;
“the three hundred prisoners in the citadel will swear to it; these
prisoners here would say the same if they stood upon the guillotine; and
I, who accompanied him, who walked beside him, I, a priest, swear before
the God who will judge all men, Monsieur de Sairmeuse, I swear that all
which it was in human power to do to arrest this movement we have done!”

The duke listened with an ironical smile.

“They did not deceive me, then, when they told me that this army of
rebels had a chaplain! Ah! Monsieur, you should sink to the earth with
shame. You, a priest, mingle with such scoundrels as these--with these
enemies of our good King and of our holy religion! Do not deny this!
Your haggard features, your swollen eyes, your disordered attire soiled
with dust and mud betray your guilt. Must I, a soldier, remind you of
what is due your sacred calling? Hold your peace, Monsieur, and depart!”

The counsel for the prisoner sprang up.

“We demand,” they cried, “that this witness be heard. He must be heard!
Military commissions are not above the laws that regulate ordinary
tribunals.”

“If I do not speak the truth,” resumed the abbe, “I am a perjured
witness, worse yet, an accomplice. It is your duty, in that case, to
have me arrested.”

The duke’s face expressed a hypocritical compassion.

“No, Monsieur le Cure,” said he, “I shall not arrest you. I would avert
the scandal which you are trying to cause. We will show your priestly
garb the respect the wearer does not deserve. Again, and for the last
time, retire, or I shall be obliged to employ force.”

What would further resistance avail? Nothing. The abbe, with a face
whiter than the plastered walls, and eyes filled with tears, came back
to his place beside Maurice.

The lawyers, meanwhile, were uttering their protests with increasing
energy. But the duke, by a prolonged hammering upon the table with his
fists, at last succeeded in reducing them to silence.

“Ah! you wish testimony!” he exclaimed. “Very well, you shall have it.
Soldiers, bring in the first witness.”

A movement among the guards, and almost immediately Chupin appeared.
He advanced deliberately, but his countenance betrayed him. A close
observer could have read his anxiety and his terror in his eyes, which
wandered restlessly about the room.

And there was a very appreciable terror in his voice when, with hand
uplifted, he swore to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth.

“What do you know regarding the prisoner d’Escorval?” demanded the duke.

“I know that he took part in the rebellion on the night of the fourth.”

“Are you sure of this?”

“I can furnish proofs.”

“Submit them to the consideration of the commission.”

The old scoundrel began to gain more confidence.

“First,” he replied, “it was to the house of Monsieur d’Escorval that
Lacheneur hastened after he had, much against his will, restored to
Monsieur le Duc the chateau of Monsieur le Duc’s ancestors. Monsieur
Lacheneur met Chanlouineau there, and from that day dates the plot of
this insurrection.”

“I was Lacheneur’s friend,” said the baron; “it was perfectly natural
that he should come to me for consolation after a great misfortune.”

M. de Sairmeuse turned to his colleague.

“You hear that!” said he. “This d’Escorval calls the restitution of a
deposit a great misfortune! Go on, witness.”

“In the second place,” resumed Chupin, “the accused was always prowling
about Lacheneur’s house.”

“That is false,” interrupted the baron. “I never visited the house but
once, and on that occasion I implored him to renounce.”

He paused, comprehending only when it was too late, the terrible
significance of his words. But having begun, he would not retract, and
he added:

“I implored him to renounce this project of an insurrection.”

“Ah! then you knew his wicked intentions?”

“I suspected them.”

“Not to reveal a conspiracy makes one an accomplice, and means the
guillotine.”

Baron d’Escorval had just signed his death-warrant.

Strange caprice of destiny! He was innocent, and yet he was the only one
among the accused whom a regular tribunal could have legally condemned.

Maurice and the abbe were prostrated with grief; but Chanlouineau, who
turned toward them, had still upon his lips a smile of confidence.

How could he hope when all hope seemed absolutely lost?

But the commissioners made no attempt to conceal their satisfaction. M.
de Sairmeuse, especially, evinced an indecent joy.

“Ah, well! Messieurs?” he said to the lawyers, in a sneering tone.

The counsel for the defence poorly dissimulated their discouragement;
but they nevertheless endeavored to question the validity of such a
declaration on the part of their client. He had said that he _suspected_
the conspiracy, not that he _knew_ it. It was quite a different thing.

“Say at once that you wish still more overwhelming evidence,”
 interrupted the duke. “Very well! You shall have it. Continue your
deposition, witness.”

“The accused,” continued Chupin, “was present at all the conferences
held at Lacheneur’s house. The proof of this is as clear as daylight.
Being obliged to cross the Oiselle to reach the Reche, and fearing the
ferryman would notice his frequent nocturnal voyages, the baron had an
old boat repaired which he had not used for years.”

“Ah! that is a remarkable circumstance, prisoner; do you recollect
having your boat repaired?”

“Yes; but not for the purpose which this man mentions.”

“For what purpose, then?”

The baron made no response. Was it not in compliance with the request of
Maurice that the boat had been put in order?

“And finally,” continued Chupin, “when Lacheneur set fire to his house
to give the signal for the insurrection, the prisoner was with him.”

“That,” exclaimed the duke, “is conclusive evidence.”

“I was, indeed, at the Reche,” interrupted the baron; “but it was, as
I have already told you, with the firm determination of preventing this
outbreak.”

M. de Sairmeuse gave utterance to a little disdainful laugh.

“Ah, gentlemen!” he said, addressing the commissioners, “can you not
see that the prisoner’s courage does not equal his depravity? But I will
confound him. What did you do, prisoner, when the insurgents left the
Reche?”

“I returned to my home with all possible haste, took a horse and
repaired to the Croix d’Arcy.”

“Then you knew that this was the spot appointed for the general
rendezvous?”

“Lacheneur had just informed me.”

“If I believed your story, I should tell you that it was your duty to
have hastened to Montaignac and informed the authorities. But what you
say is untrue. You did not leave Lacheneur, you accompanied him.”

“No, Monsieur, no!”

“And what if I could prove this fact beyond all question?”

“Impossible, Monsieur, since such was not the case.”

By the malicious satisfaction that lighted M. de Sairmeuse’s face, the
abbe knew that this wicked judge had some terrible weapon in his hands,
and that Baron d’Escorval was about to be overwhelmed by one of those
fatal coincidences which explain, although they do not justify, judicial
errors.

At a sign from the counsel for the prosecution, the Marquis de
Courtornieu left his seat and came forward to the platform.

“I must request you, Monsieur le Marquis,” said the duke, “to have the
goodness to read to the commission the deposition written and signed by
your daughter.”

This scene must have been prepared in advance for the audience. M. de
Courtornieu cleaned his glasses, drew from his pocket a paper which he
unfolded, and amid a death-like silence, he read:

“I, Blanche de Courtornieu, do declare upon oath that, on the evening
of the fourth of February, between ten and eleven o’clock, on the public
road leading from Sairmeuse to Montaignac, I was assailed by a crowd of
armed brigands. While they were deliberating as to whether they should
take possession of my person and pillage my carriage, I overheard one
of these men say to another, speaking of me: ‘She must get out, must she
not, Monsieur d’Escorval?’ I believe that the brigand who uttered these
words was a peasant named Chanlouineau, but I dare not assert it on
oath.”

A terrible cry, followed by inarticulate moans, interrupted the marquis.

The suffering which Maurice endured was too great for his strength and
his reason. He was about to spring forward and cry:

“It was I who addressed those words to Chanlouineau. I alone am guilty;
my father is innocent!”

But fortunately the abbe had the presence of mind to hold him back, and
place his hand over the poor youth’s lips.

But the priest would not have been able to restrain Maurice without the
aid of the retired army officers, who were standing beside him.

Divining all, perhaps, they surrounded Maurice, took him up, and carried
him from the room by main force, in spite of his violent resistance.

All this occupied scarcely ten seconds.

“What is the cause of this disturbance?” inquired the duke, looking
angrily over the audience.

No one uttered a word.

“At the least noise the hall shall be cleared,” added M. de Sairmeuse.
“And you, prisoner, what have you to say in self-justification, after
this crushing accusation by Mademoiselle de Courtornieu?”

“Nothing,” murmured the baron.

“So you confess your guilt?”

Once outside, the abbe confided Maurice to the care of three officers,
who promised to go with him, to carry him by main force, if need be, to
the hotel, and keep him there.

Relieved on this score, the priest re-entered the hall just in time to
see the baron seat himself without making any response, thus indicating
that he had relinquished all intention of defending his life.

Really, what could he say? How could he defend himself without betraying
his son?

Until now there had not been one person who did not believe in the
baron’s entire innocence. Could it be that he was guilty? His silence
must be accepted as a confession of guilt; at least, some present
believed so.

Baron d’Escorval appeared to be guilty. Was that not a sufficiently
great victory for the Duc de Sairmeuse?

He turned to the lawyers, and with an air of weariness and disdain he
said:

“Now speak, since it is absolutely necessary; but no long phrases! We
should have finished here an hour ago.”

The oldest lawyer rose, trembling with indignation, ready to dare
anything for the sake of giving free utterance to his thought, but the
baron checked him.

“Do not try to defend me,” he said, calmly; “it would be labor wasted.
I have only a word to say to my judges. Let them remember what the noble
and generous Marshal Moncey wrote to the King: ‘The scaffold does not
make friends.’”

This recollection was not of a nature to soften the hearts of the
judges. The marshal, for that saying, had been deprived of his office,
and condemned to three months’ imprisonment.

As the advocates made no further attempt to argue the case, the
commission retired to deliberate. This gave M. d’Escorval an opportunity
to speak with his defenders. He shook them warmly by the hand, and
thanked them for their devotion and for their courage.

The good man wept.

Then the baron, turning to the oldest among them, quickly and in a low
voice said:

“I have a last favor to ask of you. When the sentence of death shall
have been pronounced upon me, go at once to my son. You will say to him
that his dying father commands him to live; he will understand you. Tell
him it is my last wish; that he live--live for his mother!”

He said no more; the judges were returning.

Of the thirty prisoners, nine were declared not guilty, and released.

The remaining twenty-one, and M. d’Escorval and Chanlouineau were among
the number, were condemned to death.

But the smile had not once forsaken Chanlouineau’s lips.



CHAPTER XXVIII

The abbe had been right in feeling he could trust the officers to whose
care he had confided Maurice.

Finding their entreaties would not induce him to leave the citadel, they
seized him and literally carried him away. He made the most desperate
efforts to escape; each step was a struggle.

“Leave me!” he exclaimed; “let me go where duty calls me. You only
dishonor me in pretending to save me.”

His agony was terrible. He had thrown himself headlong into this absurd
undertaking, and now the responsibility of his acts had fallen upon
his father. He, the culprit, would live, and his innocent father would
perish on the guillotine. It was to this his love for Marie-Anne had led
him, that radiant love which in other days had smiled so joyously.

But our capacity for suffering has its limits.

When they had carried him to the room in the hotel where his mother and
Marie-Anne were waiting in agonized surprise, that irresistible torpor
which follows suffering too intense for human endurance, crept over him.

“Nothing is decided yet,” the officers answered in response to Mme.
d’Escorval’s questions. “The cure will hasten here as soon as the
verdict is rendered.”

Then, as they had promised not to lose sight of Maurice, they seated
themselves in gloomy silence.

The house was silent. One might have supposed the hotel deserted. At
last, a little before four o’clock, the abbe came in, followed by the
lawyer to whom the baron had confided his last wishes.

“My husband!” exclaimed Mme. d’Escorval, springing wildly from her
chair.

The priest bowed his head; she understood.

“Death!” she faltered. “They have condemned him!”

And overcome by the terrible blow, she sank back, inert, with hanging
arms.

But the weakness did not last long; she again sprang up, her eyes
brilliant with heroic resolve.

“We must save him!” she exclaimed. “We must wrest him from the scaffold.
Up, Maurice! up, Marie-Anne! No more weak lamentations, we must to work!
You, also, gentlemen, will aid me. I can count upon your assistance,
Monsieur le Cure. What are we going to do? I do not know! But something
must be done. The death of this just man would be too great a crime. God
will not permit it.”

She suddenly paused, with clasped hands, and eyes uplifted to heaven, as
if seeking divine inspiration.

“And the King,” she resumed; “will the King consent to such a crime? No.
A king can refuse mercy, but he cannot refuse justice. I will go to him.
I will tell him all! Why did not this thought come to me sooner? We must
start for Paris without losing an instant. Maurice, you will accompany
me. One of you gentlemen will go at once and order post-horses.”

Thinking they would obey her, she hastened into the next room to make
preparations for her journey.

“Poor woman!” the lawyer whispered to the abbe, “she does not know that
the sentence of a military commission is executed in twenty-four hours.”

“Well?”

“It requires four days to make the journey to Paris.”

He reflected a moment, then added:

“But, after all, to let her go would be an act of mercy. Did not Ney, on
the morning of his execution, implore the King to order the removal of
his wife who was sobbing and moaning in his cell?”

The abbe shook his head.

“No,” said he; “Madame d’Escorval will never forgive us if we prevent
her from receiving her husband’s last farewell.”

She, at that very moment, re-entered the room, and the priest was trying
to gather courage to tell her the cruel truth, when someone knocked
violently at the door.

One of the officers went to open it, and Bavois, the corporal of
grenadiers, entered, his right hand lifted to his cap, as if he were in
the presence of his superior officer.

“Is Mademoiselle Lacheneur here?” he demanded.

Marie-Anne came forward.

“I am she, Monsieur,” she replied; “what do you desire of me?”

“I am ordered, Mademoiselle, to conduct you to the citadel.”

“Ah!” exclaimed Maurice, in a ferocious tone; “so they imprison women
also!”

The worthy corporal struck himself a heavy blow upon the forehead.

“I am an old stupid!” he exclaimed, “and express myself badly. I meant
to say that I came to seek mademoiselle at the request of one of the
condemned, a man named Chanlouineau, who desires to speak with her.”

“Impossible, my good man,” said one of the officers; “they would
not allow this lady to visit one of the condemned without special
permission----”

“Well, she has this permission,” said the old soldier.

Assuring himself, with a glance, that he had nothing to fear from anyone
present, he added, in lower tones:

“This Chanlouineau told me that the cure would understand his reasons.”

Had the brave peasant really found some means of salvation? The abbe
almost began to believe it.

“You must go with this worthy man, Marie-Anne,” said he.

The poor girl shuddered at the thought of seeing Chanlouineau again, but
the idea of refusing never once occurred to her.

“Let us go,” she said, quietly.

But the corporal did not stir from his place, and winking, according to
his habit when he desired to attract the attention of his hearers:

“In one moment,” he said. “This Chanlouineau, who seems to be a shrewd
fellow, told me to tell you that all was going well. May I be hung if I
can see how! Still such is his opinion. He also told me to tell you not
to stir from this place, and not to attempt anything until mademoiselle
returns, which will be in less than an hour. He swears to you that he
will keep his promise; he only asks you to pledge your word that you
will obey him----”

“We will take no action until an hour has passed,” said the abbe. “I
promise that----”

“That is all. Salute company. And now, Mademoiselle, on the
double-quick, march! The poor devil over there must be on coals of
fire.”

That a condemned prisoner should be allowed to receive a visit from
the daughter of the leader of the rebellion--of that Lacheneur who had
succeeded in making his escape--was indeed surprising.

But Chanlouineau had been ingenious enough to discover a means of
procuring this special permission.

With this aim in view, when sentence of death was passed upon him, he
pretended to be overcome with terror, and to weep piteously.

The soldiers could scarcely believe their eyes when they saw this robust
young fellow, who had been so insolent and defiant a few hours before,
so overcome that they were obliged to carry him to his cell.

There, his lamentations were redoubled; and he begged the guard to go
to the Duc de Sairmeuse, or the Marquis de Courtornieu, and tell them he
had revelations of the greatest importance to make.

That potent word “revelations” made M. de Courtornieu hasten to the
prisoner’s cell.

He found Chanlouineau on his knees, his features distorted by what was
apparently an agony of fear. The man dragged himself toward him, took
his hands and kissed them, imploring mercy and forgiveness, swearing
that to preserve his life he was ready to do anything, yes, anything,
even to deliver up M. Lacheneur.

To capture Lacheneur! Such a prospect had powerful attractions for the
Marquis de Courtornieu.

“Do you know, then, where this brigand is concealed?” he inquired.

Chanlouineau admitted that he did not know, but declared that
Marie-Anne, Lacheneur’s daughter, knew her father’s hiding-place. She
had, he declared, perfect confidence in him; and if they would only send
for her, and allow him ten minutes’ private conversation with her,
he was sure he could obtain the secret of her father’s place of
concealment. So the bargain was quickly concluded.

The prisoner’s life was promised, him in exchange for the life of
Lacheneur.

A soldier, who chanced to be Corporal Bavois, was sent to summon
Marie-Anne.

And Chanlouineau waited in terrible anxiety. No one had told him what
had taken place at Escorval, but he divined it by the aid of that
strange prescience which so often illuminates the mind when death is
near at hand.

He was almost certain that Mme. d’Escorval was in Montaignac; he was
equally certain that Marie-Anne was with her; and if she were, he knew
that she would come.

And he waited, counting the seconds by the throbbings of his heart.

He waited, understanding the cause of every sound without,
distinguishing with the marvellous acuteness of senses excited to the
highest pitch by passion, sounds which would have been inaudible to
another person.

At last, at the end of the corridor, he heard the rustling of a dress
against the wall.

“It is she,” he murmured.

Footsteps approached; the heavy bolts were drawn back, the door opened,
and Marie-Anne entered, accompanied by Corporal Bavois.

“Monsieur de Courtornieu promised me that we should be left alone!”
 exclaimed Chanlouineau.

“Therefore, I go at once,” replied the old soldier. “But I have orders
to return for mademoiselle in half an hour.”

When the door closed behind the worthy corporal, Chanlouineau took
Marie-Anne’s hand and drew her to the tiny grafted window.

“Thank you for coming,” said he, “thank you. I can see you and speak to
you once more. Now that my hours are numbered, I may reveal the secret
of my soul and of my life. Now, I can venture to tell you how ardently I
have loved you--how much I still love you.”

Involuntarily Marie-Anne drew away her hand and stepped back.

This outburst of passion, at such a moment, seemed at once unspeakably
sad and frightful.

“Have I, then, offended you?” said Chanlouineau, sadly. “Forgive one who
is about to die! You cannot refuse to listen to the voice of one, who
after tomorrow, will have vanished from earth forever.

“I have loved you for a long time, Marie-Anne, for more than six years.
Before I saw you, I loved only my possessions. To raise fine crops, and
to amass a fortune, seemed to me, then, the greatest possible happiness
here below.

“Why did I meet you? But at that time you were so high, and I, so low,
that never in my wildest dreams did I aspire to you. I went to church
each Sunday only that I might worship you as peasant women worship the
Blessed Virgin; I went home with my eyes and my heart full of you--and
that was all.

“Then came the misfortune that brought us nearer to each other; and your
father made me as insane, yes, as insane as himself.

“After the insults he received from the Sairmeuse, your father resolved
to revenge himself upon these arrogant nobles, and he selected me for
his accomplice. He had read my heart. On leaving the house of Baron
d’Escorval, on that Sunday evening, which you must remember, the compact
that bound me to your father was made.

“‘You love my daughter, my boy,’ said he. ‘Very well, aid me, and I
promise you, in case we succeed, she shall be your wife. Only,’ he
added, ‘I must warn you that you hazard your life.’

“But what was life in comparison with the hope that dazzled me! From
that night I gave body, soul, and fortune to the cause. Others were
influenced by hatred, or by ambition; but I was actuated by neither of
these motives.

“What did the quarrels of the great matter to me--a simple laborer? I
knew that the greatest were powerless to give my crops a drop of rain in
season of drought, or a ray of sunshine during the rain.

“I took part in this conspiracy because I loved you----”

“Ah! you are cruel!” exclaimed Marie-Anne, “you are pitiless!”

It seemed to the poor girl that he was reproaching her for the horrible
fate which Lacheneur had brought upon him, and for the terrible part
which her father had imposed upon her, and which she had not been strong
enough to refuse to perform.

But Chanlouineau scarcely heard Marie-Anne’s exclamation. All the
bitterness of the past had mounted to his brain like fumes of alcohol.
He was scarcely conscious of his own words.

“But the day soon came,” he continued, “when my foolish illusions were
destroyed. You could not be mine since you belonged to another. I might
have broken my compact! I thought of doing so, but had not the courage.
To see you, to hear your voice, to dwell beneath the same roof with you,
was happiness. I longed to see you happy and honored; I fought for the
triumph of another, for him whom you had chosen----”

A sob that had risen in his throat choked his utterance; he buried
his face in his hands to hide his tears, and, for a moment, seemed
completely overcome.

But he mastered his weakness after a little and in a firm voice, he
said:

“We must not linger over the past. Time flies and the future is
ominous.”

As he spoke, he went to the door and applied first his eye, then his ear
to the opening, to see that there were no spies without.

No one was in the corridor; he could not hear a sound.

He came back to Marie-Anne’s side, and tearing the sleeve of his jacket
open with his teeth, he drew from it two letters, wrapped carefully in a
piece of cloth.

“Here,” he said, in a low voice, “is a man’s life!”

Marie-Anne knew nothing of Chanlouineau’s promises and hopes, and
bewildered by her distress, she did not at first understand.

“This,” she exclaimed, “is a man’s life!”

“Hush, speak lower!” interrupted Chanlouineau. “Yes, one of these
letters might perhaps save the life of one who has been condemned to
death.”

“Unfortunate man! Why do you not make use of it and save yourself?”

The young man sadly shook his head.

“Is it possible that you could ever love me?” he said, simply. “No, it
is not. I have, therefore, no desire to live. Rest beneath the sod is
preferable to the misery I am forced to endure. Moreover I was justly
condemned. I knew what I was doing when I left the Reche with my gun
upon my shoulder, and my sword by my side; I have no right to complain.
But those cruel judges have condemned an innocent man----”

“Baron d’Escorval?”

“Yes--the father of--Maurice!”

His voice changed in uttering the name of this man, for whose happiness
he would have given ten lives had they been his to give.

“I wish to save him,” he added, “I can do it.”

“Oh! if what you said were true? But you undoubtedly deceive yourself.”

“I know what I am saying.”

Fearing that some spy outside would overhear him, he came close to
Marie-Anne and said, rapidly, and in a low voice:

“I never believed in the success of this conspiracy. When I sought for a
weapon of defence in case of failure, the Marquis de Sairmeuse furnished
it. When it became necessary to send a circular warning our accomplices
of the date decided upon for the uprising, I persuaded Monsieur Martial
to write a model. He suspected nothing. I told him it was for a wedding;
he did what I asked. This letter, which is now in my possession, is
the rough draft of the circular; and it was written by the hand of the
Marquis de Sairmeuse. It is impossible for him to deny it. There is an
erasure on each line. Everyone would regard it as the handiwork of a man
who was seeking to convey his real meaning in ambiguous phrases.”

Chanlouineau opened the envelope and showed her the famous letter which
he had dictated, and in which the space for the date of the insurrection
was left blank.

“My dear friend, we are at last agreed, and the marriage is decided,
etc.”

The light that had sparkled in Marie-Anne’s eye was suddenly
extinguished.

“And you believe that this letter can be of any service?” she inquired,
in evident discouragement.

“I do not believe it!”

“But----”

With a gesture, he interrupted her.

“We must not lose time in discussion--listen to me. Of itself, this
letter might be unimportant, but I have arranged matters in such a way
that it will produce a powerful effect. I declared before the commission
that the Marquis de Sairmeuse was one of the leaders of the movement.
They laughed; and I read incredulity on the faces of the judges. But
calumny is never without its effect. When the Duc de Sairmeuse is about
to receive a reward for his services, there will be enemies in plenty
to remember and to repeat my words. He knew this so well that he was
greatly agitated, even while his colleagues sneered at my accusation.”

“To accuse a man falsely is a great crime,” murmured the honest
Marie-Anne.

“Yes, but I wish to save my friend, and I cannot choose my means. I
was all the more sure of success as I knew that the marquis had been
wounded. I declared that he was fighting against the troops by my side;
I demanded that he should be summoned before the tribunal; I told them
that I had in my possession unquestionable proofs of his complicity.”

“Did you say that the Marquis de Sairmeuse had been wounded?” inquired
Marie-Anne.

Chanlouineau’s face betrayed the most intense astonishment.

“What!” he exclaimed, “you do not know----”

Then after an instant’s reflection:

“Fool that I am!” he resumed. “Who could have told you what had
happened? You remember that when we were travelling over the Sairmeuse
road on our way to the Croix d’Arcy, and after your father had left
us to ride on in advance, Maurice placed himself at the head of one
division, and you walked beside him, while your brother Jean and myself
stayed behind to urge on the laggards. We were performing our duty
conscientiously when suddenly we heard the gallop of a horse behind us.
‘We must know who is coming,’ Jean said to me.

“We paused. The horse soon reached us; we caught the bridle and held
him. Can you guess who the rider was? Martial de Sairmeuse.

“To describe your brother’s fury on recognizing the marquis would be
impossible.

“‘At last I find you, wretched noble!’ he exclaimed, ‘and now we will
settle our account! After reducing my father, who has just given you a
fortune, to despair and penury, you have tried to degrade my sister. I
will have my revenge! Down, we must fight!’”

Marie-Anne could scarcely tell whether she was awake or dreaming.

“My brother,” she murmured, “has challenged the marquis! Is it
possible?”

“Brave as Monsieur Martial is,” pursued Chanlouineau, “he did not seem
inclined to accept the invitation. He stammered out something like this:
‘You are mad--you are jesting--have we not always been friends? What
does this mean?’

“Jean ground his teeth in rage. ‘This means that we have endured your
insulting familiarity long enough,’ he replied, ‘and if you do not
dismount and meet me in open combat, I will blow your brains out!’

“Your brother, as he spoke, manipulated his pistol in so threatening a
manner that the marquis dismounted, and addressing me:

“‘You see, Chanlouineau,’ he said, ‘I must fight a duel or submit to
assassination. If Jean kills me there is no more to be said--but if I
kill him, what is to be done?’

“I told him he would be free to depart on condition he would give me his
word not to return to Montaignac before two o’clock.

“‘Then I accept the challenge,’ said he; ‘give me a weapon.’

“I gave him my sword, your brother drew his, and they took their places
in the middle of the highway.”

The young farmer paused to take breath, then said, more slowly:

“Marie-Anne, your father and I have misjudged your brother. Poor Jean’s
appearance is terribly against him. His face indicates a treacherous,
cowardly nature, his smile is cunning, and his eyes always shun yours.
We have distrusted him, but we should ask his pardon. A man who fights
as I saw him fight, is deserving of confidence. For this combat in
the public road, and in the darkness of the night, was terrible. They
attacked each other silently but furiously. At last Jean fell.”

“Ah! my brother is dead!” exclaimed Marie-Anne.

“No,” responded Chanlouineau; “at least we have reason to hope not; and
I know he has not lacked any attention. This duel had another witness,
a man named Poignot, whom you must remember; he was one of your father’s
tenants. He took Jean, promising me that he would conceal him and care
for him.

“As for the marquis, he showed me that he too was wounded, and then he
remounted his horse, saying:

“‘What could I do? He would have it so.’”

Marie-Anne understood now.

“Give me the letter,” she said to Chanlouineau, “I will go to the duke.
I will find some way to reach him, and then God will tell me what course
to pursue.”

The noble peasant handed the girl the tiny scrap of paper which might
have been his own salvation.

“On no account,” said he, “must you allow the duke to suppose that you
have upon your person the proof with which you threaten him. Who knows
of what he might be capable under such circumstances? He will say, at
first, that he can do nothing--that he sees no way to save the baron.
You will tell him that he must find a means, if he does not wish this
letter sent to Paris, to one of his enemies----”

He paused; he heard the grating of the bolt. Corporal Bavois reappeared.

“The half hour expired ten minutes ago,” he said, sadly. “I have my
orders.”

“Coming,” said Chanlouineau; “all is ended!”

And handing Marie-Anne the second letter:

“This is for you,” he added. “You will read it when I am no more. Pray,
pray, do not weep thus! Be brave! You will soon be the wife of Maurice.
And when you are happy, think sometimes of the poor peasant who loved
you so much.”

Marie-Anne could not utter a word, but she lifted her face to his.

“Ah! I dared not ask it!” he exclaimed.

And for the first time he clasped her in his arms and pressed his lips
to her pallid cheek.

“Now adieu,” he said once more. “Do not lose a moment. Adieu!”



CHAPTER XXIX

The prospect of capturing Lacheneur, the chief conspirator, excited the
Marquis de Courtornieu so much that he had not been able to tear himself
away from the citadel to return home to his dinner.

Remaining near the entrance of the dark corridor leading to
Chanlouineau’s cell, he watched Marie-Anne depart; but as he saw her go
out into the twilight with a quick, alert step, he felt a sudden doubt
of Chanlouineau’s sincerity.

“Can it be that this miserable peasant has deceived me?” he thought.

So strong was this suspicion that he hastened after her, determined to
question her--to ascertain the truth--to arrest her, if necessary.

But he no longer possessed the agility of youth, and when he reached the
gateway the guard told him that Mlle. Lacheneur had already passed out.
He rushed out after her, looked about on every side, but could see no
trace of her. He re-entered the citadel, furious with himself for his
own credulity.

“Still, I can visit Chanlouineau,” thought he, “and to-morrow will be
time enough to summon this creature and question her.”

“This creature” was even then hastening up the long, ill-paved street
that led to the Hotel de France.

Regardless of self, and of the curious gaze of a few passers-by, she ran
on, thinking only of shortening the terrible anxiety which her friends
at the hotel must be enduring.

“All is not lost!” she exclaimed, on re-entering the room.

“My God, Thou hast heard my prayers!” murmured the baroness.

Then, suddenly seized by a horrible dread, she added:

“Do not attempt to deceive me. Are you not trying to delude me with
false hopes? That would be cruel!”

“I am not deceiving you, Madame, Chanlouineau has given me a weapon,
which, _I_ hope and believe, places the Duc de Sairmeuse in our power.
He is omnipotent in Montaignac; the only man who could oppose him,
Monsieur de Courtornieu, is his friend. I believe that Monsieur
d’Escorval can be saved.”

“Speak!” cried Maurice; “what must we do?”

“Pray and wait, Maurice. I must act alone in this matter, but be assured
that I--the cause of all your misfortune--will leave nothing undone
which is possible for mortal to do.”

Absorbed in the task which she had imposed upon herself, Marie-Anne had
failed to remark a stranger who had arrived during her absence--an old
white-haired peasant.

The abbe called her attention to him.

“Here is a courageous friend,” said he, “who since morning, has been
searching for you everywhere, in, order to give you news of your
father.”

Marie-Anne was so overcome that she could scarcely falter her gratitude.

“Oh, you need not thank me,” answered the brave peasant. “I said to
myself: ‘The poor girl must be terribly anxious. I ought to relieve her
of her misery.’ So I came to tell you that Monsieur Lacheneur is safe
and well, except for a wound in the leg, which causes him considerable
suffering, but which will be healed in two or three weeks. My
son-in-law, who was hunting yesterday in the mountains, met him near the
frontier in company with two of his friends. By this time he must be in
Piedmont, beyond the reach of the gendarmes.”

“Let us hope now,” said the abbe, “that we shall soon hear what has
become of Jean.”

“I know, already, Monsieur,” responded Marie-Anne; “my brother has been
badly wounded, and he is now under the protection of kind friends.”

She bowed her head, almost crushed beneath her burden of sorrow, but
soon rallying, she exclaimed:

“What am I doing! What right have I to think of my friends, when upon
my promptness and upon my courage depends the life of an innocent man
compromised by them?”

Maurice, the abbe, and the officers surrounded the brave young girl.
They wished to know what she was about to attempt, and to dissuade her
from incurring useless danger.

She refused to reply to their pressing questions. They wished to
accompany her, or, at least, to follow her at a distance, but she
declared that she must go alone.

“I will return in less than two hours, and then we can decide what must
be done,” said she, as she hastened away.

To obtain an audience with the Duc de Sairmeuse was certainly a
difficult matter; Maurice and the abbe had proved that only too well
the previous day. Besieged by weeping and heart-broken families, he shut
himself up securely, fearing, perhaps, that he might be moved by their
entreaties.

Marie-Anne knew this, but it did not alarm her. Chanlouineau had given
her a word, the same which he had used; and this word was a key which
would unlock the most firmly and obstinately locked doors.

In the vestibule of the house occupied by the Duc de Sairmeuse, three or
four valets stood talking.

“I am the daughter of Monsieur Lacheneur,” said Marie-Anne, addressing
one of them. “I must speak to the duke at once, on matters connected
with the revolt.”

“The duke is absent.”

“I came to make a revelation.”

The servant’s manner suddenly changed.

“In that case follow me, Mademoiselle.”

She followed him up the stairs and through two or three rooms. At last
he opened a door, saying, “enter.” She went in.

It was not the Duc de Sairmeuse who was in the room, but his son,
Martial.

Stretched upon a sofa, he was reading a paper by the light of a large
candelabra.

On seeing Marie-Anne he sprang up, as pale and agitated as if the door
had given passage to a spectre.

“You!” he stammered.

But he quickly mastered his emotion, and in a second his quick mind
revolved all the possibilities that might have produced this visit:

“Lacheneur has been arrested!” he exclaimed, “and you, wishing to save
him from the fate which the military commission will pronounce upon him,
have thought of me. Thank you, dearest Marie-Anne, thank you for your
confidence. I will not abuse it. Let your heart be reassured. We will
save your father, I promise you--I swear it. How, I do not yet know. But
what does that matter? It is enough that he shall be saved. I will have
it so!”

His voice betrayed the intense passion and joy that was surging in his
heart.

“My father has not been arrested,” said Marie-Anne, coldly.

“Then,” said Martial, with some hesitation, “then it is Jean who is a
prisoner.”

“My brother is in safety. If he survives his wounds he will escape all
attempts at capture.”

From white the Marquis de Sairmeuse had turned as red as fire. By
Marie-Anne’s manner he saw that she knew of the duel. He made no attempt
to deny it; but he tried to excuse himself.

“It was Jean who challenged me,” said he; “I tried to avoid it. I only
defended my own life in fair combat, and with equal weapons----”

Marie-Anne interrupted him.

“I reproach you for nothing, Monsieur le Marquis,” she said, quietly.

“Ah! Marie-Anne, I am more severe than you. Jean was right to challenge
me. I deserved his anger. He knew the baseness of which I had been
guilty; but you--you were ignorant of it. Oh! Marie-Anne, if I wronged
you in thought it was because I did not know you. Now I know that you,
above all others, are pure and chaste.”

He tried to take her hands; she repulsed him with horror; and broke into
a fit of passionate sobbing.

Of all the blows she had received this last was most terrible and
overwhelming.

What humiliation and shame--! Now, indeed, was her cup of sorrow filled
to overflowing. “Chaste and pure!” he had said. Oh, bitter mockery!

But Martial misunderstood the meaning of the poor girl’s gesture.

“Oh! I comprehend your indignation,” he resumed, with growing eagerness.
“But if I have injured you even in thought, I now offer you reparation.
I have been a fool--a miserable fool--for I love you; I love, and can
love you only. I am the Marquis de Sairmeuse. I am the possessor of
millions. I entreat you, I implore you to be my wife.”

Marie-Anne listened in utter bewilderment. Vertigo seized her; even
reason seemed to totter upon its throne.

But now, it had been Chanlouineau who, in his prison-cell, cried that he
died for love of her. Now, it was Martial who avowed his willingness to
sacrifice his ambition and his future for her sake.

And the poor peasant condemned to death, and the son of the all-powerful
Duc de Sairmeuse, had avowed their passion in almost the very same
words.

Martial paused, awaiting some response--a word, a gesture. But
Marie-Anne remained mute, motionless, frozen.

“You are silent,” he cried, with increased vehemence. “Do you question
my sincerity? No, it is impossible! Then why this silence? Do you fear
my father’s opposition? You need not. I know how to gain his consent.
Besides, what does his approbation matter to us? Have we any need of
him? Am I not my own master? Am I not rich--immensely rich? I should be
a miserable fool, a coward, if I hesitated between his stupid prejudices
and the happiness of my life.”

He was evidently obliging himself to weigh all the possible objections,
in order to answer them and overrule them.

“Is it on account of your family that you hesitate?” he continued. “Your
father and brother are pursued, and France is closed against them. Very
well, we will leave France, and they shall come and live near you. Jean
will no longer dislike me when you are my wife. We will all live in
England or in Italy. Now I am grateful for the fortune that will enable
me to make life a continual enchantment for you. I love you--and in the
happiness and tender love which shall be yours in the future, I will
compel you to forget all the bitterness of the past!”

Marie-Anne knew the Marquis de Sairmeuse well enough to understand the
intensity of the love revealed by these astounding propositions.

And for that very reason she hesitated to tell him that he had won this
triumph over his pride in vain.

She was anxiously wondering to what extremity his wounded vanity would
carry him, and if a refusal would not transform him into a bitter enemy.

“Why do you not answer?” asked Martial, with evident anxiety.

She felt that she must reply, that she must speak, say something; but
she could not unclose her lips.

“I am only a poor girl, Monsieur le Marquis,” she murmured, at last. “If
I accepted your offer, you would regret it continually.”

“Never!”

“But you are no longer free. You have already plighted your troth.
Mademoiselle Blanche de Courtornieu is your promised wife.”

“Ah! say one word--only one--and this engagement, which I detest, is
broken.”

She was silent. It was evident that her mind was fully made up, and that
she refused his offer.

“Do you hate me, then?” asked Martial, sadly.

If she had allowed herself to tell the whole truth Marie-Anne would have
answered “Yes.” The Marquis de Sairmeuse did inspire her with an almost
insurmountable aversion.

“I no more belong to myself than you belong to yourself, Monsieur,” she
faltered.

A gleam of hatred, quickly extinguished, shone in Martial’s eye.

“Always Maurice!” said he.

“Always.”

She expected an angry outburst, but he remained perfectly calm.

“Then,” said he, with a forced smile, “I must believe this and other
evidence. I must believe that you have forced me to play a most
ridiculous part. Until now I doubted it.”

The poor girl bowed her head, crimsoning with shame to the roots of her
hair; but she made no attempt at denial.

“_I_ was not my own mistress,” she stammered; “my father commanded and
threatened, and I--I obeyed him.”

“That matters little,” he interrupted; “your role has not been that
which a pure young girl should play.”

It was the only reproach he had uttered, and still he regretted it,
perhaps because he did not wish her to know how deeply he was wounded,
perhaps because--as he afterward declared--he could not overcome his
love for Marie-Anne.

“Now,” he resumed, “I understand your presence here. You come to ask
mercy for Monsieur d’Escorval.”

“Not mercy, but justice. The baron is innocent.”

Martial approached Marie-Anne, and lowering his voice:

“If the father is innocent,” he whispered, “then it is the son who is
guilty.”

She recoiled in terror. He knew the secret which the judges could not,
or would not penetrate.

But seeing her anguish, he had pity.

“Another reason,” said he, “for attempting to save the baron! His blood
shed upon the guillotine would form an impassable gulf between Maurice
and you. I will join my efforts to yours.”

Blushing and embarrassed, Marie-Anne dared not thank him. How was she
about to reward his generosity? By vilely traducing him. Ah! she would
infinitely have preferred to see him angry and revengeful.

Just then a valet opened the door, and the Duc de Sairmeuse, still in
full uniform, entered.

“Upon my word!” he exclaimed, as he crossed the threshold, “I must
confess that Chupin is an admirable hunter. Thanks to him----”

He paused abruptly; he had not perceived Marie-Anne until now.

“The daughter of that scoundrel Lacheneur!” said he, with an air of the
utmost surprise. “What does she desire here?”

The decisive moment had come--the life of the baron hung upon
Marie-Anne’s courage and address. The consciousness of the terrible
responsibility devolving upon her restored her self-control and calmness
as if by magic.

“I have a revelation to sell to you, Monsieur,” she said, resolutely.

The duke regarded her with mingled wonder and curiosity; then, laughing
heartily, he threw himself upon a sofa, exclaiming:

“Sell it, my pretty one--sell it!”

“I cannot speak until I am alone with you.”

At a sign from his father, Martial left the room.

“You can speak now,” said the duke.

She did not lose a second.

“You must have read, Monsieur,” she began, “the circular convening the
conspirators.”

“Certainly; I have a dozen copies in my pocket.”

“By whom do you suppose it was written?”

“By the elder d’Escorval, or by your father.”

“You are mistaken, Monsieur; that letter was the work of the Marquis de
Sairmeuse, your son.”

The duke sprang up, fire flashing from his eyes, his face purple with
anger.

“Zounds! girl! I advise you to bridle your tongue!”

“The proof of what I have asserted exists.”

“Silence, you hussy, or----”

“The lady who sends me here, Monsieur, possesses the original of this
circular written by the hand of Monsieur Martial, and I am obliged to
tell you----”

She did not have an opportunity to complete the sentence. The duke
sprang to the door, and, in a voice of thunder, called his son.

As soon as Martial entered the room:

“Repeat,” said the duke--“repeat before my son what you have just said
to me.”

Boldly, with head erect, and clear, firm voice, Marie-Anne repeated her
accusation.

She expected, on the part of the marquis, an indignant denial, cruel
reproaches, or an angry explanation. Not a word. He listened with a
nonchalant air, and she almost believed she could read in his eyes an
encouragement to proceed, and a promise of protection.

When she had concluded:

“Well!” demanded the duke, imperiously.

“First,” replied Martial, lightly, “I would like to see this famous
circular.”

The duke handed him a copy.

“Here--read it.”

Martial glanced over it, laughed heartily, and exclaimed:

“A clever trick.”

“What do you say?”

“I say that this Chanlouineau is a sly rascal. Who the devil would have
thought the fellow so cunning to see his honest face? Another lesson to
teach one not to trust to appearances.”

In all his life the Duc de Sairmeuse had never received so severe a
shock.

“Chanlouineau was not lying, then,” he said to his son, in a choked,
unnatural voice; “you _were_ one of the instigators of this rebellion,
then?”

Martial’s face grew dark, and in a tone of disdainful hauteur, he
replied:

“This is the fourth time, sir, that you have addressed that question to
me, and for the fourth time I answer: ‘No.’ That should suffice. If the
fancy had seized me for taking part in this movement, I should frankly
confess it. What possible reason could I have for concealing anything
from you?”

“The facts!” interrupted the duke, in a frenzy of passion; “the facts!”

“Very well,” rejoined Martial, in his usual indifferent tone; “the fact
is that the model of this circular does exist, that it was written in my
best hand on a very large sheet of very poor paper. I recollect that
in trying to find appropriate expressions I erased and rewrote several
words. Did I date this writing? I think I did, but I could not swear to
it.”

“How do you reconcile this with your denials?” exclaimed M. de
Sairmeuse.

“I can do this easily. Did I not tell you just now that Chanlouineau had
made a tool of me?”

The duke no longer knew what to believe; but what exasperated him more
than all else was his son’s imperturbable tranquillity.

“Confess, rather, that you have been led into this filth by your
mistress,” he retorted, pointing to Marie-Anne.

But this insult Martial would not tolerate.

“Mademoiselle Lacheneur is not my mistress,” he replied, in a tone so
imperious that it was a menace. “It is true, however, that it rests
only with her to decide whether she will be the Marquise de Sairmeuse
tomorrow. Let us abandon these recriminations, they do not further the
progress of our business.”

The faint glimmer of reason which still lighted M. de Sairmeuse’s mind,
checked the still more insulting reply that rose to his lips. Trembling
with suppressed rage, he made the circuit of the room several times,
and finally paused before Marie-Anne, who remained in the same place, as
motionless as a statue.

“Come, my good girl,” said he, “give me the writing.”

“It is not in my possession, sir.”

“Where is it?”

“In the hands of a person who will give it to you only under certain
conditions.”

“Who is this person?”

“I am not at liberty to tell you.”

There was both admiration and jealousy in the look that Martial fixed
upon Marie-Anne.

He was amazed by her coolness and presence of mind. Ah! how powerful
must be the passion that imparted such a ringing clearness to her voice,
such brilliancy to her eyes, such precision to her responses.

“And if I should not accept the--the conditions which are imposed, what
then?” asked M. de Sairmeuse.

“In that case the writing will be utilized.”

“What do you mean by that?”

“I mean, sir, that early to-morrow morning a trusty messenger will start
for Paris, charged with the task of submitting this document to the eyes
of certain persons who are not exactly friends of yours. He will show it
to Monsieur Laine, for example--or to the Duc de Richelieu; and he will,
of course, explain to them its significance and its value. Will this
writing prove the complicity of the Marquis de Sairmeuse? Yes, or no?
Have you, or have you not, dared to try and to condemn to death the
unfortunate men who were only the tools of your son?”

“Ah, wretch! hussy! viper!” interrupted the duke. He was beside himself.
A foam gathered upon his lips, his eyes seemed starting from their
sockets; he was no longer conscious of what he was saying.

“This,” he exclaimed, with wild gestures, “is enough to appall me! Yes,
I have bitter enemies, envious rivals who would give their right hand
for this execrable letter. Ah! if they obtain it they will demand an
investigation, and then farewell to the rewards due to my services.

“It will be shouted from the house-tops that Chanlouineau, in the
presence of the tribunal, declared you, Marquis, his leader and his
accomplice. You will be obliged to submit to the scrutiny of physicians,
who, seeing a freshly healed wound, will require you to tell where you
received it, and why you concealed it.

“Of what shall I _not_ be accused? They will say that I expedited
matters in order to silence the voice that had been raised against
my son. Perhaps they will even say that I secretly favored the
insurrection; I shall be vilified in the journals.

“And who has thus ruined the fortunes of our house, that promised so
brilliantly? You, you alone, Marquis.

“You believe in nothing, you doubt everything--you are cold, sceptical,
disdainful, _blase_. But a pretty woman makes her appearance on the
scene. You go wild like a school-boy and are ready to commit any act of
folly. It is you who I am addressing, Marquis. Do you hear me? Speak!
what have you to say?”

Martial had listened to this tirade with unconcealed scorn, and without
even attempting to interrupt it.

Now he responded, slowly:

“I think, sir, if Mademoiselle Lacheneur _had_ any doubts of the value
of the document she possesses, she has them no longer.”

This response fell upon the duke’s wrath like a bucket of ice-water. He
instantly comprehended his folly; and frightened by his own words, he
stood stupefied with astonishment.

Without deigning to add another word, the marquis turned to Marie-Anne.

“Will you be so kind as to explain what is required of my father in
exchange for this letter?”

“The life and liberty of Monsieur d’Escorval.”

The duke started as if he had received an electric shock.

“Ah!” he exclaimed. “I knew they would ask something that was
impossible!”

He sank back in his arm-chair. A profound despair succeeded his frenzy.
He buried his face in his hands, evidently seeking some expedient.

“Why did you not come to me before judgment was pronounced?” he
murmured. “Then I could have done anything--now, my hands are bound. The
commission has spoken; the judgment must be executed----”

He rose, and in the tone of a man who is resigned to anything, he said:

“Decidedly. I should risk more in attempting to save the baron”--in his
anxiety he gave M. d’Escorval his title--“a thousand times more than I
have to fear from my enemies. So, Mademoiselle”--he no longer said “my
good girl”--“you can utilize your document.”

The duke was about leaving the room, but Martial detained him by a
gesture.

“Think again before you decide. Our situation is not without a
precedent. A few months ago the Count de Lavalette was condemned to
death. The King wished to pardon him, but his ministers and friends
opposed it. Though the King was master, what did he do? He seemed to
be deaf to all the supplications made in the prisoner’s behalf. The
scaffold was erected, and yet Lavalette was saved! And no one was
compromised--yes, a jailer lost his position; he is living on his income
now.”

Marie-Anne caught eagerly at the idea so cleverly presented by Martial.

“Yes,” she exclaimed, “the Count de Lavalette, protected by royal
connivance, succeeded in making his escape.”

The simplicity of the expedient--the authority of the example--seemed to
make a vivid impression upon the duke. He was silent for a moment, and
Marie-Anne fancied she saw an expression of relief steal over his face.

“Such an attempt would be very hazardous,” he murmured; “yet, with care,
and if one were sure that the secret would be kept----”

“Oh! the secret will be religiously preserved, Monsieur,” interrupted
Marie-Anne.

With a glance Martial recommended silence; then turning to his father,
he said:

“One can always consider an expedient, and calculate the
consequences--that does not bind one. When is this sentence to be
carried into execution?”

“To-morrow,” responded the duke.

But even this terrible response did not cause Marie-Anne any alarm.
The duke’s anxiety and terror had taught her how much reason she had to
hope; and she saw that Martial had openly espoused her cause.

“We have, then, only the night before us,” resumed the marquis.
“Fortunately, it is only half-past seven, and until ten o’clock my
father can visit the citadel without exciting the slightest suspicion.”

He paused suddenly. His eyes, in which had shone almost absolute
confidence, became gloomy. He had just discovered an unexpected and, as
it seemed to him, almost insurmountable difficulty.

“Have we any intelligent men in the citadel?” he murmured. “The
assistance of a jailer or of a soldier is indispensable.”

He turned to his father, and brusquely asked: “Have you any man in whom
you can confide?”

“I have three or four spies--they can be bought.”

“No! the wretch who betrays his comrade for a few sous, will betray you
for a few louis. We must have an honest man who sympathizes with the
opinions of Baron d’Escorval--an old soldier who fought under Napoleon,
if possible.”

A sudden inspiration visited Marie-Anne’s mind.

“I know the man that you require!” she cried.

“You?”

“Yes, I. At the citadel.”

“Take care! Remember that he must risk much. If this should be
discovered, those who take part in it will be sacrificed.”

“He of whom I speak is the man you need. I will be responsible for him.”

“And he is a soldier?”

“He is only an humble corporal; but the nobility of his nature entitles
him to the highest rank. Believe me, we can safely confide in him.”

If she spoke thus, she who would willingly have given her life for the
baron’s salvation, she must be absolutely certain.

So thought Martial.

“I will confer with this man,” said he. “What is his name?”

“He is called Bavois, and he is a corporal in the first company of
grenadiers.”

“Bavois,” repeated Martial, as if to fix the name in his memory;
“Bavois. My father will find some pretext for desiring him summoned.”

“It is easy to find a pretext. He was the brave soldier left on guard at
Escorval after the troops left the house.”

“This promises well,” said Martial. He had risen and gone to the
fireplace in order to be nearer his father.

“I suppose,” he continued, “the baron has been separated from the other
prisoners?”

“Yes, he is alone, in a large and very comfortable room.”

“Where is it?”

“On the second story of the corner tower.”

But Martial, who was not so well acquainted with the citadel as his
father, was obliged to reflect a moment.

“The corner tower!” said he; “is not that the tall tower which one sees
from a distance, and which is built on a spot where the rock is almost
perpendicular?”

“Precisely.”

By the promptness M. de Sairmeuse displayed in replying, it was easy
to see that he was ready to risk a good deal to effect the prisoner’s
deliverance.

“What kind of a window is that in the baron’s room?” inquired Martial.

“It is quite large and furnished with a double row of iron bars,
securely fastened into the stone walls.”

“It is easy enough to cut these bars. On which side does this window
look?”

“On the country.”

“That is to say, it overlooks the precipice. The devil! That is a
serious difficulty, and yet, in one respect, it is an advantage, for
they station no sentinels there, do they?”

“Never. Between the citadel wall and the edge of the precipice there
is barely standing-room. The soldiers do not venture there even in the
daytime.”

“There is one more important question. What is the distance from
Monsieur d’Escorval’s window to the ground?”

“It is about forty feet from the base of the tower.”

“Good! And from the base of the tower to the foot of the precipice--how
far is that?”

“Really, I scarcely know. Sixty feet, at least, I should think.”

“Ah, that is high, terribly high. The baron fortunately is still agile
and vigorous.” The duke began to be impatient.

“Now,” said he to his son, “will you be so kind as to explain your
plan?”

Martial had gradually resumed the careless tone which always exasperated
his father.

“He is sure of success,” thought Marie-Anne.

“My plan is simplicity itself,” replied Martial. “Sixty and forty are
one hundred. It is necessary to procure one hundred feet of strong rope.
It will make a very large bundle; but no matter. I will twist it around
me, envelop myself in a large cloak, and accompany you to the citadel.
You will send for Corporal Bavois; you will leave me alone with him in a
quiet place; I will explain our wishes.”

M. de Sairmeuse shrugged his shoulders.

“And how will you procure a hundred feet of rope at this hour in
Montaignac? Will you go about from shop to shop? You might as well
trumpet your project at once.”

“I shall attempt nothing of the kind. What I cannot do the friends of
the Escorval family will do.”

The duke was about to offer some new objection when his son interrupted
him.

“Pray do not forget the danger that threatens us,” he said, earnestly,
“nor the little time that is left us. I have committed a fault, leave me
to repair it.”

And turning to Marie-Anne:

“You may consider the baron saved,” he pursued; “but it is necessary
for me to confer with one of his friends. Return at once to the Hotel de
France and tell the cure to meet me on the Place d’Armes, where I go to
await him.”



CHAPTER XXX

Though among the first to be arrested at the time of the panic before
Montaignac, the Baron d’Escorval had not for an instant deluded himself
with false hopes.

“I am a lost man,” he thought. And confronting death calmly, he now
thought only of the danger that threatened his son.

His mistake before the judges was the result of his preoccupation.

He did not breathe freely until he saw Maurice led from the hall by Abbe
Midon and the friendly officers, for he knew that his son would try to
confess connection with the affair.

Then, calm and composed, with head erect, and steadfast eye, he listened
to the death-sentence.

In the confusion that ensued in removing the prisoners from the hall,
the baron found himself beside Chanlouineau, who had begun his noisy
lamentations.

“Courage, my boy,” he said, indignant at such apparent cowardice.

“Ah! it is easy to talk,” whined the young farmer.

Then seeing that no one was observing them, he leaned toward the baron,
and whispered:

“It is for you I am working. Save all your strength for to-night.”

Chanlouineau’s words and burning glance surprised M. d’Escorval, but he
attributed both to fear. When the guards took him back to his cell, he
threw himself upon his pallet, and before him rose that vision of the
last hour, which is at once the hope and despair of those who are about
to die.

He knew the terrible laws that govern a court-martial. The next day--in
a few hours--at dawn, perhaps, they would take him from his cell, place
him in front of a squad of soldiers, an officer would lift his sword,
and all would be over.

Then what was to become of his wife and his son?

His agony on thinking of these dear ones was terrible. He was alone; he
wept.

But suddenly he started up, ashamed of his weakness. He must not
allow these thoughts to unnerve him. He was determined to meet death
unflinchingly. Resolved to shake off the profound melancholy that was
creeping over him, he walked about his cell, forcing his mind to occupy
itself with material objects.

The room which had been allotted to him was very large. It had once
communicated with the apartment adjoining; but the door had been walled
up for a long time. The cement which held the large blocks of stone
together had crumbled away, leaving crevices through which one might
look from one room into the other.

M. d’Escorval mechanically applied his eye to one of these interstices.
Perhaps he had a friend for a neighbor, some wretched man who was to
share his fate. He saw no one. He called, first in a whisper, then
louder. No voice responded to his.

“If _I_ could only tear down this thin partition,” he thought.

He trembled, then shrugged his shoulders. And if he did, what then? He
would only find himself in another apartment similar to his own, and
opening like his upon a corridor full of guards, whose monotonous tramp
he could plainly hear as they passed to and fro.

What folly to think of escape! He knew that every possible precaution
must have been taken to guard against it.

Yes, he knew this, and yet he could not refrain from examining his
window. Two rows of iron bars protected it. These were placed in such a
way that it was impossible for him to put out his head and see how far
he was above the ground. The height, however, must be considerable,
judging from the extent of the view.

The sun was setting; and through the violet haze the baron could discern
an undulating line of hills, whose culminating point must be the land of
the Reche.

The dark masses of foliage that he saw on the right were probably the
forests of Sairmeuse. On the left, he divined rather than saw, nestling
between the hills, the valley of the Oiselle and Escorval.

Escorval, that lovely retreat where he had known such happiness, where
he had hoped to die the calm and serene death of the just.

And remembering his past felicity, and thinking of his vanished dreams,
his eyes once more filled with tears. But he quickly dried them on
hearing the door of his cell open.

Two soldiers appeared.

One of the men bore a torch, the other, one of those long baskets
divided into compartments which are used in carrying meals to the
officers on guard.

These men were evidently deeply moved, and yet, obeying a sentiment of
instinctive delicacy, they affected a sort of gayety.

“Here is your dinner, Monsieur,” said one soldier; “it ought to be very
good, for it comes from the cuisine of the commander of the citadel.”

M. d’Escorval smiled sadly. Some attentions on the part of one’s jailer
have a sinister significance. Still, when he seated himself before the
little table which they prepared for him, he found that he was really
hungry.

He ate with a relish, and chatted quite cheerfully with the soldiers.

“Always hope for the best, sir,” said one of these worthy fellows. “Who
knows? Stranger things have happened!”

When the baron finished his repast, he asked for pen, ink, and paper.
They brought what he desired.

He found himself again alone; but his conversation with the soldiers had
been of service to him. His weakness had passed; his _sang-froid_ had
returned; he would now reflect.

He was surprised that he had heard nothing from Mme. d’Escorval and from
Maurice.

Could it be that they had been refused access to the prison? No, they
could not be; he could not imagine that there existed men sufficiently
cruel to prevent a doomed man from pressing to his heart, in a last
embrace, his wife and his son.

Yet, how was it that neither the baroness nor Maurice had made an
attempt to see him! Something must have prevented them from doing so.
What could it be?

He imagined the worst misfortunes. He saw his wife writhing in agony,
perhaps dead. He pictured Maurice, wild with grief, upon his knees at
the bedside of his mother.

But they might come yet. He consulted his watch. It marked the hour of
seven.

But he waited in vain. No one came.

He took up his pen, and was about to write, when he heard a bustle in
the corridor outside. The clink of spurs resounded on the flags; he
heard the sharp clink of the rifle as the guard presented arms.

Trembling, the baron sprang up, saying:

“They have come at last!”

He was mistaken; the footsteps died away in the distance.

“A round of inspection!” he murmured.

But at the same moment, two objects thrown through the tiny opening in
the door of his cell fell on the floor in the middle of the room.

M. d’Escorval caught them up. Someone had thrown him two files.

His first feeling was one of distrust. He knew that there were jailers
who left no means untried to dishonor their prisoners before delivering
them to the executioner.

Was it a friend, or an enemy, that had given him these instruments of
deliverance and of liberty.

Chanlouineau’s words and the look that accompanied them recurred to his
mind, perplexing him still more.

He was standing with knitted brows, turning and returning the fine and
well-tempered files in his hands, when he suddenly perceived upon the
floor a tiny scrap of paper which had, at first, escaped his notice.

He snatched it up, unfolded it, and read:


“Your friends are at work. Everything is prepared for your escape. Make
haste and saw the bars of your window. Maurice and his mother embrace
you. Hope, courage!”


Beneath these few lines was the letter M.

But the baron did not need this initial to be reassured. He had
recognized Abbe Midon’s handwriting.

“Ah! he is a true friend,” he murmured.

Then the recollection of his doubts and despair arose in his mind.

“This explains why neither my wife nor son came to visit me,” he
thought. “And I doubted their energy--and I was complaining of their
neglect!”

Intense joy filled his breast; he raised the letter that promised him
life and liberty to his lips, and enthusiastically exclaimed:

“To work! to work!”

He had chosen the finest of the two files, and was about to attack the
ponderous bars, when he fancied he heard someone open the door of the
next room.

Someone had opened it, certainly. The person closed it again, but did
not lock it.

Then the baron heard someone moving cautiously about. What did all this
mean? Were they incarcerating some new prisoner, or were they stationing
a spy there?

Listening breathlessly, the baron heard a singular sound, whose cause it
was absolutely impossible to explain.

Noiselessly he advanced to the former communicating door, knelt, and
peered through one of the interstices.

The sight that met his eyes amazed him.

A man was standing in a corner of the room. The baron could see the
lower part of the man’s body by the light of a large lantern which he
had deposited on the floor at his feet. He was turning around and around
very quickly, by this movement unwinding a long rope which had been
twined around his body as thread is wound about a bobbin.

M. d’Escorval rubbed his eyes as if to assure himself that he was
not dreaming. Evidently this rope was intended for him. It was to be
attached to the broken bars.

But how had this man succeeded in gaining admission to this room?
Who could it be that enjoyed such liberty in the prison? He was not a
soldier--or, at least, he did not wear a uniform.

Unfortunately, the highest crevice was in such a place that the visual
ray did not strike the upper part of the man’s body; and, despite the
baron’s efforts, he was unable to see the face of this friend--he judged
him to be such--whose boldness verged on folly.

Unable to resist his intense curiosity, M. d’Escorval was on the point
of rapping on the wall to question him, when the door of the room
occupied by this man, whom the baron already called his saviour, was
impetuously thrown open.

Another man entered, whose face was also outside the baron’s range of
vision; and the new-comer, in a tone of astonishment, exclaimed:

“Good heavens! what are you doing?”

The baron drew back in despair.

“All is discovered!” he thought.

The man whom M. d’Escorval believed to be his friend did not pause in
his labor of unwinding the rope, and it was in the most tranquil voice
that he responded:

“As you see, I am freeing myself from this burden of rope, which I find
extremely uncomfortable. There are at least sixty yards of it, I should
think--and what a bundle it makes! I feared they would discover it under
my cloak.”

“And what are you going to do with all this rope?” inquired the
new-comer.

“I am going to hand it to Baron d’Escorval, to whom I have already given
a file. He must make his escape to-night.”

So improbable was this scene that the baron could not believe his own
ears.

“I cannot be awake; I must be dreaming,” he thought.

The new-comer uttered a terrible oath, and, in an almost threatening
tone, he said:

“We will see about that! If you have gone mad, I, thank God! still
possess my reason! I will not permit----”

“Pardon!” interrupted the other, coldly, “you will permit it. This is
merely the result of your own--credulity. When Chanlouineau asked you to
allow him to receive a visit from Mademoiselle Lacheneur, that was the
time you should have said: ‘I will not permit it.’ Do you know what the
fellow desired? Simply to give Mademoiselle Lacheneur a letter of mine,
so compromising in its natures that if it ever reaches the hands of a
certain person of my acquaintance, my father and I will be obliged
to reside in London in future. Then farewell to the projects for an
alliance between our two families!”

The new-comer heaved a mighty sigh, accompanied by a half-angry,
half-sorrowful exclamation; but the other, without giving him any
opportunity to reply, resumed:

“You, yourself, Marquis, would doubtless be compromised. Were you not a
chamberlain during the reign of Bonaparte? Ah, Marquis! how could a man
of your experience, a man so subtle, and penetrating, and acute, allow
himself to be duped by a low, ignorant peasant?”

Now M. d’Escorval understood. He was not dreaming; it was the Marquis de
Courtornieu and Martial de Sairmeuse who were talking on the other side
of the wall.

This poor M. de Courtornieu had been so entirely crushed by Martial’s
revelation that he no longer made any effort to oppose him.

“And this terrible letter?” he groaned.

“Marie-Anne Lacheneur gave it to Abbe Midon, who came to me and said:
‘Either the baron will escape, or this letter will be taken to the Duc
de Richelieu.’ I voted for the baron’s escape, I assure you. The abbe
procured all that was necessary; he met me at a rendezvous which I
appointed in a quiet spot; he coiled all his rope about my body, and
here I am.”

“Then you think if the baron escapes they will give you back your
letter?”

“Most assuredly.”

“Deluded man! As soon as the baron is safe, they will demand the life of
another prisoner, with the same menaces.”

“By no means.”

“You will see.”

“I shall see nothing of the kind, for a very simple reason. I have the
letter now in my pocket. The abbe gave it to me in exchange for my word
of honor.”

M. de Courtornieu’s exclamation proved that he considered the abbe an
egregious fool.

“What!” he exclaimed. “You hold the proof, and--But this is madness!
Burn this accursed letter by the flames of this lantern, and let the
baron go where his slumbers will be undisturbed.”

Martial’s silence betrayed something like stupor.

“What! you would do this--you?” he demanded, at last.

“Certainly--and without the slightest hesitation.”

“Ah, well! I cannot say that I congratulate you.”

The sneer was so apparent that M. de Courtornieu was sorely tempted
to make an angry response. But he was not a man to yield to his first
impulse--this former chamberlain under the Emperor, now become a _grand
prevot_ under the Restoration.

He reflected. Should he, on account of a sharp word, quarrel with
Martial--with the only suitor who had pleased his daughter? A
rupture--then he would be left without any prospect of a son-in-law!
When would Heaven send him such another? And how furious Mlle. Blanche
would be!

He concluded to swallow the bitter pill; and it was with a paternal
indulgence of manner that he said:

“You are young, my dear Martial.”

The baron was still kneeling by the partition, his ear glued to the
crevices, holding his breath in an agony of suspense.

“You are only twenty, my dear Martial,” pursued the Marquis de
Courtornieu; “you possess the ardent enthusiasm and generosity of youth.
Complete your undertaking; I shall interpose no obstacle; but remember
that all may be discovered--and then----”

“Have no fears, sir,” interrupted the young marquis; “I have taken every
precaution. Did you see a single soldier in the corridor, just now? No.
That is because my father has, at my solicitation, assembled all the
officers and guards under pretext of ordering exceptional precautions.
He is talking to them now. This gave me an opportunity to come here
unobserved. No one will see me when I go out. Who, then, will dare
suspect me of having any hand in the baron’s escape?”

“If the baron escapes, justice will demand to know who aided him.”

Martial laughed.

“If justice seeks to know, she will find a culprit of my providing.
Go now; I have told you all. I had but one person to fear: that was
yourself. A trusty messenger requested you to join me here. You came;
you know all, you have agreed to remain neutral. I am tranquil. The
baron will be safe in Piedmont when the sun rises.”

He picked up his lantern, and added, gayly:

“But let us go--my father cannot harangue those soldiers forever.”

“But,” insisted M. de Courtornieu, “you have not told me----”

“I will tell you all, but not here. Come, come!”

They went out, locking the door behind them; and then the baron rose
from his knees.

All sorts of contradictory ideas, doubts, and conjectures filled his
mind.

What could this letter have contained? Why had not Chanlouineau used it
to procure his own salvation? Who would have believed that Martial would
be so faithful to a promise wrested from him by threats?

But this was a time for action, not for reflection. The bars were heavy,
and there were two rows of them.

M. d’Escorval set to work.

He had supposed that the task would be difficult. It was a thousand
times more so than he had expected; he discovered this almost
immediately.

It was the first time that he had ever worked with a file, and he did
not know how to use it. His progress was despairingly slow.

Nor was that all. Though he worked as cautiously as possible, each
movement of the instrument across the iron produced a harsh, grating
sound that froze his blood with terror. What if someone should overhear
this noise? And it seemed to him impossible for it to escape notice,
since he could plainly distinguish the measured tread of the guards, who
had resumed their watch in the corridor.

So slight was the result of his labors, that at the end of twenty
minutes he experienced a feeling of profound discouragement.

At this rate, it would be impossible for him to sever the first bar
before daybreak, What, then, was the use of spending his time in
fruitless labor? Why mar the dignity of death by the disgrace of an
unsuccessful effort to escape?

He was hesitating when footsteps approached his cell. He hastened to
seat himself at the table.

The door opened and a soldier entered, to whom an officer who did not
cross the threshold remarked:

“You have your instructions, Corporal, keep a close watch. If the
prisoner needs anything, call.”

M. de Escorval’s heart throbbed almost to bursting. What was coming now?

Had M. de Courtornieu’s counsels carried the day, or had Martial sent
someone to aid him?

“We must not be dawdling here,” said the corporal, as soon as the door
was closed.

M. d’Escorval bounded from his chair. This man was a friend. Here was
aid and life.

“I am Bavois,” continued the corporal. “Someone said to me just now:
‘A friend of the Emperor is in danger; are you willing to lend him a
helping hand?’ I replied: ‘Present,’ and here I am!”

This certainly was a brave soul. The baron extended his hand, and in a
voice trembling with emotion:

“Thanks,” said he; “thanks to you who, without knowing me, expose
yourself to the greatest danger for my sake.”

Bavois shrugged his shoulders disdainfully.

“Positively, my old hide is no more precious than yours. If we do not
succeed, they will chop off our heads with the same axe. But we shall
succeed. Now, let us cease talking and proceed to business.”

As he spoke he drew from beneath his long overcoat a strong iron crowbar
and a small vial of brandy, and deposited them upon the bed.

He then took the candle and passed it back and forth before the window
five or six times.

“What are you doing?” inquired the baron, in suspense.

“I am signalling to your friends that everything is progressing
favorably. They are down there waiting for us; and see, now they are
answering.”

The baron looked, and three times they saw a little flash of flame like
that produced by the burning of a pinch of gunpowder.

“Now,” said the corporal, “we are all right. Let us see what progress
you have made with the bars.”

“I have scarcely begun,” murmured M. d’Escorval.

The corporal inspected the work.

“You may indeed say that you have made no progress,” said he; “but,
never mind, I have been a locksmith, and I know how to handle a file.”

Having drawn the cork from the vial of brandy which he had brought, he
fastened the stopper to the end of one of the files, and swathed the
handle of the instrument with a piece of damp linen.

“That is what they call putting a _stop_ on the instrument,” he
remarked, by way of explanation.

Then he made an energetic attack on the bars. It at once became evident
that he had not exaggerated his knowledge of the subject, nor the
efficacy of his precautions for deadening the sound. The harsh grating
that had so alarmed the baron was no longer heard, and Bavois,
finding he had nothing more to dread from the keenest ears, now made
preparations to shelter himself from observation.

To cover the opening in the door would arouse suspicion at once--so the
corporal adopted another expedient.

Moving the little table to another part of the room, he placed the light
upon it, in such a position that the window remained entirely in shadow.

Then he ordered the baron to sit down, and handing him a paper, said:

“Now read aloud, without stopping for an instant, until you see me cease
work.”

By this method they might reasonably hope to deceive the guards outside
in the corridor. Some of them, indeed, did come to the door and look in,
then went away to say to their companions:

“We have just taken a look at the prisoner. He is very pale, and his
eyes are glittering feverishly. He is reading aloud to divert his mind.
Corporal Bavois is looking out of the window. It must be dull music for
him.”

The baron’s voice would also be of advantage in overpowering any
suspicious sound, should there be one.

And while Bavois worked, M. d’Escorval read, read, read.

He had completed the perusal of the entire paper, and was about to begin
it again, when the old soldier, leaving the window, motioned him to
stop.

“Half the task is completed,” he said, in a whisper. “The lower bars are
cut.”

“Ah! how can I ever repay you for your devotion!” murmured the baron.

“Hush! not a word!” interrupted Bavois. “If I escape with you, I can
never return here; and I shall not know where to go, for the regiment,
you see, is my only family. Ah, well! if you will give me a home with
you, I shall be content.”

Whereupon he swallowed a big draught of brandy, and set to work with
renewed ardor.

The corporal had cut one of the second row of bars, when he was
interrupted by M. d’Escorval, who, without discontinuing his reading,
had approached and pulled Bavois’s long coat to attract his attention.

He turned quickly.

“What is it?”

“I heard a singular noise.”

“Where?”

“In the adjoining room where the ropes are.”

Honest Bavois muttered a terrible oath.

“Do they intend to betray us? I risked my life, and they promised me
fair play.”

He placed his ear against an opening in the partition, and listened for
a long time. Nothing, not the slightest sound.

“It must have been some rat that you heard,” he said, at last. “Resume
your reading.”

And he began his work again. This was the only interruption, and a
little before four o’clock everything was ready. The bars were cut, and
the ropes, which had been drawn through an opening in the wall, were
coiled under the window.

The decisive moment had come. Bavois took the counterpane from the bed,
fastened it over the opening in the door, and filled up the key-hole.

“Now,” said he, in the same measured tone which he would have used
in instructing his recruits, “attention, sir, and obey the word of
command.” Then he calmly explained that the escape would consist of two
distinct operations; the first in gaining the narrow platform at
the base of the tower; the second, in descending to the foot of the
precipitous rock.

The abbe, who understood this, had brought Martial two ropes; the one to
be used in the descent of the precipice being considerably longer than
the other.

“I will fasten the shortest rope under your arms, Monsieur, and I will
let you down to the base of the tower. When you have reached it, I will
pass you the longer rope and the crowbar. Do not miss them. If we find
ourselves without them, on that narrow ledge of rock, we shall either
be compelled to deliver ourselves up, or throw ourselves down the
precipice. I shall not be long in joining you. Are you ready?”

M. d’Escorval lifted his arms, the rope was fastened securely about him,
and he crawled through the window.

From there the height seemed immense. Below, in the barren fields that
surrounded the citadel, eight persons were waiting, silent, anxious,
breathless.

They were Mme. d’Escorval and Maurice, Marie-Anne, Abbe Midon, and the
four retired army officers.

There was no moon; but the night was very clear, and they could see the
tower quite plainly.

Soon after four o’clock sounded they saw a dark object glide slowly down
the side of the tower--it was the baron. After a little, another form
followed very rapidly--it was Bavois.

Half of the perilous journey was accomplished.

From below, they could see the two figures moving about on the narrow
platform. The corporal and the baron were exerting all their strength to
fix the crowbar securely in a crevice of the rock.

In a moment or two one of the figures stepped from the projecting rock
and glided gently down the side of the precipice.

It could be none other than M. d’Escorval. Transported with happiness,
his wife sprang forward with open arms to receive him.

Wretched woman! A terrific cry rent the still night air.

M. d’Escorval was falling from a height of fifty feet; he was hurled
down to the foot of the rocky precipice. The rope had parted.

Had it broken naturally?

Maurice, who examined the end of it, exclaimed with horrible
imprecations of hatred and vengeance that they had been betrayed--that
their enemy had arranged to deliver only a dead body into their
hands--that the rope, in short, had been foully tampered with--cut!



CHAPTER XXXI

Chupin had not taken time to sleep, nor scarcely time to drink, since
that unfortunate morning when the Duc de Sairmeuse ordered affixed
to the walls of Montaignac, that decree in which he promised twenty
thousand francs to the person who should deliver up Lacheneur, dead or
alive.

“Twenty thousand francs,” Chupin muttered gloomily; “twenty sacks with a
hundred pistoles in each! Ah! if I could discover Lacheneur; even if
he were dead and buried a hundred feet under ground, I should gain the
reward.”

The appellation of traitor, which he would receive; the shame and
condemnation that would fall upon him and his, did not make him hesitate
for a moment.

He saw but one thing--the reward--the blood-money.

Unfortunately, he had nothing whatever to guide him in his researches;
no clew, however vague.

All that was known in Montaignac was that M. Lacheneur’s horse was
killed at the Croix d’Arcy.

But no one knew whether Lacheneur himself had been wounded, or whether
he had escaped from the fray uninjured. Had he reached the frontier? or
had he found an asylum in the house of one of his friends?

Chupin was thus hungering for the price of blood, when, on the day
of the trial, as he was returning from the citadel, after making his
deposition, he entered a drinking saloon. While there he heard the name
of Lacheneur uttered in low tones near him.

Two peasants were emptying a bottle of wine, and one of them, an old
man, was telling the other that he had come to Montaignac to give Mlle.
Lacheneur news of her father.

He said that his son-in-law had met the chief conspirator in the
mountains which separate the _arrondissement_ of Montaignac from Savoy.
He even mentioned the exact place of meeting, which was near Saint
Pavin-des-Gottes, a tiny village of only a few houses.

Certainly the worthy man did not think he was committing a dangerous
indiscretion. In his opinion, Lacheneur had, ere this, crossed the
frontier, and was out of danger.

In this he was mistaken.

The frontier bordering on Savoy was guarded by soldiers, who had
received orders to allow none of the conspirators to pass.

The passage of the frontier, then, presented many great difficulties,
and even if a man succeeded in effecting it, he might be arrested and
imprisoned on the other side, until the formalities of extradition had
been complied with.

Chupin saw his advantage, and instantly decided on his course.

He knew that he had not a moment to lose. He threw a coin down upon the
counter, and without waiting for his change, rushed back to the citadel,
and asked the sergeant at the gate for pen and paper.

The old rascal generally wrote slowly and painfully; to-day it took him
but a moment to trace these lines:


“I know Lacheneur’s retreat, and beg monseigneur to order some mounted
soldiers to accompany me, in order to capture him. Chupin.”


This note was given to one of the guards, with a request to take it to
the Duc de Sairmeuse, who was presiding over the military commission.

Five minutes later, the soldier reappeared with the same note.

Upon the margin the duke had written an order, placing at Chupin’s
disposal a lieutenant and eight men chosen from the Montaignac
chasseurs, who could be relied upon, and who were not suspected (as were
the other troops) of sympathizing with the rebels.

Chupin also requested a horse for his own use, and this was accorded
him. The duke had just received this note when, with a triumphant
air, he abruptly entered the room where Marie-Anne and his son were
negotiating for the release of Baron d’Escorval.

It was because he believed in the truth of the rather hazardous
assertion made by his spy that he exclaimed, upon the threshold:

“Upon my word! it must be confessed that this Chupin is an incomparable
huntsman! Thanks to him----”

Then he saw Mlle. Lacheneur, and suddenly checked himself.

Unfortunately, neither Martial nor Marie-Anne were in a state of mind to
notice this remark and its interruption.

Had he been questioned, the duke would probably have allowed the truth
to escape him, and M. Lacheneur might have been saved.

But Lacheneur was one of those unfortunate beings who seem to be pursued
by an evil destiny which they can never escape.

Buried beneath his horse, M. Lacheneur had lost consciousness.

When he regained his senses, restored by the fresh morning air, the
place was silent and deserted. Not far from him, he saw two dead bodies
which had not yet been removed.

It was a terrible moment, and in the depth of his soul he cursed death,
which had refused to heed his entreaties. Had he been armed, doubtless,
he would have ended by suicide, the most cruel mental torture which man
was ever forced to endure--but he had no weapon.

He was obliged to accept the chastisement of life.

Perhaps, too, the voice of honor whispered that it was cowardice to
strive to escape the responsibility of one’s acts by death.

At last, he endeavored to draw himself out from beneath the body of his
horse.

This proved to be no easy matter, as his foot was still in the stirrup,
and his limbs were so badly cramped that he could scarcely move them.
He finally succeeded in freeing himself, however, and, on examination,
discovered that he, who it would seem ought to have been killed ten
times over, had only one hurt--a bayonet-wound in the leg, extending
from the ankle almost to the knee.

Such a wound, of course, caused him not a little suffering, and he was
trying to bandage it with his handkerchief, when he heard the sound of
approaching footsteps.

He had no time for reflection; he sprang into the forest that lies to
the left of the Croix d’Arcy.

The troops were returning to Montaignac after pursuing the rebels for
more than three miles. There were about two hundred soldiers, and they
were bringing back, as prisoners, about twenty peasants.

Hidden by a great oak scarcely fifteen paces from the road, Lacheneur
recognized several of the prisoners in the gray light of dawn. It
was only by the merest chance that he escaped discovery; and he fully
realized how difficult it would be for him to gain the frontier without
falling into the hands of the detachment of soldiery, who were doubtless
scouring the country in every direction.

Still he did not despair.

The mountains lay only two leagues away; and he firmly believed that he
could successfully elude his pursuers as soon as he gained the shelter
of the hills.

He began his journey courageously.

Alas! he had not realized how exhausted he had become from the excessive
labor and excitement of the past few days, and by the loss of blood from
his wound, which he could not stanch.

He tore up a pole in one of the vineyards to serve as a staff, and
dragged himself along, keeping in the shelter of the woods as much as
possible, and creeping along beside the hedges and in the ditches when
he was obliged to traverse an open space.

To the great physical suffering, and the most cruel mental anguish, was
now added an agony that momentarily increased--hunger.

He had eaten nothing for thirty hours, and he felt terribly weak from
lack of nourishment. This torture soon became so intolerable that he was
willing to brave anything to appease it.

At last he perceived the roofs of a tiny hamlet. He decided to enter it
and ask for food. He was on the outskirts of the village, when he heard
the rolling of a drum. Instinctively he hid behind a wall. But it was
only a town-crier beating his drum to call the people together.

And soon a voice rose so clear and penetrating that each word it uttered
fell distinctly on Lacheneur’s ears.

It said:

“This is to inform you that the authorities of Montaignac promise to
give a reward of twenty thousand francs--two thousand pistoles, you
understand--to him who will deliver up the man known as Lacheneur, dead
or alive. Dead or alive, you understand. If he is dead, the compensation
will be the same; twenty thousand francs! It will be paid in gold.”

With a bound, Lacheneur had risen, wild with despair and horror. Though
he had believed himself utterly exhausted, he found superhuman strength
to flee.

A price had been set upon his head. This frightful thought awakened in
his breast the frenzy that renders a hunted wild beast so dangerous.

In all the villages around him he fancied he could hear the rolling of
drums, and the voice of the criers proclaiming this infamous edict.

Go where he would now, he was a tempting bait offered to treason and
cupidity. In what human creature could he confide? Under what roof could
he ask shelter?

And even if he were dead, he would still be worth a fortune.

Though he died from lack of nourishment and exhaustion under a bush by
the wayside, his emaciated body would still be worth twenty thousand
francs.

And the man who found his corpse would not give it burial. He would
place it on his cart and bear it to Montaignac. He would go to the
authorities and say: “Here is Lacheneur’s body--give me the reward!”

How long and by what paths he pursued his flight, he could not tell.

But several hours after, as he traversed the wooded hills of Charves,
he saw two men, who sprang up and fled at his approach. In a terrible
voice, he called after them:

“Eh! you men! do each of you desire a thousand pistoles? I am
Lacheneur.”

They paused when they recognized him, and Lacheneur saw that they were
two of his followers. They were well-to-do farmers, and it had been very
difficult to induce them to take part in the revolt.

These men had part of a loaf of bread and a little brandy. They gave
both to the famished man.

They sat down beside him on the grass, and while he was eating they
related their misfortunes. Their connection with the conspiracy had been
discovered; their houses were full of soldiers, who were hunting for
them, but they hoped to reach Italy by the aid of a guide who was
waiting for them at an appointed place.

Lacheneur extended his hand to them.

“Then I am saved,” said he. “Weak and wounded as I am, I should perish
if I were left alone.”

But the two farmers did not accept the hand he offered.

“We should leave you,” said the younger man, gloomily, “for you are the
cause of our misfortunes. You deceived us, Monsieur Lacheneur.”

He dared not protest, so just was the reproach.

“Nonsense! let him come all the same,” said the other, with a peculiar
glance at his companion.

So they walked on, and that same evening, after nine hours of travelling
on the mountains, they crossed the frontier.

But this long journey was not made without bitter reproaches, and even
more bitter recriminations.

Closely questioned by his companions, Lacheneur, exhausted both in mind
and body, finally admitted the insincerity of the promises with which
he had inflamed the zeal of his followers. He acknowledged that he had
spread the report that Marie-Louise and the young King of Rome were
concealed in Montaignac, and that this report was a gross falsehood. He
confessed that he had given the signal for the revolt without any chance
of success, and without means of action, leaving everything to chance.
In short, he confessed that nothing was real save his hatred, his
implacable hatred of the Sairmeuse family.

A dozen times, at least, during this terrible avowal, the peasants who
accompanied him were on the point of hurling him down the precipices
upon whose verge they were walking.

“So it was to gratify his own spite,” they thought, quivering with rage,
“that he sets everybody to fighting and killing one another--that he
ruins us, and drives us into exile. We will see.”

The fugitives went to the nearest house after crossing the frontier.

It was a lonely inn, about a league from the little village of
Saint-Jean-de-Coche, and was kept by a man named Balstain.

They rapped, in spite of the lateness of the hour--it was past midnight.
They were admitted, and they ordered supper.

But Lacheneur, weak from loss of blood, and exhausted by his long tramp,
declared that he would eat no supper.

He threw himself upon a bed in an adjoining room, and was soon asleep.

This was the first time since their meeting with Lacheneur that his
companions had found an opportunity to talk together in private.

The same idea had occurred to both of them.

They believed that by delivering up Lacheneur to the authorities, they
might obtain pardon for themselves.

Neither of these men would have consented to receive a single sou of the
money promised to the betrayer; but to exchange their life and liberty
for the life and liberty of Lacheneur did not seem to them a culpable
act, under the circumstances.

“For did he not deceive us?” they said to themselves.

They decided, at last, that as soon as they had finished their supper,
they would go to Saint-Jean-de-Coche and inform the Piedmontese guards.

But they reckoned without their host.

They had spoken loud enough to be overheard by Balstain, the innkeeper,
who had learned, during the day, of the magnificent reward which had
been promised to Lacheneur’s captor.

When he heard the name of the guest who was sleeping quietly under his
roof, a thirst for gold seized him. He whispered a word to his wife,
then escaped through the window to run and summon the gendarmes.

He had been gone half an hour before the peasants left the house; for
to muster up courage for the act they were about to commit they had been
obliged to drink heavily.

They closed the door so violently on going out that Lacheneur was
awakened by the noise. He sprang up, and came out into the adjoining
room.

The wife of the innkeeper was there alone.

“Where are my friends?” he asked, anxiously. “Where is your husband?”

Moved by sympathy, the woman tried to falter some excuse, but finding
none, she threw herself at his feet, crying:

“Fly, Monsieur, save yourself--you are betrayed!”

Lacheneur rushed back into the other room, seeking a weapon with which
he could defend himself, an issue through which he could flee!

He had thought that they might abandon him, but betray him--no, never!

“Who has sold me?” he asked, in a strained, unnatural voice.

“Your friends--the two men who supped there at that table.”

“Impossible, Madame, impossible!”

He did not suspect the designs and hopes of his former comrades; and he
could not, he would not believe them capable of ignobly betraying him
for gold.

“But,” pleaded the innkeeper’s wife, still on her knees before him,
“they have just started for Saint-Jean-de-Coche, where they will
denounce you. I heard them say that your life would purchase theirs.
They have certainly gone to summon the gendarmes! Is this not enough, or
am I obliged to endure the shame of confessing that my own husband, too,
has gone to betray you.”

Lacheneur understood it all now! And this supreme misfortune, after all
the misery he had endured, broke him down completely.

Great tears gushed from his eyes, and sinking down into a chair, he
murmured:

“Let them come; I am ready for them. No, I will not stir from here. My
miserable life is not worth such a struggle.”

But the wife of the traitor rose, and grasping the unfortunate man’s
clothing, she shook him, she dragged him to the door--she would have
carried him had she possessed sufficient strength.

“You shall not remain here,” said she, with extraordinary vehemence.
“Fly, save yourself. You shall not be taken here; it will bring
misfortune upon our house!”

Bewildered by these violent adjurations, and urged on by the instinct of
self-preservation, so powerful in every human heart, Lacheneur stepped
out upon the threshold.

The night was very dark, and a chilling fog intensified the gloom.

“See, Madame,” said the poor fugitive gently, “how can I find my way
through these mountains, which I do not know, and where there are no
roads--where the foot-paths are scarcely discernible.”

With a quick movement Balstain’s wife pushed Lacheneur out, and turning
him as one does a blind man to set him on the right track:

“Walk straight before you,” said she, “always against the wind. God will
protect you. Farewell!”

He turned to ask further directions, but she had re-entered the house
and closed the door.

Upheld by a feverish excitement, he walked for long hours. He soon lost
his way, and wandered on through the mountains, benumbed with cold,
stumbling over rocks, sometimes falling.

Why he was not precipitated to the depths of some chasm it is difficult
to explain.

He lost all idea of his whereabouts, and the sun was high in the heavens
when he at last met a human being of whom he could inquire his way.

It was a little shepherd-boy, in pursuit of some stray goats, whom he
encountered; but the lad, frightened by the wild and haggard appearance
of the stranger, at first refused to approach.

The offer of a piece of money induced him to come a little nearer.

“You are on the summit of the mountain, Monsieur,” said he; “and exactly
on the boundary line. Here is France; there is Savoy.”

“And what is the nearest village?”

“On the Savoyard side, Saint-Jean-de-Coche; on the French side,
Saint-Pavin.”

So after all his terrible exertions, Lacheneur was not a league from the
inn.

Appalled by this discovery, he remained for a moment undecided which
course to pursue.

What did it matter? Why should the doomed hesitate? Do not all roads
lead to the abyss into which they must sink?

He remembered the gendarmes that the innkeeper’s wife had warned him
against, and slowly and with great difficulty descended the steep
mountainside leading down to France.

He was near Saint-Pavin, when, before an isolated cottage, he saw a
pretty peasant woman spinning in the sunshine.

He dragged himself toward her, and in weak tones begged her hospitality.

On seeing this man, whose face was ghastly pale, and whose clothing
was torn and soiled with dust and blood, the woman rose, evidently more
surprised than alarmed.

She looked at him closely, and saw that his age, his stature, and his
features corresponded with the descriptions of Lacheneur, which had been
scattered thickly about the frontier.

“You are the conspirator they are hunting for, and for whom they promise
a reward of twenty thousand francs,” she said.

Lacheneur trembled.

“Yes, I am Lacheneur,” he replied, after a moment’s hesitation; “I
am Lacheneur. Betray me, if you will, but in charity’s name give me a
morsel of bread, and allow me to rest a little.”

At the words “betray me,” the young woman made a gesture of horror and
disgust.

“We betray you, sir!” said she. “Ah! you do not know the Antoines! Enter
our house, and lie down upon the bed while I prepare some refreshments
for you. When my husband comes home, we will see what can be done.”

It was nearly sunset when the master of the house, a robust mountaineer,
with a frank face, returned.

On beholding the stranger seated at his fireside he turned frightfully
pale.

“Unfortunate woman!” he whispered to his wife, “do you not know that any
man who shelters this fugitive will be shot, and his house levelled to
the ground?”

Lacheneur rose with a shudder.

He had not known this. He knew the infamous reward which had been
promised to his betrayer; but he had not known the danger his presence
brought upon these worthy people. “I will go at once, sir,” said he,
gently.

But the peasant placed his large hand kindly upon his guest’s shoulder,
and forced him to resume his seat.

“It was not to drive you away that I said what I did,” he remarked. “You
are at home, and you shall remain here until I can find some means of
insuring your safety.”

The pretty peasant woman flung her arms about her husband’s neck, and in
tones of the most ardent affection exclaimed: “Ah! you are a noble man,
Antoine.”

He smiled, embraced her tenderly, then, pointing to the open door:

“Watch!” he said. “I feel it my duty to tell you, sir, that it will
not be easy to save you,” resumed the honest peasant. “The promises of
reward have set all evil-minded people on the alert. They know that you
are in the neighborhood. A rascally innkeeper has crossed the frontier
for the express purpose of betraying your whereabouts to the French
gendarmes.”

“Balstain?”

“Yes, Balstain; and he is hunting for you now. That is not all. As I
passed through Saint-Pavin, on my return, I saw eight mounted soldiers,
guided by a peasant, also on horseback. They declared that they knew
you were concealed in the village, and they were going to search every
house.”

These soldiers were none other than the Montaignac chasseurs, placed at
Chupin’s disposal by the Duc de Sairmeuse.

It was indeed as Antoine had said.

The task was certainly not at all to their taste, but they were
closely watched by the lieutenant in command, who hoped to receive some
substantial reward if the expedition was crowned with success. Antoine,
meanwhile, continued his exposition of his hopes and fears.

“Wounded and exhausted as you are,” he was saying to Lacheneur, “you
will be in no condition to make a long march in less than a fortnight.
Until then you must conceal yourself. Fortunately, I know a safe retreat
in the mountain, not far from here. I will take you there to-night, with
provisions enough to last you for a week.”

A stifled cry from his wife interrupted him.

He turned, and saw her fall almost fainting against the door, her face
whiter than her coif, her finger pointing to the path that led from
Saint-Pavin to their cottage.

“The soldiers--they are coming!” she gasped.

Quicker than thought, Lacheneur and the peasant sprang to the door to
see for themselves.

The young woman had spoken the truth.

The Montaignac chasseurs were climbing the steep foot-path slowly, but
surely.

Chupin walked in advance, urging them on with voice, gesture and
example.

An imprudent word from the little shepherd-boy, whom M. Lacheneur had
questioned, had decided the fugitive’s fate.

On returning to Saint-Pavin, and hearing that the soldiers were
searching for the chief conspirator, the lad chanced to say:

“I met a man just now on the mountain who asked me where he was; and I
saw him go down the footpath leading to Antoine’s cottage.”

And in proof of his words, he proudly displayed the piece of silver
which Lacheneur had given him.

“One more bold stroke and we have our man!” exclaimed Chupin. “Come,
comrades!”

And now the party were not more than two hundred feet from the house in
which the proscribed man had found an asylum.

Antoine and his wife looked at each other with anguish in their eyes.

They saw that their visitor was lost.

“We must save him! we must save him!” cried the woman.

“Yes, we must save him!” repeated the husband, gloomily. “They shall
kill me before I betray a man in my own house.”

“If he would hide in the stable behind the bundles of straw----”

“They would find him! These soldiers are worse than tigers, and the
wretch who leads them on must have the keen scent of a blood-hound.”

He turned quickly to Lacheneur.

“Come, sir,” said he, “let us leap from the back window and flee to the
mountains. They will see us, but no matter! These horsemen are always
clumsy runners. If you cannot run, I will carry you. They will probably
fire at us, but they will miss us.”

“And your wife?” asked Lacheneur.

The honest mountaineer shuddered; but he said:

“She will join us.”

Lacheneur took his friend’s hand and pressed it tenderly.

“Ah! you are noble people,” he exclaimed, “and God will reward you for
your kindness to a poor fugitive. But you have done too much already.
I should be the basest of men if I consented to uselessly expose you to
danger. I can bear this life no longer; I have no wish to escape.”

He drew the sobbing woman to him and kissed her upon the forehead.

“I have a daughter, young and beautiful like yourself, as generous
and proud. Poor Marie-Anne! And I have pitilessly sacrificed her to my
hatred! I should not complain; come what may, I have deserved it.”

The sound of approaching footsteps became more and more distinct.
Lacheneur straightened himself up, and seemed to be gathering all his
energy for the decisive moment.

“Remain inside,” he said, imperiously, to Antoine and his wife. “I am
going out; they must not arrest me in your house.”

As he spoke, he stepped outside the door, with a firm tread, a dauntless
brow, a calm and assured mien.

The soldiers were but a few feet from him.

“Halt!” he exclaimed, in a strong, ringing voice. “It is Lacheneur you
are seeking, is it not? I am he! I surrender myself.”

An unbroken stillness reigned. Not a sound, not a word replied.

The spectre of death that hovered above his head imparted such an
imposing majesty to his person that the soldiers paused, silent and
awed.

But there was one man who was terrified by this resonant voice, and that
was Chupin.

Remorse filled his cowardly heart, and pale and trembling, he tried to
hide behind the soldiers.

Lacheneur walked straight to him.

“So it is you who have sold my life, Chupin?” he said, scornfully. “You
have not forgotten, I see plainly, how often Marie-Anne has filled your
empty larder--and now you take your revenge.”

The miserable wretch seemed crushed. Now that he had done this foul
deed, he knew what treason really was.

“So be it,” said M. Lacheneur. “You will receive the price of my blood;
but it will not bring you good fortune--traitor!”

But Chupin, indignant with himself for his weakness, was already trying
to shake off the fear that mastered him.

“You have conspired against the King,” he stammered. “I have done only
my duty in denouncing you.”

And turning to the soldiers, he said:

“As for you, comrades, you may rest assured that the Duc de Sairmeuse
will testify his gratitude for your services.”

They had bound Lacheneur’s hands, and the party were about to
descend the mountain, when a man appeared, bareheaded, covered with
perspiration, and panting for breath.

Twilight was falling, but M. Lacheneur recognized Balstain.

“Ah! you have him!” he exclaimed, as soon as he was within hearing
distance, and pointing to the prisoner. “The reward belongs to me--I
denounced him first on the other side of the frontier. The gendarmes at
Saint-Jean-de-Coche will testify to that. He would have been captured
last night in my house, but he ran away in my absence; and I have been
following the bandit for sixteen hours.”

He spoke with extraordinary vehemence and volubility, beside himself
with fear lest he was about to lose his reward, and lest his treason
would bring him nothing save disgrace and obloquy.

“If you have any right to the reward, you must prove it before the
proper authorities,” said the officer in command.

“If I have any right!” interrupted Balstain; “who contests my right,
then?”

He looked threateningly around, and his eyes fell on Chupin.

“Is it you?” he demanded. “Do you dare to assert that you discovered the
brigand?”

“Yes, it was I who discovered his hiding-place.”

“You lie, impostor!” vociferated the innkeeper; “you lie!”

The soldiers did not move. This scene repaid them for the disgust they
had experienced during the afternoon.

“But,” continued Balstain, “what else could one expect from a vile knave
like Chupin? Everyone knows that he has been obliged to flee from France
a dozen times on account of his crimes. Where did you take refuge when
you crossed the frontier, Chupin? In my house, in the inn kept by honest
Balstain. You were fed and protected there. How many times have I saved
you from the gendarmes and from the galleys? More times than I can
count. And to reward me, you steal my property; you steal this man who
was mine----”

“He is insane!” said the terrified Chupin, “he is mad!”

Then the innkeeper changed his tactics.

“At least you will be reasonable,” he exclaimed. “Let us see, Chupin,
what you will do for an old friend? Divide, will you not? No, you
say no? What will you give me, comrade? A third? Is that too much? A
quarter, then----”

Chupin felt that all the soldiers were enjoying his terrible
humiliation. They were sneering at him, and only an instant before they
had avoided coming in contact with him with evident horror.

Transported with anger, he pushed Balstain violently aside, crying to
the soldiers:

“Come--are we going to spend the night here?”

An implacable hatred gleamed in the eye of the Piedmontese.

He drew his knife from his pocket, and making the sign of the cross in
the air:

“Saint-Jean-de-Coche,” he exclaimed, in a ringing voice, “and you, Holy
Virgin, hear my vow. May my soul burn in hell if I ever use a knife at
my repasts until I have plunged this, which I now hold, into the heart
of the scoundrel who has defrauded me!”

Having said this, he disappeared in the woods, and the soldiers took up
their line of march.

But Chupin was no longer the same. All his accustomed impudence
had fled. He walked on with bowed head, a prey to the most sinister
presentiments.

He felt assured that an oath like that of Balstain’s, and uttered by
such a man, was equivalent to a death-warrant, or at least to a speedy
prospect of assassination.

This thought tormented him so much that he would not allow the
detachment to spend the night at Saint-Pavin, as had been agreed upon.
He was impatient to leave the neighborhood.

After supper Chupin sent for a cart; the prisoner, securely bound, was
placed in it, and the party started for Montaignac.

The great bell was striking two when Lacheneur was brought into the
citadel.

At that very moment M. d’Escorval and Corporal Bavois were making their
preparations for escape.



CHAPTER XXXII

Alone in his cell, Chanlouineau, after Marie-Anne’s departure, abandoned
himself to the most frightful despair.

He had just given more than life to the woman he loved so fervently.

For had he not, in the hope of obtaining an interview with her, perilled
his honor by simulating the most ignoble fear? While doing so, he
thought only of the success of his ruse. But now he knew only too well
what those who had witnessed his apparent weakness would say of him.

“This Chanlouineau is only a miserable coward after all,” he fancied he
could hear them saying among themselves. “We have seen him on his knees,
begging for mercy, and promising to betray his accomplices.”

The thought that his memory would be tarnished with charges of cowardice
and treason drove him nearly mad.

He actually longed for death, since it would give him an opportunity to
retrieve his honor.

“They shall see, then,” he cried, wrathfully, “if I turn pale and
tremble before the soldiers.”

He was in this state of mind when the door opened to admit the Marquis
de Courtornieu, who, after seeing Mlle. Lacheneur leave the prison, came
to Chanlouineau to ascertain the result of her visit.

“Well, my good fellow--” began the marquis, in his most condescending
manner.

“Leave!” cried Chanlouineau, in a fury of passion. “Leave, or----”

Without waiting to hear the end of the sentence the marquis made his
escape, greatly surprised and not a little dismayed by this sudden
change.

“What a dangerous and blood-thirsty rascal!” he remarked to the guard.
“It would, perhaps, be advisable to put him in a strait-jacket!”

Ah! there was no necessity for that. The heroic peasant had thrown
himself upon his straw pallet, oppressed with feverish anxiety.

Would Marie-Anne know how to make the best use of the weapon which he
had placed in her hands?

If he hoped so, it was because she would have as her counsellor and
guide a man in whose judgment he had the most implicit confidence--Abbe
Midon.

“Martial will be afraid of the letter,” he said to himself, again and
again; “certainly he will be afraid.”

In this Chanlouineau was entirely mistaken. His discernment and
intelligence were certainly above his station, but he was not
sufficiently acute to read a character like that of the young Marquis de
Sairmeuse.

The document which he had written in a moment of _abandon_ and
blindness, was almost without influence in determining his course.

He pretended to be greatly alarmed, in order to frighten his father; but
in reality he considered the threat puerile.

Marie-Anne would have obtained the same assistance from him if she had
not possessed this letter.

Other influences had decided him: the difficulties and dangers of the
undertaking, the risks to be incurred, the prejudices to be braved.

To save the life of Baron d’Escorval--an enemy--to wrest him from the
execution on the very steps of the scaffold, as it were, seemed to him
a delightful enterprise. And to assure the happiness of the woman he
adored by saving the life of an enemy, even after his suit had been
refused, seemed a chivalrous act worthy of him.

Besides, what an opportunity it afforded for the exercise of his
_sang-froid_, his diplomatic talent, and the _finesse_ upon which he
prided himself!

It was necessary to make his father his dupe. That was an easy task.

It was necessary to impose upon the credulity of the Marquis de
Courtornieu. This was a difficult task, yet he succeeded.

But poor Chanlouineau could not conceive of such contradictions, and he
was consumed with anxiety.

Willingly would he have consented to be put to the torture before
receiving his death-blow, if he might have been allowed to follow
Marie-Anne in her undertakings.

What was she doing? How could he ascertain?

A dozen times during the evening he called his guards, under every
possible pretext, and tried to compel them to talk with him. He knew
very well that these men could be no better informed on the subject than
he was himself, that he could place no confidence in their reports--but
that made no difference.

The drums beat for the evening roll-call, then for the extinguishment of
lights--after that, silence.

Standing at the window of his cell, Chanlouineau concentrated all his
faculties in a superhuman effort of attention.

It seemed to him if the baron regained his liberty, he would be warned
of it by some sign. Those whom he had saved owed him, he thought, this
slight token of gratitude.

A little after two o’clock he heard sounds that made him tremble. There
was a great bustle in the corridors; guards running to and fro, and
calling each other, a rattling of keys, and the opening and shutting of
doors.

The passage was suddenly illuminated; he looked out, and by the
uncertain light of the lanterns, he thought he saw Lacheneur, as pale as
a ghost, pass the cell, led by some soldiers.

Lacheneur! Could this be possible? He doubted his own eyesight. He
thought it must be a vision born of the fever burning in his brain.

Later, he heard a despairing cry. But was it surprising that one should
hear such a sound in a prison, where twenty men condemned to death were
suffering the agony of that terrible night which precedes the day of
execution.

At last, the gray light of early dawn came creeping in through the
prison-bars. Chanlouineau was in despair.

“The letter was useless!” he murmured.

Poor generous peasant! His heart would have leaped for joy could he have
cast a glance on the courtyard of the citadel.

More than an hour had passed after the sounding of the _reveille_, when
two countrywomen, who were carrying their butter and eggs to market,
presented themselves at the gate of the fortress.

They declared that while passing through the fields at the base of the
precipitous cliff upon which the citadel was built, they had discovered
a rope dangling from the side of the rock. A rope! Then one of the
condemned prisoners must have escaped. The guards hastened to Baron
d’Escorval’s room--it was empty.

The baron had fled, taking with him the man who had been left to guard
him--Corporal Bavois, of the grenadiers.

The amazement was as intense as the indignation, but the fright was
still greater.

There was not a single officer who did not tremble on thinking of
his responsibility; not one who did not see his hopes of advancement
blighted forever.

What should they say to the formidable Duc de Sairmeuse and to the
Marquis de Courtornieu, who, in spite of his calm and polished manners,
was almost as much to be feared. It was necessary to warn them, however,
and a sergeant was despatched with the news.

Soon they made their appearance, accompanied by Martial; all frightfully
angry.

M. de Sairmeuse especially seemed beside himself.

He swore at everybody, accused everybody, threatened everybody.

He began by consigning all the keepers and guards to prison; he even
talked of demanding the dismissal of all the officers.

“As for that miserable Bavois,” he exclaimed, “as for that cowardly
deserter, he shall be shot as soon as we capture him, and we will
capture him, you may depend upon it!”

They had hoped to appease the duke’s wrath a little, by informing him of
Lacheneur’s arrest; but he knew this already, for Chupin had ventured to
awake him in the middle of the night to tell him the great news.

The baron’s escape afforded the duke an opportunity to exalt Chupin’s
merits.

“The man who has discovered Lacheneur will know how to find this traitor
d’Escorval,” he remarked.

M. de Courtornieu, who was more calm, “took measures for the restoration
of a great culprit to the hand of justice,” as he said.

He sent couriers in every direction, ordering them to make close
inquiries throughout the neighborhood.

His commands were brief, but to the point; they were to watch the
frontier, to submit all travellers to a rigorous examination, to search
the house, and to sow the description of d’Escorval broadcast through
the land.

But first of all he ordered the arrest both of Abbe Midon--the Cure of
Sairmeuse, and of the son of Baron d’Escorval.

Among the officers present there was one, an old lieutenant, medalled
and decorated, who had been deeply wounded by imputations uttered by the
Duc de Sairmeuse.

He stepped forward with a gloomy air, and said that these measures were
doubtless all very well, but the most pressing and urgent duty was to
institute an investigation at once, which, while acquainting them with
the method of escape, would probably reveal the accomplices.

On hearing the word “investigation,” neither the Duc de Sairmeuse nor
the Marquis de Courtornieu could repress a slight shudder.

They could not ignore the fact that their reputations were at stake, and
that the merest trifle might disclose the truth. A precaution neglected,
the most insignificant detail, a word, a gesture might ruin their
ambitious hopes forever.

They trembled to think that this officer might be a man of unusual
shrewdness, who had suspected their complicity, and was impatient to
verify his presumptions.

No, the old lieutenant had not the slightest suspicion. He had spoken
on the impulse of the moment, merely to give vent to his displeasure. He
was not even keen enough to remark the rapid glance interchanged between
the marquis and the duke.

Martial noticed this look, however, and with a politeness too studied
not to be ridicule, he addressed the lieutenant:

“Yes, we must institute an investigation; that suggestion is as shrewd
as it is opportune,” he remarked.

The old officer turned away with a muttered oath.

“That coxcomb is poking fun at me,” he thought; “and he and his father
and that prig deserve--but what is one to do?”

In spite of his bold remark, Martial felt that he must not incur the
slightest risk.

To whom must the charge of this investigation be intrusted? To the duke
and to the marquis, of course, since they were the only persons who
would know just how much to conceal, and just how much to disclose.

They began their task immediately, with an _empressement_ which could
not fail to silence all doubts, in case any existed in the minds of
their subordinates.

But who could be suspicious? The success of the plot had been all the
more certain from the fact that the baron’s escape seemed likely to
injure the interests of the very parties who had favored it.

Martial thought he knew the details of the escape as exactly as the
fugitives themselves. He had been the author, even if they had been the
actors, of the drama of the preceding night.

He was soon obliged to admit that he was mistaken in this opinion.

The investigation revealed facts which seemed incomprehensible to him.

It was evident that the Baron d’Escorval and Corporal Bavois had been
compelled to accomplish two successive descents.

To do this the prisoners had realized (since they had succeeded) the
necessity of having two ropes. Martial had provided them; the prisoners
must have used them. And yet only one rope could be found--the one which
the peasant woman had perceived hanging from the rocky platform, where
it was made fast to an iron crowbar.

From the window to the platform, there was no rope.

“This is most extraordinary!” murmured Martial, thoughtfully.

“Very strange!” approved M. de Courtornieu.

“How the devil could they have reached the base of the tower?”

“That is what I cannot understand.”

But Martial found another cause for surprise.

On examining the rope that remained--the one which had been used in
making the second descent--he discovered that it was not a single piece.
Two pieces had been knotted together. The longest piece had evidently
been too short.

How did this happen? Could the duke have made a mistake in the height of
the cliff? or had the abbe measured the rope incorrectly?

But Martial had also measured it with his eye, and it had seemed to
him that the rope was much longer, fully a third longer, than it now
appeared.

“There must have been some accident,” he remarked to his father and to
the marquis; “but what?”

“Well, what does it matter?” replied the marquis, “you have the
compromising letter, have you not?”

But Martial’s was one of those minds that never rest when confronted by
an unsolved problem.

He insisted on going to inspect the rocks at the foot of the precipice.

There they discovered large spots of blood.

“One of the fugitives must have fallen,” said Martial, quickly, “and was
dangerously wounded!”

“Upon my word!” exclaimed the Duc de Sairmeuse, “if Baron d’Escorval has
broken his neck, I shall be delighted!”

Martial’s face turned crimson, and he looked searchingly at his father.

“I suppose, Monsieur, that you do not mean one word of what you are
saying,” Martial said, coldly. “We pledged ourselves, upon the honor of
our name, to save Baron d’Escorval. If he has been killed it will be a
great misfortune to us, Monsieur, a great misfortune.”

When his son addressed him in his haughty and freezing tone the duke
never knew how to reply. He was indignant, but his son’s was the
stronger nature.

“Nonsense!” exclaimed M. de Courtornieu; “if the rascal had merely been
wounded we should have known it.”

Such was the opinion of Chupin, who had been sent for by the duke, and
who had just made his appearance.

But the old scoundrel, who was usually so loquacious and so officious,
replied briefly; and, strange to say, did not offer his services.

Of his imperturbable assurance, of his wonted impudence, of his
obsequious and cunning smile, absolutely nothing remained.

His restless eyes, the contraction of his features, his gloomy manner,
and the occasional shudder which he could not repress, all betrayed his
secret perturbation.

So marked was the change that even the Duc de Sairmeuse observed it.

“What calamity has happened to you, Master Chupin?” he inquired.

“This has happened,” he responded, sullenly: “when I was coming here
the children of the town threw mud and stones at me, and ran after me,
shouting: ‘Traitor! traitor!’”

He clinched his fists; he seemed to be meditating vengeance, and he
added:

“The people of Montaignac are pleased. They know that the baron has
escaped, and they are rejoicing.”

Alas! this joy was destined to be of short duration, for this was the
day appointed for the execution of the conspirators.

It was Wednesday.

At noon the gates of the citadel were closed, and the gloom was
profound and universal, when the heavy rolling of drums announced the
preparations for the frightful holocaust.

Consternation and fear spread through the town; the silence of death
made itself felt on every side; the streets were deserted, and the doors
and shutters of every house were closed.

At last, as three o’clock sounded, the gates of the fortress were opened
to give passage to fourteen doomed men, each accompanied by a priest.

Fourteen! for seized by remorse or fright at the last moment, M de
Courtornieu and the Duc de Sairmeuse had granted a reprieve to six of
the prisoners and at that very hour a courier was hastening toward Paris
with six petitions for pardons, signed by the Military Commission.

Chanlouineau was not among those for whom royal clemency had been
solicited.

When he left his cell, without knowing whether or not his letter had
availed, he counted the condemned with poignant anxiety.

His eyes betrayed such an agony of anguish that the priest who
accompanied him leaned toward him and whispered:

“For whom are you looking, my son?”

“For Baron d’Escorval.”

“He escaped last night.”

“Ah! now I shall die content!” exclaimed the heroic peasant.

He died as he had sworn he would die, without even changing color--calm
and proud, the name of Marie-Anne upon his lips.



CHAPTER XXXIII

Ah, well, there was one woman, a fair young girl, whose heart had not
been touched by the sorrowful scenes of which Montaignac had been the
theatre.

Mlle. Blanche de Courtornieu smiled as brightly as ever in the midst of
a stricken people; and surrounded by mourners, her lovely eyes remained
dry.

The daughter of a man who, for a week, exercised the power of a
dictator, she did not lift her finger to save a single one of the
condemned prisoners from the executioner.

They had stopped her carriage on the public road. This was a crime which
Mlle. de Courtornieu could never forget.

She also knew that she owed it to Marie-Anne’s intercession that she had
not been held prisoner. This she could never forgive.

So it was with the bitterest resentment that, on the morning
following her arrival in Montaignac, she recounted what she styled her
“humiliations” to her father, i.e., the inconceivable arrogance of that
Lacheneur girl, and the frightful brutality of which the peasants had
been guilty.

And when the Marquis de Courtornieu asked if she would consent to
testify against Baron d’Escorval, she coldly replied:

“I think that such is my duty, and I shall fulfil it, however painful it
may be.”

She knew perfectly well that her deposition would be the baron’s
death-warrant; but she persisted in her resolve, veiling her hatred and
her insensibility under the name of virtue.

But we must do her the justice to admit that her testimony was sincere.

She really believed that it was Baron d’Escorval who was with the
rebels, and whose opinion Chanlouineau had asked.

This error on the part of Mlle. Blanche rose from the custom of
designating Maurice by his Christian name, which prevailed in the
neighborhood.

In speaking of him everyone said “Monsieur Maurice.” When they said
“Monsieur d’Escorval,” they referred to the baron.

After the crushing evidence against the accused had been written and
signed in her fine and aristocratic hand-writing, Mlle. de Courtornieu
bore herself with partly real and partly affected indifference. She
would not, on any account, have had people suppose that anything
relating to these plebeians--these low peasants--could possibly disturb
her proud serenity. She would not so much as ask a single question on
the subject.

But this superb indifference was, in great measure, assumed. In her
inmost soul she was blessing this conspiracy which had caused so many
tears and so much blood to flow. Had it not removed her rival from her
path?

“Now,” she thought, “the marquis will return to me, and I will make him
forget the bold creature who has bewitched him!”

Chimeras! The charm had vanished which had once caused the love of
Martial de Sairmeuse to oscillate between Mlle. de Courtornieu and the
daughter of Lacheneur.

Captivated at first by the charms of Mlle. Blanche, he soon discovered
the calculating ambition and the utter worldliness concealed beneath
such seeming simplicity and candor. Nor was he long in discerning her
intense vanity, her lack of principle, and her unbounded selfishness;
and, comparing her with the noble and generous Marie-Anne, his
admiration was changed into indifference, or rather repugnance.

He did return to her, however, or at least he seemed to return to
her, actuated, perhaps, by that inexplicable sentiment that impels us
sometimes to do that which is most distasteful to us, and by a feeling
of discouragement and despair, knowing that Marie-Anne was now lost to
him forever.

He also said to himself that a pledge had been interchanged between the
duke and the Marquis de Courtornieu; that he, too, had given his word,
and that Mlle. Blanche was his betrothed.

Was it worth while to break this engagement? Would he not be compelled
to marry some day? Why not fulfil the pledge that had been made? He was
as willing to marry Mlle. de Courtornieu as anyone else, since he was
sure that the only woman whom he had ever truly loved--the only woman
whom he ever could love--was never to be his.

Master of himself when near her, and sure that he would ever remain the
same, it was easy to play the part of lover with that perfection and
that charm which--sad as it is to say it--the real passion seldom
or never attains. He was assisted by his self-love, and also by that
instinct of duplicity which leads a man to contradict his thoughts by
his acts.

But while he seemed to be occupied only with thoughts of his approaching
marriage, his mind was full of intense anxiety concerning Baron
d’Escorval.

What had become of the baron and of Bavois after their escape? What had
become of those who were awaiting them on the rocks--for Martial knew
all their plans--Mme. d’Escorval and Marie-Anne, the abbe and Maurice,
and the four officers?

There were, then, ten persons in all who had disappeared. And Martial
asked himself again and again, how it could be possible for so many
individuals to mysteriously disappear, leaving no trace behind them.

“It unquestionably denotes a superior ability,” thought Martial, “I
recognize the hand of the priest.”

It was, indeed, remarkable, since the search ordered by the Duc de
Sairmeuse and the marquis had been pursued with feverish activity,
greatly to the terror of those who had instituted it. Still what could
they do? They had imprudently excited the zeal of their subordinates,
and now they were unable to moderate it. But fortunately all efforts to
discover the fugitives had proved unavailing.

One witness testified, however, that on the morning of the escape, he
met, just before daybreak, a party of about a dozen persons, men and
women, who seemed to be carrying a dead body.

This circumstance, taken in connection with the broken rope and the
blood-stains, made Martial tremble.

He had also been strongly impressed by another circumstance, which was
revealed as the investigation progressed.

All the soldiers who were on guard that eventful night were
interrogated. One of them testified as follows:

“I was on guard in the corridor communicating with the prisoner’s
apartment in the tower, when at about half-past two o’clock, after
Lacheneur had been placed in his cell, I saw an officer approaching me.
I challenged him; he gave me the countersign, and, naturally, I allowed
him to pass. He went down the corridor, and entered the room adjoining
that in which Monsieur d’Escorval was confined. He remained there about
five minutes.”

“Did you recognize this officer?” Martial eagerly inquired.

And the soldier answered: “No. He wore a large cloak, the collar of
which was turned up so high that it covered his face to the very eyes.”

Who could this mysterious officer have been? What was he doing in the
room where the ropes had been deposited?

Martial racked his brain to discover an answer to these questions.

The Marquis de Courtornieu himself seemed much disturbed.

“How could you be ignorant that there were many sympathizers with this
movement in the garrison?” he said, angrily. “You might have known that
this visitor, who concealed his face so carefully, was an accomplice who
had been warned by Bavois, and who came to see if he needed a helping
hand.”

This was a plausible explanation, still it did not satisfy Martial.

“It is very strange,” he thought, “that Monsieur d’Escorval has not
even deigned to let me know he is in safety. The service which _I_ have
rendered him deserves that acknowledgment, at least.”

Such was his disquietude that he resolved to apply to Chupin, even
though this traitor inspired him with extreme repugnance.

But it was no longer easy to obtain the services of the old spy. Since
he had received the price of Lacheneur’s blood--the twenty thousand
francs which had so fascinated him--Chupin had deserted the house of the
Duc de Sairmeuse.

He had taken up his quarters in a small inn on the outskirts of the
town; and he spent his days alone in a large room on the second floor.

At night he barricaded the doors, and drank, drank, drank; and until
daybreak they could hear him cursing and singing or struggling against
imaginary enemies.

Still he dared not disobey the order brought by a soldier, summoning him
to the Hotel de Sairmeuse at once.

“I wish to discover what has become of Baron d’Escorval,” said Martial.

Chupin trembled, he who had formerly been bronze, and a fleeting color
dyed his cheeks.

“The Montaignac police are at your disposal,” he answered sulkily.
“They, perhaps, can satisfy the curiosity of Monsieur le Marquis. I do
not belong to the police.”

Was he in earnest, or was he endeavoring to augment the value of his
services by refusing them? Martial inclined to the latter opinion.

“You shall have no reason to complain of my generosity,” said he. “I
will pay you well.”

But on hearing the word “pay,” which would have made his eyes gleam with
delight a week before, Chupin flew into a furious passion.

“So it was to tempt me again that you summoned me here!” he exclaimed.
“You would do better to leave me quietly at my inn.”

“What do you mean, fool?”

But Chupin did not even hear this interruption, and, with increasing
fury, he continued:

“They told me that, by betraying Lacheneur, I should be doing my duty
and serving the King. I betrayed him, and now I am treated as if I had
committed the worst of crimes. Formerly, when I lived by stealing and
poaching, they despised me, perhaps; but they did not shun me as they
did the pestilence. They called me rascal, robber, and the like; but
they would drink with me all the same. To-day I have twenty thousand
francs, and I am treated as if I were a venomous beast. If I approach a
man, he draws back; if I enter a room, those who are there leave it.”

The recollection of the insults he had received made him more and more
frantic with rage.

“Was the act I committed so ignoble and abominable?” he pursued. “Then
why did your father propose it? The shame should fall on him. He should
not have tempted a poor man with wealth like that. If, on the contrary,
I have done well, let them make laws to protect me.”

Martial comprehended the necessity of reassuring his troubled mind.

“Chupin, my boy,” said he, “I do not ask you to discover Monsieur
d’Escorval in order to denounce him; far from it--I only desire you to
ascertain if anyone at Saint-Pavin, or at Saint-Jean-de-Coche, knows of
his having crossed the frontier.”

On hearing the name Saint-Jean-de-Coche, Chupin’s face blanched.

“Do you wish me to be murdered?” he exclaimed, remembering Balstain
and his vow. “I would have you know that I value my life, now that I am
rich.”

And seized with a sort of panic he fled precipitately. Martial was
stupefied with astonishment.

“One might really suppose that the wretch was sorry for what he had
done,” he thought.

If that was really the case, Chupin was not alone.

M. de Courtornieu and the Duc de Sairmeuse were secretly blaming
themselves for the exaggerations in their first reports, and the manner
in which they had magnified the proportions of the rebellion. They
accused each other of undue haste, of neglect of the proper forms of
procedure, and the injustice of the verdict rendered.

Each endeavored to make the other responsible for the blood which had
been spilled; one tried to cast the public odium upon the other.

Meanwhile they were both doing their best to obtain a pardon for the six
prisoners who had been reprieved.

They did not succeed.

One night a courier arrived at Montaignac, bearing the following laconic
despatch:


“The twenty-one convicted prisoners must be executed.”


That is to say, the Duc de Richelieu, and the council of ministers,
headed by M. Decazes, the minister of police, had decided that the
petitions for clemency must be refused.

This despatch was a terrible blow to the Duc de Sairmeuse and M. de
Courtornieu. They knew, better than anyone else, how little these poor
men, whose lives they had tried, too late, to save, deserved death. They
knew it would soon be publicly proven that two of the six men had taken
no part whatever in the conspiracy.

What was to be done?

Martial desired his father to resign his authority; but the duke had not
courage to do it.

M. de Courtornieu encouraged him. He admitted that all this was very
unfortunate, but declared, since the wine had been drawn, that it was
necessary to drink it, and that one could not draw back now without
causing a terrible scandal.

The next day the dismal rolling of drums was again heard, and the six
doomed men, two of whom were known to be innocent, were led outside
the walls of the citadel and shot, on the same spot where, only a week
before, fourteen of their comrades had fallen.

And the prime mover in the conspiracy had not yet been tried.

Confined in the cell next to that which Chanlouineau had occupied,
Lacheneur had fallen into a state of gloomy despondency, which lasted
during his whole term of imprisonment. He was terribly broken, both in
body and in mind.

Once only did the blood mount to his pallid cheek, and that was on the
morning when the Duc de Sairmeuse entered the cell to interrogate him.

“It was you who drove me to do what I did,” he said. “God sees us, and
judges us!”

Unhappy man! his faults had been great; his chastisement was terrible.

He had sacrificed his children on the altar of his wounded pride; he
had not even the consolation of pressing them to his heart and of asking
their forgiveness before he died.

Alone in his cell he could not distract his mind from thoughts of his
son and of his daughter; but such was the terrible situation in which he
had placed himself that he dared not ask what had become of them.

Through a compassionate keeper, he learned that nothing had been heard
of Jean, and that it was supposed Marie-Anne had gone to some foreign
country with the d’Escorval family.

When summoned before the court for trial, Lacheneur was calm and
dignified in manner. He attempted no defence, but responded with perfect
frankness. He took all the blame upon himself, and would not give the
name of one of his accomplices.

Condemned to be beheaded, he was executed on the following day. In
spite of the rain, he desired to walk to the place of execution. When he
reached the scaffold, he ascended the steps with a firm tread, and, of
his own accord, placed his head upon the block.

A few seconds later, the rebellion of the 4th of March counted its
twenty-first victim.

And that same evening the people everywhere were talking of the
magnificent rewards which were to be bestowed upon the Duc de Sairmeuse
and the Marquis de Courtornieu; and it was also asserted that the
nuptials of the children of these great houses were to take place before
the close of the week.



CHAPTER XXXIV

That Martial de Sairmeuse was to marry Mlle. Blanche de Courtornieu did
not surprise the inhabitants of Montaignac in the least.

But spreading such a report, with Lacheneur’s execution fresh in the
minds of everyone, could not fail to bring odium upon these men who had
held absolute power, and who had exercised it so mercilessly.

Heaven knows that M. de Courtornieu and the Duc de Sairmeuse were now
doing their best to make the people of Montaignac forget the atrocious
cruelty of which they had been guilty during their dictatorship.

Of the hundred or more who were confined in the citadel, only
eighteen or twenty were tried, and they received only some very slight
punishment; the others were released.

Major Carini, the leader of the conspirators in Montaignac, who had
expected to lose his head, heard himself, with astonishment, sentenced
to two years’ imprisonment.

But there are crimes which nothing can efface or extenuate. Public
opinion attributed this sudden clemency on the part of the duke and the
marquis to fear.

People execrated them for their cruelty, and despised them for their
apparent cowardice.

They were ignorant of this, however, and hastened forward the
preparations for the nuptials of their children, without suspecting that
the marriage was considered a shameless defiance of public sentiment on
their part.

The 17th of April was the day which had been appointed for the bridal,
and the wedding-feast was to be held at the Chateau de Sairmeuse, which,
at a great expense, had been transformed into a fairy palace for the
occasion.

It was in the church of the little village of Sairmeuse, on the
loveliest of spring days, that this marriage ceremony was performed by
the cure who had taken the place of poor Abbe Midon.

At the close of the address to the newly wedded pair, the priest uttered
these words, which he believed prophetic:

“You will be, you _must_ be happy!”

Who would not have believed as he did? Where could two young people
be found more richly dowered with all the attributes likely to produce
happiness, i.e., youth, rank, health, and riches.

But though an intense joy sparkled in the eyes of the new Marquise
de Sairmeuse, there were those among the guests who observed the
bridegroom’s preoccupation. One might have supposed that he was making
an effort to drive away some gloomy thought.

At the moment when his young wife hung upon his arm, proud and radiant,
a vision of Marie-Anne rose before him, more life-like, more potent than
ever.

What had become of her that she had not been seen at the time of her
father’s execution? Courageous as he knew her to be, if she had made no
attempt to see her father, it must have been because she was ignorant of
his approaching doom.

“Ah! if she had but loved him,” Martial thought, “what happiness would
have been his. But, now he was bound for life to a woman whom he did not
love.”

At dinner, however, he succeeded in shaking off the sadness that
oppressed him, and when the guests rose to repair to the drawing-rooms,
he had almost forgotten his dark forebodings. He was rising in his turn,
when a servant approached him with a mysterious air.

“Someone desires to see the marquis,” whispered the valet.

“Who?”

“A young peasant who will not give his name.”

“On one’s wedding-day, one must grant an audience to everybody,” said
Martial.

And gay and smiling he descended the staircase.

In the vestibule, lined with rare and fragrant plants, stood a young
man. He was very pale, and his eyes glittered with feverish brilliancy.

On recognizing him Martial could not restrain an exclamation of
surprise.

“Jean Lacheneur!” he exclaimed; “imprudent man!”

The young man stepped forward.

“You believed that you were rid of me,” he said, bitterly. “Instead, I
return from afar. You can have your people arrest me if you choose.”

Martial’s face crimsoned at the insult; but he retained his composure.

“What do you desire?” he asked, coldly.

Jean drew from his pocket a folded letter.

“I am to give you this on behalf of Maurice d’Escorval.”

With an eager hand, Martial broke the seal. He glanced over the letter,
turned as pale as death, staggered and said only one word.

“Infamous!”

“What must I say to Maurice?” insisted Jean. “What do you intend to do?”

With a terrible effort Martial had conquered his weakness. He seemed to
deliberate for ten seconds, then seizing Jean’s arm, he dragged him up
the staircase, saying:

“Come--you shall see.”

Martial’s countenance had changed so much during the three minutes
he had been absent that there was an exclamation of terror when he
reappeared, holding an open letter in one hand and leading with the
other a young peasant whom no one recognized.

“Where is my father?” he demanded, in a husky voice; “where is the
Marquis de Courtornieu?”

The duke and the marquis were with Mme. Blanche in the little salon at
the end of the main hall.

Martial hastened there, followed by a crowd of wondering guests, who,
foreseeing a stormy scene, were determined not to lose a syllable.

He walked directly to M. de Courtornieu, who was standing by the
fireplace, and handing him the letter:

“Read!” said he, in a terrible voice.

M. de Courtornieu obeyed. He became livid; the paper trembled in his
hands; his eyes fell, and he was obliged to lean against the marble
mantel for support.

“I do not understand,” he stammered: “no, I do not understand.”

The duke and Mme. Blanche both sprang forward.

“What is it?” they asked in a breath; “what has happened?”

With a rapid movement, Martial tore the paper from the hands of the
Marquis de Courtornieu, and addressing his father:

“Listen to this letter,” he said, imperiously.

Three hundred people were assembled there, but the silence was so
profound that the voice of the young marquis penetrated to the farthest
extremity of the hall as he read:


“Monsieur le marquis--In exchange for a dozen lines that threatened you
with ruin, you promised us, upon the honor of your name, the life of
Baron d’Escorval.

“You did, indeed, bring the ropes by which he was to make his escape,
but they had been previously cut, and my father was precipitated to the
rocks below.

“You have forfeited your honor, Monsieur. You have soiled your name with
ineffaceable opprobrium. While so much as a drop of blood remains in my
veins, I will leave no means untried to punish you for your cowardice
and vile treason.

“By killing me you would, it is true, escape the chastisement I am
reserving for you. Consent to fight with me. Shall I await you to-morrow
on the Reche? At what hour? With what weapons?

“If you are the vilest of men, you can appoint a rendezvous, and then
send your gendarmes to arrest me. That would be an act worthy of you.

“Maurice d’Escorval.”


The duke was in despair. He saw the secret of the baron’s flight made
public--his political prospects ruined.

“Hush!” he said, hurriedly, and in a low voice; “hush, wretched man, you
will ruin us!”

But Martial seemed not even to hear him. When he had finished his
reading:

“Now, what do you think?” he demanded, looking the Marquis de
Courtornieu full in the face.

“I am still unable to comprehend,” said the old nobleman, coldly.

Martial lifted his hand; everyone believed that he was about to strike
the man who had been his father-in-law only a few hours.

“Very well! I comprehend!” he exclaimed. “I know now who that officer
was who entered the room in which I had deposited the ropes--and I know
what took him there.”

He crumbled the letter between his hands and threw it in M. de
Courtornieu’s face, saying:

“Here is your reward--coward!”

Overwhelmed by this _denouement_ the marquis sank into an arm-chair, and
Martial, still holding Jean Lacheneur by the arm, was leaving the room,
when his young wife, wild with despair, tried to detain him.

“You shall not go!” she exclaimed, intensely exasperated; “you shall
not! Where are you going? To rejoin the sister of the man, whom I now
recognize?”

Beside himself, Martial pushed his wife roughly aside.

“Wretch!” said he, “how dare you insult the noblest and purest of women?
Ah, well--yes--I am going to find Marie-Anne. Farewell!”

And he passed on.



CHAPTER XXXV

The ledge of rock upon which Baron d’Escorval and Corporal Bavois rested
in their descent from the tower was very narrow.

In the widest place it did not measure more than a yard and a half, and
its surface was uneven, cut by innumerable fissures and crevices, and
sloped suddenly at the edge. To stand there in the daytime, with the
wall of the tower behind one, and the precipice at one’s feet, would
have been considered very imprudent.

Of course, the task of lowering a man from this ledge, at dead of night,
was perilous in the extreme.

Before allowing the baron to descend, honest Bavois took every possible
precaution to save himself from being dragged over the verge of the
precipice by the weight he would be obliged to sustain.

He placed his crowbar firmly in a crevice of the rock, then bracing his
feet against the bar, he seated himself firmly, throwing his shoulders
well back, and it was only when he was sure of his position that he said
to the baron:

“I am here and firmly fixed, comrade; now let yourself down.”

The sudden parting of the rope hurled the brave corporal rudely against
the tower wall, then he was thrown forward by the rebound.

His unalterable _sang-froid_ was all that saved him.

For more than a minute he hung suspended over the abyss into which the
baron had just fallen, and his hands clutched at the empty air.

A hasty movement, and he would have fallen.

But he possessed a marvellous power of will, which prevented him from
attempting any violent effort. Prudently, but with determined energy,
he screwed his feet and his knees into the crevices of the rock, feeling
with his hands for some point of support, and gradually sinking to one
side, he finally succeeded in dragging himself from the verge of the
precipice.

It was time, for a cramp seized him with such violence that he was
obliged to sit down and rest for a moment.

That the baron had been killed by his fall, Bavois did not doubt for an
instant. But this catastrophe did not produce much effect upon the old
soldier, who had seen so many comrades fall by his side on the field of
battle.

What did _amaze_ him was the breaking of the rope--a rope so large that
one would have supposed it capable of sustaining the weight of ten men
like the baron.

As he could not, by reason of the darkness, see the ruptured place,
Bavois felt it with his finger; and, to his inexpressible astonishment,
he found it smooth. No filaments, no rough bits of hemp, as usual after
a break; the surface was perfectly even.

The corporal comprehended what Maurice had comprehended below.

“The scoundrels have cut the rope!” he exclaimed, with a frightful oath.

And a recollection of what had happened three or four hours previous
arose in his mind.

“This,” he thought, “explains the noise which the poor baron heard in
the next room! And I said to him: ‘Nonsense! it is a rat!’”

Then he thought of a very simple method of verifying his conjectures. He
passed the cord about the crowbar and pulled it with all his strength.
It parted in three places.

This discovery appalled him.

A part of the rope had fallen with the unfortunate baron, and it was
evident that the remaining fragments tied together would not be long
enough to reach to the base of the rock.

From this isolated ledge it was impossible to reach the ground upon
which the citadel was built.

“You are in a fine fix, Corporal,” he growled.

Honest Bavois looked the situation full in the face, and saw that it was
desperate.

“Well, Corporal, your jig is up!” he murmured, “At daybreak they will
find that the baron’s cell is empty. They will poke their heads out
of the window, and they will see you here, like a stone saint upon his
pedestal. Naturally, you will be captured, tried, condemned; and you
will be led out to take your turn in the ditches. Ready! Aim! Fire! And
that will be the end of your story.”

He stopped short. A vague idea had entered his mind, which he felt might
possibly be his salvation.

It came to him in touching the rope which he had used in his descent
from the prison to the ledge, and which, firmly attached to the bars,
hung down the side of the tower.

“If you had that rope which hangs there useless, Corporal, you could add
it to these fragments, and then it would be long enough to carry you
to the foot of the rock. But how shall I obtain it? It is certainly
impossible to go back after it! and how can I pull it down when it is so
securely fastened to the bars?”

He sought a way, found it, and pursued it, talking to himself all the
while as if there were two corporals; one prompt to conceive, the other,
a trifle stupid, to whom it was necessary to explain everything in
detail.

“Attention, Corporal,” said he. “You are going to knot these five pieces
of rope together and attach them to your waist; then you are going to
climb up to that window, hand over hand. Not an easy matter! A carpeted
staircase is preferable to that rope dangling there. But no matter, you
are not finical, Corporal! So you climb it, and here you are in the cell
again. What are you going to do? A mere nothing. You are unfastening the
cord attached to the bars; you will tie it to this, and that will give
you eighty feet of good strong rope. Then you will pass the rope about
one of the bars that remain intact; the rope will thus be doubled; then
you let yourself down again, and when you are here, you have only
to untie one of the knots and the rope is at your service. Do you
understand, Corporal?”

The corporal did understand so well that in less than twenty minutes
he was back again upon the narrow shelf of rock, the difficult and
dangerous operation which he had planned accomplished.

Not without a terrible effort; not without torn and bleeding hands and
knees.

But he had succeeded in obtaining the rope, and now he was certain
that he could make his escape from his dangerous position. He laughed
gleefully, or rather with that chuckle which was habitual to him.

Anxiety, then joy, had made him forget M. d’Escorval. At the thought of
him, he was smitten with remorse.

“Poor man!” he murmured. “I shall succeed in saving my miserable life,
for which no one cares, but I was unable to save him. Undoubtedly, by
this time his friends have carried him away.”

As he uttered these words he was leaning over the abyss. He doubted the
evidence of his own senses when he saw a faint light moving here and
there in the depths below.

What had happened? For something very extraordinary must have happened
to induce intelligent men like the baron’s friends to display this
light, which, if observed from the citadel, would betray their presence
and ruin them.

But Corporal Bavois’s moments were too precious to be wasted in idle
conjectures.

“Better go down on the double-quick,” he said aloud, as if to spur on
his courage. “Come, my friend, spit on your hands and be off!”

As he spoke the old soldier threw himself flat on his belly and crawled
slowly backward to the verge of the precipice. The spirit was strong,
but the flesh shuddered. To march upon a battery had always been a mere
pastime to the worthy corporal; but to face an unknown peril, to suspend
one’s life upon a cord, was a different matter.

Great drops of perspiration, caused by the horror of his situation,
stood out upon his brow when he felt that half his body had passed the
edge of the precipice, and that the slightest movement would now launch
him into space.

He made this movement, murmuring:

“If there is a God who watches over honest people let Him open His eyes
this instant!”

The God of the just was watching.

Bavois arrived at the end of his dangerous journey with torn and
bleeding hands, but safe. He fell like a mass of rock; and the rudeness
of the shock drew from him a groan resembling the roar of an infuriated
beast.

For more than a minute he lay there upon the ground stunned and dizzy.

When he rose two men seized him roughly.

“Ah, no foolishness,” he said quickly. “It is I, Bavois.”

This did not cause them to relax their hold.

“How does it happen,” demanded one, in a threatening tone, “that Baron
d’Escorval falls and you succeed in making the descent in safety a few
moments later?”

The old soldier was too shrewd not to understand the whole import of
this insulting question.

The sorrow and indignation aroused within him gave him strength to free
himself from the hands of his captors.

“_Mille tonnerres_!” he exclaimed; “so I pass for a traitor, do I! No,
it is impossible--listen to me.”

Then rapidly, but with surprising clearness, he related all the details
of his escape, his despair, his perilous situation, and the almost
insurmountable obstacles which he had overcome. To hear was to believe.

The men--they were, of course, the retired army officers who had
been waiting for the baron--offered the honest corporal their hands,
sincerely sorry that they had wounded the feelings of a man who was so
worthy of their respect and gratitude.

“You will forgive us, Corporal,” they said, sadly. “Misery renders men
suspicious and unjust, and we are very unhappy.”

“No offence,” he growled. “If I had trusted poor Monsieur d’Escorval, he
would be alive now.”

“The baron still breathes,” said one of the officers.

This was such astounding news that Bavois was utterly confounded for a
moment.

“Ah! I will give my right hand, if necessary, to save him!” he
exclaimed, at last.

“If it is possible to save him, he will be saved, my friend. That worthy
priest whom you see there, is an excellent physician. He is examining
Monsieur d’Escorval’s wounds now. It was by his order that we procured
and lighted this candle, which may bring our enemies upon us at any
moment; but this is not a time for hesitation.”

Bavois looked with all his eyes, but from where he was standing he could
discover only a confused group of moving figures.

“I would like to see the poor man,” he said, sadly.

“Come nearer, my good fellow; fear nothing!”

He stepped forward, and by the flickering light of the candle which
Marie-Anne held, he saw a spectacle which moved him more than the
horrors of the bloodiest battle-field.

The baron was lying upon the ground, his head supported on Mme.
d’Escorval’s knee.

His face was not disfigured; but he was pale as death itself, and his
eyes were closed.

At intervals a convulsive shudder shook his frame, and a stream of blood
gushed from his mouth. His clothing was hacked--literally hacked
in pieces; and it was easy to see that his body had sustained many
frightful wounds.

Kneeling beside the unconscious man, Abbe Midon, with admirable
dexterity, was stanching the blood and applying bandages which had been
torn from the linen of those present.

Maurice and one of the officers were assisting him. “Ah! if I had my
hands on the scoundrel who cut the rope,” cried the corporal, in a
passion of indignation; “but patience. I shall have him yet.”

“Do you know who it was?”

“Only too well!”

He said no more. The abbe had done all it was possible to do, and he now
lifted the wounded man a little higher on Mme. d’Escorval’s knee.

This change of position elicited a moan that betrayed the unfortunate
baron’s intense sufferings. He opened his eyes and faltered a few
words--they were the first he had uttered.

“Firmin!” he murmured, “Firmin!” It was the name of the baron’s former
secretary, a man who had been absolutely devoted to his master, but who
had been dead for several years. It was evident that the baron’s mind
was wandering. Still he had some vague idea of his terrible situation,
for in a stifled, almost inaudible voice, he added:

“Oh! how I suffer! Firmin, I will not fall into the hands of the Marquis
de Courtornieu alive. You shall kill me rather--do you hear me? I
command it.”

This was all; then his eyes closed again, and his head fell back a dead
weight. One would have supposed that he had yielded up his last sigh.

Such was the opinion of the officers; and it was with poignant anxiety
they drew the abbe a little aside.

“Is it all over?” they asked. “Is there any hope?”

The priest sadly shook his head, and pointing to heaven:

“My hope is in God!” he said, reverently.

The hour, the place, the terrible catastrophe, the present danger, the
threatening future, all combined to lend a deep solemnity to the words
of the priest.

So profound was the impression that, for more than a minute, these men,
familiar with peril and scenes of horror, stood in awed silence.

Maurice, who approached, followed by Corporal Bavois, brought them back
to the exigencies of the present.

“Ought we not to make haste and carry away my father?” he asked. “Must
we not be in Piedmont before evening?”

“Yes!” exclaimed the officers, “let us start at once.”

But the priest did not move, and in a despondent voice, he said:

“To make any attempt to carry Monsieur d’Escorval across the frontier in
his present condition would cost him his life.”

This seemed so inevitably a death-warrant for them all, that they
shuddered.

“My God! what shall we do?” faltered Maurice. “What course shall we
pursue?”

Not a voice replied. It was clear that they hoped for salvation through
the priest alone.

He was lost in thought, and it was some time before he spoke.

“About an hour’s walk from here,” he said, at last, “beyond the Croix
d’Arcy, is the hut of a peasant upon whom I can rely. His name is
Poignot; and he was formerly in Monsieur Lacheneur’s employ. With the
assistance of his three sons, he now tills quite a large farm. We must
procure a litter and carry Monsieur d’Escorval to the house of this
honest peasant.”

“What, Monsieur,” interrupted one of the officers, “you wish us to
procure a litter at this hour of the night, and in this neighborhood?”

“It must be done.”

“But, will it not awaken suspicion?”

“Most assuredly.”

“The Montaignac police will follow us.”

“I am certain of it.”

“The baron will be recaptured!”

“No.”

The abbe spoke in the tone of a man who, by virtue of assuming all the
responsibility, feels that he has a right to be obeyed.

“When the baron has been conveyed to Poignot’s house,” he continued,
“one of you gentlemen will take the wounded man’s place upon the litter;
the others will carry him, and the party will remain together until it
has reached Piedmontese territory. Then you will separate and pretend
to conceal yourselves, but do it in such a way that you are seen
everywhere.” All present comprehended the priest’s simple plan.

They were to throw the emissaries sent by the Duc de Sairmeuse and the
Marquis de Courtornieu off the track; and at the very moment it was
apparently proven that the baron was in the mountains, he would be safe
in Poignot’s house.

“One word more,” added the priest. “It will be necessary to make the
_cortege_ which accompanies the pretended baron resemble as much as
possible the little party that would be likely to attend Monsieur
d’Escorval. Mademoiselle Lacheneur will accompany you; Maurice also.
People know that I would not leave the baron, who is my friend; my
priestly robe would attract attention; one of you must assume it. God
will forgive this deception on account of its worthy motive.”

It was now necessary to procure the litter; and the officers were
trying to decide where they should go to obtain it, when Corporal Bavois
interrupted them.

“Give yourselves no uneasiness,” he remarked; “I know an inn not far
from here where I can procure one.”

He departed on the run, and five minutes later reappeared with a small
litter, a thin mattress, and a coverlid. He had thought of everything.

The wounded man was lifted carefully and placed upon the mattress.

A long and difficult operation which, in spite of extreme caution, drew
many terrible groans from the baron.

When all was ready, each officer took an end of the litter, and the
little procession, headed by the abbe, started on its way. They were
obliged to proceed slowly on account of the suffering which the least
jolting inflicted upon the baron. Still they made some progress, and by
daybreak they were about half way to Poignot’s house.

It was then that they met some peasants going to their daily toil. Both
men and women paused to look at them, and when the little _cortege_ had
passed they still stood gazing curiously after these people who were
apparently carrying a dead body.

The priest did not seem to trouble himself in regard to these
encounters; at least, he made no attempt to avoid them.

But he did seem anxious and cautious when, after a three hours’ march,
they came in sight of Poignot’s cottage.

Fortunately there was a little grove not far from the house. The abbe
made the party enter it, recommending the strictest prudence, while
he went on in advance to confer with this man, upon whose decision the
safety of the whole party depended.

As the priest approached the house, a small, thin man, with gray hair
and a sunburned face emerged from the stable.

It was Father Poignot.

“What! is this you, Monsieur le Cure!” he exclaimed, delightedly.
“Heavens! how pleased my wife will be. We have a great favor to ask of
you----”

And then, without giving the abbe an opportunity to open his lips, he
began to tell him his perplexities. The night of the revolt he had given
shelter to a poor man who had received an ugly sword-thrust. Neither his
wife nor himself knew how to dress the wound, and he dared not call in a
physician.

“And this wounded man,” he added, “is Jean Lacheneur, the son of my
former employer.” A terrible anxiety seized the priest’s heart.

Would this man, who had already given an asylum to one wounded
conspirator, consent to receive another?

The abbe’s voice trembled as he made known his petition.

The farmer turned very pale and shook his head gravely, while the priest
was speaking. When the abbe had finished:

“Do you know, sir,” he asked, coldly, “that I incur a great risk by
converting my house into a hospital for these rebels?”

The abbe dared not answer.

“They told me,” Father Poignot continued, “that I was a coward, because
_I_ would not take part in the revolt. Such was not my opinion. Now I
choose to shelter these wounded men--I shelter them. In my opinion, it
requires quite as much courage as it does to go and fight.”

“Ah! you are a brave man!” cried the abbe.

“I know that very well! Bring Monsieur d’Escorval. There is no one here
but my wife and boys--no one will betray him!”

A half hour later the baron was lying in a small loft, where Jean
Lacheneur was already installed.

From the window, Abbe Midon and Mme. d’Escorval watched the little
_cortege_, organized for the purpose of deceiving the Duc de Sairmeuse’s
spies, as it moved rapidly away.

Corporal Bavois, with his head bound up with bloodstained linen, had
taken the baron’s place upon the litter.

This was one of the troubled epochs in history that try men’s souls.
There is no chance for hypocrisy; each man stands revealed in his
grandeur, or in his pettiness of soul.

Certainly much cowardice was displayed during the early days of the
second Restoration; but many deeds of sublime courage and devotion were
performed.

These officers who befriended Mme. d’Escorval and Maurice--who lent
their aid to the abbe--knew the baron only by name and reputation.

It was sufficient for them to know that he was the friend of their
former ruler--the man whom they had made their idol, and they rejoiced
with all their hearts when they saw M. d’Escorval reposing under Father
Poignot’s roof in comparative security.

After this, their task, which consisted in misleading the government
emissaries, seemed to them mere child’s play.

But all these precautions were unnecessary. Public sentiment had
declared itself in an unmistakable manner, and it was evident that
Lacheneur’s hopes had not been without some foundation.

The police discovered nothing, not so much as a single detail of the
escape. They did not even hear of the little party that had travelled
nearly three leagues in the full light of day, bearing a wounded man
upon a litter.

Among the two thousand peasants who believed that this wounded man was
Baron d’Escorval, there was not one who turned informer or let drop an
indiscreet word.

But on approaching the frontier, which they knew to be strictly guarded,
the fugitives became even more cautious.

They waited until nightfall before presenting themselves at a lonely
inn, where they hoped to procure a guide to lead them through the
defiles of the mountains.

Frightful news awaited them there. The innkeeper informed them of the
bloody massacre at Montaignac.

With tears rolling down his cheeks, he related the details of the
execution, which he had heard from an eyewitness.

Fortunately, or unfortunately, he knew nothing of M. d’Escorval’s flight
or of M. Lacheneur’s arrest.

But he was well acquainted with Chanlouineau, and he was inconsolable
over the death of that “handsome young fellow, the best farmer in the
country.”

The officers, who had left the litter a short distance from the inn,
decided that they could confide at least a part of their secret to this
man.

“We are carrying one of our wounded comrades,” they said to him. “Can
you guide us across the frontier to-night?”

The innkeeper replied that he would do so very willingly, that he would
promise to take them safely past the military posts; but that he would
not think of going upon the mountain before the moon rose.

By midnight the fugitives were _en route_; by daybreak they set foot on
Piedmont territory.

They had dismissed their guide some time before. They now proceeded to
break the litter in pieces; and handful by handful they cast the wool of
the mattress to the wind.

“Our task is accomplished,” the officer said to Maurice. “We will now
return to France. May God protect you! Farewell!”

It was with tears in his eyes that Maurice saw these brave men, who had
just saved his father’s life, depart. Now he was the sole protector of
Marie-Anne, who, pale and overcome with fatigue and emotion, trembled on
his arm.

But no--Corporal Bavois still lingered by his side.

“And you, my friend,” he asked, sadly, “what are you going to do?”

“Follow you,” replied the old soldier. “I have a right to a home with
you; that was agreed between your father and myself! So do not hurry,
the young lady does not seem well, and I see the village only a short
distance away.”



CHAPTER XXXVI

Essentially a woman in grace and beauty, as well as in devotion and
tenderness, Marie-Anne was capable of a virile bravery. Her energy and
her coolness during those trying days had been the admiration and the
astonishment of all around her.

But human endurance has its limits. Always after excessive efforts comes
a moment when the shrinking flesh fails the firmest will.

When Marie-Anne tried to begin her journey anew, she found that her
strength was exhausted; her swollen feet would no longer sustain her,
her limbs sank under her, her head whirled, and an intense freezing
coldness crept over her heart.

Maurice and the old soldier were obliged to support her, almost carry
her. Fortunately they were not far from the village, whose church-tower
they had discerned through the gray mists of morning.

Soon the fugitives could distinguish the houses on the outskirts of the
town. The corporal suddenly stopped short with an oath.

“_Mille tonnerres_!” he exclaimed; “and my uniform! To enter the village
in this rig would excite suspicion at once; before we had a chance to
sit down, the Piedmontese gendarmes would arrest us.”

He reflected for a moment, twirling his mustache furiously; then, in a
tone that would have made a passerby tremble, he said:

“All things are fair in love and war. The next peasant who passes--”

“But I have money,” interrupted Maurice, unbuckling a belt filled with
gold, which he had put on under his clothing on the night of the revolt.

“Eh! we are fortunate!” cried Bavois. “Give me some, and I will
soon find some shop in the suburbs where I can purchase a change of
clothing.” He departed; but it was not long before he reappeared,
transformed by a peasant’s costume, which fitted him perfectly. His
small, thin face was almost hidden beneath an immense broad-brimmed hat.

“Now, steady, forward, march!” he said to Maurice and Marie-Anne, who
scarcely recognized him in this disguise.

The town, which they soon reached, was called Saliente. They read the
name upon a guide-post.

The fourth house after entering the place was a hostelry, the
Traveller’s Rest. They entered it, and ordered the hostess to take the
young lady to a room and to assist her in disrobing.

The order was obeyed, and Maurice and the corporal went into the
dining-room and ordered something to eat.

The desired refreshments were served, but the glances cast upon the
guests were by no means friendly. It was evident that they were regarded
with suspicion.

A large man, who was apparently the proprietor of the house, hovered
around them, and at last embraced a favorable opportunity to ask their
names.

“My name is Dubois,” replied Maurice, without the slightest hesitation.
“I am travelling on business, and this man here is my farmer.”

These replies seemed to reassure the host a little.

“And what is your business?” he inquired.

“I came into this land of inquisitive people to buy mules,” laughed
Maurice, striking his belt of money.

On hearing the jingle of the coin the man lifted his cap deferentially.
Raising mules was the chief industry of the country. This bourgeois was
very young, but he had a well-filled purse, and that was enough.

“You will excuse me,” resumed the host, in quite a different tone. “You
see, we are obliged to be very careful. There has been some trouble in
Montaignac.”

The imminence of the peril and the responsibility devolving upon
him, gave Maurice an assurance unusual to him; and it was in the most
careless, off-hand manner possible that he concocted a quite plausible
story to explain his early arrival on foot accompanied by a sick wife.
He congratulated himself upon his address, but the old corporal was far
from satisfied.

“We are too near the frontier to bivouac here,” he grumbled. “As soon as
the young lady is on her feet again we must hurry on.”

He believed, and Maurice hoped, that twenty-four hours of rest would
restore Marie-Anne.

They were mistaken. The very springs of life in her existence seemed to
have been drained dry. She did not appear to suffer, but she remained in
a death-like torpor, from which nothing could arouse her. They spoke to
her but she made no response. Did she hear? did she comprehend? It was
extremely doubtful.

By rare good fortune the mother of the proprietor proved to be a
good, kind-hearted old woman, who would not leave the bedside of
Marie-Anne--of Mme. Dubois, as she was called at the Traveller’s Rest.

It was not until the evening of the third day that they heard Marie-Anne
utter a word.

“Poor girl!” she sighed; “poor, wretched girl!”

It was of herself that she spoke.

By a phenomenon not very unusual after a crisis in which reason has been
temporarily obscured, it seemed to her that it was someone else who had
been the victim of all the misfortunes, whose recollections gradually
returned to her like the memory of a painful dream.

What strange and terrible events had taken place since that August
Sabbath, when, on leaving the church with her father, she heard of the
arrival of the Duc de Sairmeuse.

And that was only eight months ago.

What a difference between those days when she lived happy and envied in
that beautiful Chateau de Sairmeuse, of which she believed herself the
mistress, and at the present time, when she found herself lying in the
comfortless room of a miserable country inn, attended by an old woman
whom she did not know, and with no other protection than that of an old
soldier--a deserter, whose life was in constant danger--and that of her
proscribed lover.

From this total wreck of her cherished ambitions, of her hopes, of her
fortune, of her happiness, and of her future, she had not even saved her
honor.

But was she alone responsible? Who had imposed upon her the odious role
which she had played with Maurice, Martial, and Chanlouineau?

As this last name darted through her mind, the scene in the prison-cell
rose suddenly and vividly before her.

Chanlouineau had given her a letter, saying as he did so:

“You will read this when I am no more.”

She might read it now that he had fallen beneath the bullets of the
soldiery. But what had become of it? From the moment that he gave it to
her until now she had not once thought of it.

She raised herself in bed, and in an imperious voice:

“My dress,” she said to the old nurse, seated beside her; “give me my
dress.”

The woman obeyed; with an eager hand Marie-Anne examined the pocket.

She uttered an exclamation of joy on finding the letter there.

She opened it, read it slowly twice, then, sinking back on her pillows,
she burst into tears.

Maurice anxiously approached her.

“What is the matter?” he inquired anxiously.

She handed him the letter, saying: “Read.”

Chanlouineau was only a poor peasant. His entire education had been
derived from an old country pedagogue, whose school he attended for
three winters, and who troubled himself much less about the progress of
his students than about the size of the books which they carried to and
from the school.

This letter, which was written upon the commonest kind of paper, was
sealed with a huge wafer, as large as a two-sou piece, which he had
purchased from a grocer in Sairmeuse.

The chirography was labored, heavy and trembling; it betrayed the stiff
hand of a man more accustomed to guiding the plough than the pen.

The lines zigzagged toward the top or toward the bottom of the page, and
faults of orthography were everywhere apparent.

But if the writing was that of a vulgar peasant, the thoughts it
expressed were worthy of the noblest, the proudest in the land.

This was the letter which Chanlouineau had written, probably on the eve
of the insurrection:


“Marie-Anne--The outbreak is at hand. Whether it succeeds, or whether it
fails, I shall die. That was decided on the day when I learned that you
could marry none other than Maurice d’Escorval.

“But the conspiracy will not succeed; and I understand your father well
enough to know that he will not survive its defeat. And if Maurice and
your brother should both be killed, what would become of you? Oh, my
God, would you not be reduced to beggary?

“The thought has haunted me continually. I have reflected, and this is
my last will:

“I give and bequeath to you all my property, all that I possess:

“My house, the Borderie, with the gardens and vineyards pertaining
thereto, the woodland and the pastures of Berarde, and five lots of land
at Valrollier.

“You will find an inventory of this property, and of my other
possessions which I devise to you, deposited with the lawyer at
Sairmeuse.

“You can accept this bequest without fear; for, having no parents, my
control over my property is absolute.

“If you do not wish to remain in France, this property will sell for at
least forty thousand francs.

“But it would, it seems to me, be better for you to remain in your own
country. The house on the Borderie is comfortable and convenient, since
I have had it divided into three rooms and thoroughly repaired.

“Upstairs is a room that has been fitted up by the best upholsterer in
Montaignac. I intended it for you. Beneath the hearth-stone in this room
you will find a box containing three hundred and twenty-seven louis d’or
and one hundred and forty-six livres.

“If you refuse this gift, it will be because you scorn me even after I
am dead. Accept it, if not for your own sake, for the sake of--I dare
not write it; but you will understand my meaning only too well.

“If Maurice is not killed, and I shall try my best to stand between him
and danger, he will marry you. Then you will, perhaps, be obliged to ask
his consent in order to accept my gift. I hope that he will not refuse
it. One is not jealous of the dead!

“Besides, he knows well that you have scarcely vouchsafed a glance to
the poor peasant who has loved you so much.

“Do not be offended at anything I have said, I am in such agony that I
cannot weigh my words.

“Adieu, adieu, Marie-Anne.

“Chanlouineau.”


Maurice also read twice, before handing it back, this letter whose every
word palpitated with sublime passion.

He was silent for a moment, then, in a husky voice, he said:

“You cannot refuse; it would be wrong.”

His emotion was so great that he could not conceal it, and he left the
room.

He was overwhelmed by the grandeur of soul exhibited by this peasant,
who, after saving the life of his successful rival at the Croix d’Arcy,
had wrested Baron d’Escorval from the hands of his executioners, and
who had never allowed a complaint nor a reproach to escape his lips, and
whose protection over the woman he adored extended even from beyond the
grave.

In comparison with this obscure hero, Maurice felt himself
insignificant, mediocre, unworthy.

Good God! what if this comparison should arise in Marie-Anne’s mind as
well? How could he compete with the memory of such nobility of soul and
heroic self-sacrifice?

Chanlouineau was mistaken; one, may, perhaps, be jealous of the dead!

But Maurice took good care to conceal this poignant anxiety and these
sorrowful thoughts, and during the days that followed, he presented
himself in Marie-Anne’s room with a calm, even cheerful face.

For she, unfortunately, was not restored to health. She had recovered
the full possession of her mental faculties, but her strength had not
yet returned. She was still unable to sit up; and Maurice was forced to
relinquish all thought of quitting Saliente, though he felt the earth
burn beneath his feet.

This persistent weakness began to astonish the old nurse. Her faith in
herbs, gathered by the light of the moon, was considerably shaken.

Honest Bavois was the first to suggest the idea of consulting a
physician whom he had found in this land of savages.

Yes; he had found a really skilful physician in the neighborhood, a
man of superior ability. Attached at one time to the beautiful court
of Prince Eugene, he had been obliged to flee from Milan, and had taken
refuge in this secluded spot.

This physician was summoned, and promptly made his appearance. He was
one of those men whose age it is impossible to determine. His past,
whatever it might have been, had wrought deep furrows on his brow, and
his glance was as keen and piercing as his lancet.

After visiting the sick-room, he drew Maurice aside.

“Is this young lady really your wife, Monsieur--Dubois?”

He hesitated so strangely over this name, Dubois, that Maurice felt his
face crimson to the roots of his hair.

“I do not understand your question,” he retorted, angrily.

“I beg your pardon, of course, but you seem very young for a married
man, and your hands are too soft to belong to a farmer. And when I spoke
to this young lady of her husband, she blushed scarlet. The man who
accompanies you has terrible mustaches for a farmer. Besides, you
must remember that there have been troubles across the frontier at
Montaignac.”

From crimson Maurice had turned white. He felt that he was
discovered--that he was in this man’s power.

What should he do?

What good would denial do?

He reflected that confession is sometimes the height of prudence, and
that extreme confidence often meets with sympathy and protection; so, in
a voice trembling with anxiety, he said:

“You are not mistaken, Monsieur. My friend and myself both are
fugitives, undoubtedly condemned to death in France at this moment.”

And without giving the doctor time to respond, he narrated the
terrible events that had happened at Sairmeuse, and the history of his
unfortunate love-affair.

He omitted nothing. He neither concealed his own name nor that of
Marie-Anne.

When his recital was completed, the physician pressed his hand.

“It is just as I supposed,” said he. “Believe me, Monsieur--Dubois, you
must not tarry here. What I have discovered others will discover. And
above all, do not warn the hotel-keeper of your departure. He has not
been deceived by your explanation. Self-interest alone has kept his
mouth closed. He has seen your money, and so long as you spend it at his
house he will hold his tongue; but if he discovers that you are going
away, he will probably betray you.”

“Ah! sir, but how is it possible for us to leave this place?”

“In two days the young lady will be on her feet again,” interrupted the
physician. “And take my advice. At the next village, stop and give your
name to Mademoiselle Lacheneur.”

“Ah! sir,” Maurice exclaimed; “have you considered the advice you offer
me? How can I, a proscribed man--a man condemned to death perhaps--how
can I obtain the necessary papers?”

The physician shook his head.

“Excuse me, you are no longer in France, Monsieur d’Escorval, you are in
Piedmont.”

“Another difficulty!”

“No, because in this country, people marry, or at least they can marry,
without all the formalities that cause you so much anxiety.”

“Is it possible?” Maurice exclaimed.

“Yes, if you can find a priest who will consent to your union, inscribe
your name upon his parish register and give you a certificate, you will
be so indissolubly united, Mademoiselle Lacheneur and you, that the
court of Rome would never grant you a divorce.”

To suspect the truth of these affirmations was difficult, and yet
Maurice doubted still.

“So, sir,” he said, hesitatingly, “in case I was able to find a
priest----”

The physician was silent. One might have supposed he was blaming himself
for meddling with matters that did not concern him.

Then, almost brusquely, he said:

“Listen to me attentively, Monsieur d’Escorval. I am about to take my
leave, but before I go, I shall take occasion to recommend a good
deal of exercise for the sick lady--I will do this before your host.
Consequently, day after to-morrow, Wednesday, you will hire mules, and
you, Mademoiselle Lacheneur and your old friend, the soldier, will
leave the hotel as if going on a pleasure excursion. You will push on
to Vigano, three leagues from here, where I live. I will take you to a
priest, one of my friends; and he, upon my recommendation, will perform
the marriage ceremony. Now reflect, shall I expect you on Wednesday?”

“Oh, yes, yes, Monsieur. How can I ever thank you?”

“By not thanking me at all. See, here is the innkeeper; you are Monsieur
Dubois, again.”

Maurice was intoxicated with joy. He understood the irregularity of
such a marriage, but he knew it would reassure Marie-Anne’s troubled
conscience. Poor girl! she was suffering an agony of remorse. It was
that which was killing her.

He did not speak to her on the subject, however, fearing something might
occur to interfere with the project.

But the old physician had not given his word lightly, and everything
took place as he had promised.

The priest at Vigano blessed the marriage of Maurice d’Escorval and of
Marie-Anne Lacheneur, and after inscribing their names upon the church
register, he gave them a certificate, upon which the physician and
Corporal Bavois figured as witnesses.

That same evening the mules were sent back to Saliente, and the
fugitives resumed their journey.

Abbe Midon had counselled them to reach Turin as quickly as possible.

“It is a large city,” he said; “you will be lost in the crowd. I have
more than one friend there, whose name and address are upon this paper.
Go to them, and in that way I will try to send you news of your father.”

So it was toward Turin that Maurice, Marie-Anne, and Corporal Bavois
directed their steps.

But their progress was very slow, for they were obliged to avoid
frequented roads, and renounce the ordinary modes of transportation.

The fatigue of travel, instead of exhausting Marie-Anne, seemed to
revive her. After five or six days the color came back to her cheek and
her strength returned.

“Fate seems to have relaxed her rigor,” said Maurice, one day. “Who
knows what compensations the future may have in store for us!”

No, fate had not taken pity upon them; it was only a short respite
granted by destiny. One lovely April morning the fugitives stopped for
breakfast at an inn on the outskirts of a large city.

Maurice having finished his repast was just leaving the table to settle
with the hostess, when a despairing cry arrested him.

Marie-Anne, deadly pale, and with eyes staring wildly at a paper which
she held in her hand, exclaimed in frenzied tones:

“Here! Maurice! Look!”

It was a French journal about a fortnight old, which had probably been
left there by some traveller.

Maurice seized it and read:


“Yesterday, Lacheneur, the leader of the revolt in Montaignac, was
executed. The miserable mischief-maker exhibited upon the scaffold the
audacity for which he has always been famous.”


“My father has been put to death!” cried Marie-Anne, “and I--his
daughter--was not there to receive his last farewell!”

She rose, and in an imperious voice:

“I will go no farther,” she said; “we must turn back now without losing
an instant. I wish to return to France.”

To return to France was to expose themselves to frightful peril. What
good would it do? Was not the misfortune irreparable?

So Corporal Bavois suggested, very timidly. The old soldier trembled at
the thought that they might suspect him of being afraid.

But Maurice would not listen.

He shuddered. It seemed to him that Baron d’Escorval must have been
discovered and arrested at the same time that Lacheneur was captured.

“Yes, let us start at once on our return!” he exclaimed.

They immediately procured a carriage to convey them to the frontier. One
important question, however, remained to be decided. Should Maurice and
Marie-Anne make their marriage public? She wished to do so, but Maurice
entreated her, with tears in his eyes, to conceal it.

“Our marriage certificate will not silence the evil disposed,” said he.
“Let us keep our secret for the present. We shall doubtless remain in
France only a few days.”

Unfortunately, Marie-Anne yielded.

“Since you wish it,” said she, “I will obey you. No one shall know it.”

The next day, which was the 14th of April, the fugitives at nightfall
reached Father Poignot’s house.

Maurice and Corporal Bavois were disguised as peasants.

The old soldier had made one sacrifice that drew tears from his eyes; he
had shaved off his mustache.



CHAPTER XXXVII

When Abbe Midon and Martial de Sairmeuse held their conference, to
discuss and to decide upon the arrangements for the Baron d’Escorval’s
escape, a difficulty presented itself which threatened to break off the
negotiation.

“Return my letter,” said Martial, “and I will save the baron.”

“Save the baron,” replied the abbe, “and your letter shall be returned.”

But Martial’s was one of those natures which become exasperated by the
least shadow of suspicion.

The idea that anyone should suppose him influenced by threats, when in
reality, he had yielded only to Marie-Anne’s tears, angered him beyond
endurance.

“These are my last words, Monsieur,” he said, emphatically. “Restore
to me, now, this instant, the letter which was obtained from me by
Chanlouineau’s ruse, and I swear to you, by the honor of my name, that
all which it is possible for any human being to do to save the baron, I
will do. If you distrust my word, good-evening.”

The situation was desperate, the danger imminent, the time limited;
Martial’s tone betrayed an inflexible determination.

The abbe could not hesitate. He drew the letter from his pocket and
handing it to Martial:

“Here it is, Monsieur,” he said, solemnly, “remember that you have
pledged the honor of your name.”

“I will remember it, Monsieur le Cure. Go and obtain the ropes.”

The abbe’s sorrow and amazement were intense, when, after the baron’s
terrible fall, Maurice announced that the cord had been cut. And yet he
could not make up his mind that Martial was guilty of the execrable act.
It betrayed a depth of duplicity and hypocrisy which is rarely found
in men under twenty-five years of age. But no one suspected his secret
thoughts. It was with the most unalterable _sang-froid_ that he dressed
the baron’s wounds and made arrangements for the flight. Not until he
saw M. d’Escorval installed in Poignot’s house did he breathe freely.

The fact that the baron had been able to endure the journey, proved
that in this poor maimed body remained a power of vitality for which the
priest had not dared to hope.

Some way must now be discovered to procure the surgical instruments and
the remedies which the condition of the wounded man demanded.

But where and how could he procure them?

The police kept a close watch over the physicians and druggists in
Montaignac, in the hope of discovering the wounded conspirators through
them.

But the cure, who had been for ten years physician and surgeon for the
poor of his parish, had an almost complete set of surgical instruments
and a well-filled medicine-chest.

“This evening,” said he, “I will obtain what is needful.”

When night came, he put on a long blue blouse, shaded his face by an
immense slouch hat, and directed his steps toward Sairmeuse.

Not a light was visible through the windows of the presbytery; Bibiane,
the old housekeeper, must have gone out to gossip with some of the
neighbors.

The priest effected an entrance into the house, which had once been
his, by forcing the lock of the door opening on the garden; he found the
requisite articles, and retired without having been discovered.

That night the abbe hazarded a cruel but indispensable operation. His
heart trembled, but not the hand that held the knife, although he had
never before attempted so difficult a task.

“It is not upon my weak powers that I rely: I have placed my trust in
One who is on High.”

His faith was rewarded. Three days later the wounded man, after quite a
comfortable night, seemed to regain consciousness.

His first glance was for his devoted wife, who was seated by his
bedside; his first word was for his son.

“Maurice?” he asked.

“Is in safety,” replied the abbe. “He must be on the way to Turin.”

M. d’Escorval’s lips moved as if he were murmuring a prayer; then, in a
feeble voice:

“We owe you a debt of gratitude which we can never pay,” he murmured,
“for I think I shall pull through.”

He did “pull through,” but not without terrible suffering, not without
difficulties that made those around him tremble with anxiety. Jean
Lacheneur, more fortunate, was on his feet by the end of the week.

Forty days had passed, when one evening--it was the 17th of April--while
the abbe was reading a newspaper to the baron, the door gently opened
and one of the Poignot boys put in his head, then quickly withdrew it.

The priest finished the paragraph, laid down the paper, and quietly went
out.

“What is it?” he inquired of the young man.

“Ah! Monsieur, Monsieur Maurice, Mademoiselle Lacheneur and the old
corporal have just arrived; they wish to come up.”

In three bounds the abbe descended the narrow staircase.

“Unfortunate creatures!” he exclaimed, addressing the three imprudent
travellers, “what has induced you to return here?”

Then turning to Maurice:

“Is it not enough that _for_ you, and _through_ you, your father has
nearly died? Are you afraid he will not be recaptured, that you return
here to set the enemies upon his track? Depart!”

The poor boy, quite overwhelmed, faltered his excuse. Uncertainty seemed
to him worse than death; he had heard of M. Lacheneur’s execution; he
had not reflected, he would go at once; he asked only to see his father
and to embrace his mother.

The priest was inflexible.

“The slightest emotion might kill your father,” he declared; “and to
tell your mother of your return, and of the dangers to which you have
foolishly exposed yourself, would cause her untold tortures. Go at once.
Cross the frontier again this very night.”

Jean Lacheneur, who had witnessed this scene, now approached.

“It is time for me to depart,” said he, “and I entreat you to care for
my sister, the place for her is here, not upon the highways.”

The abbe deliberated for a moment, then he said, brusquely:

“So be it; but go at once; your name is not upon the proscribed list.
You will not be pursued.”

Thus, suddenly separated from his wife, Maurice wished to confer with
her, to give her some parting advice; but the abbe did not allow him an
opportunity.

“Go, go at once,” he insisted. “Farewell!”

The good abbe was too hasty.

Just when Maurice stood sorely in need of wise counsel, he was thus
delivered over to the influence of Jean Lacheneur’s furious hatred. As
soon as they were outside:

“This,” exclaimed Jean, “is the work of the Sairmeuse and the Marquis
de Courtornieu! I do not even know where they have thrown the body of
my murdered parent; you cannot even embrace the father who has been
traitorously assassinated by them!”

He laughed a harsh, discordant, terrible laugh, and continued:

“And yet, if we ascended that hill, we could see the Chateau de
Sairmeuse in the distance, brightly illuminated. They are celebrating
the marriage of Martial de Sairmeuse and Blanche de Courtornieu. _We_
are homeless wanderers without friends, and without a shelter for our
heads: _they_ are feasting and making merry.”

Less than this would have sufficed to rekindle the wrath of Maurice. He
forgot everything in saying to himself that to disturb this fete by his
appearance would be a vengeance worthy of him.

“I will go and challenge Martial now, on the instant, in the presence of
the revellers,” he exclaimed.

But Jean interrupted him.

“No, not that! They are cowards; they would arrest you. Write; I will be
the bearer of the letter.”

Corporal Bavois heard them; but he did not oppose their folly. He
thought it all perfectly natural, under the circumstances, and esteemed
them the more for their rashness.

Forgetful of prudence they entered the first shop, and the challenge was
written and confided to Jean Lacheneur.



CHAPTER XXXVIII

To disturb the merrymaking at the Chateau de Sairmeuse; to change the
joy of the bridal-day into sadness; to cast a gloom over the nuptials of
Martial and Mlle. Blanche de Courtornieu.

This, in truth, was all that Jean Lacheneur hoped to do.

As for believing that Martial, triumphant and happy, would accept the
challenge of Maurice, a miserable outlaw, he did not believe it.

While awaiting Martial in the vestibule of the chateau, he armed himself
against the scorn and sneers which he would probably receive from this
haughty nobleman whom he had come to insult.

But Martial’s kindly greeting had disconcerted him a little.

But he was reassured when he saw the terrible effect produced upon the
marquis by the insulting letter.

“We have cut him to the quick,” he thought.

When Martial seized him by the arm and led him upstairs, he made no
resistance.

While they traversed the brightly lighted drawing-rooms and passed
through the crowd of astonished guests, Jean thought neither of his
heavy shoes nor of his peasant dress.

Breathless with anxiety, he wondered what was to come.

He soon knew.

Leaning against the gilded door-post, he witnessed the terrible scene in
the little salon.

He saw Martial de Sairmeuse, frantic with passion, cast into the face of
his father-in-law Maurice d’Escorval’s letter.

One might have supposed that all this did not affect him in the least,
he stood so cold and unmoved, with compressed lips and downcast eyes;
but appearances were deceitful. His heart throbbed with wild exultation;
and if he cast down his eyes, it was only to conceal the joy that
sparkled there.

He had not hoped for so prompt and so terrible a revenge.

Nor was this all.

After brutally repulsing Blanche, his newly wedded wife, who attempted
to detain him, Martial again seized Jean Lacheneur’s arm.

“Now,” said he, “follow me!”

Jean followed him still without a word.

They again crossed the grand hall, but instead of going to the vestibule
Martial took a candle that was burning upon a side table, and opened a
little door leading to the private staircase.

“Where are you taking me?” inquired Jean Lacheneur.

Martial, who had already ascended two or three steps, turned.

“Are you afraid?” he asked.

The other shrugged his shoulders, and coldly replied:

“If you put it in that way, let us go on.”

They entered the room which Martial had occupied since taking possession
of the chateau. It was the same room that had once belonged to Jean
Lacheneur; and nothing had been changed. He recognized the brightly
flowered curtains, the figures on the carpet, and even an old arm-chair
where he had read many a novel in secret.

Martial hastened to a small writing-desk, and took from it a paper which
he slipped into his pocket.

“Now,” said he, “let us go. We must avoid another scene. My father
and--my wife will be seeking me. I will explain when we are outside.”

They hastily descended the staircase, passed through the gardens, and
soon reached the long avenue.

Then Jean Lacheneur suddenly paused.

“To come so far for a simple yes or no is, I think, unnecessary,” said
he. “Have you decided? What answer am I to give Maurice d’Escorval?”

“Nothing! You will take me to him. I must see him and speak with him in
order to justify myself. Let us proceed!”

But Jean Lacheneur did not move.

“What you ask is impossible!” he replied.

“Why?”

“Because Maurice is pursued. If he is captured, he will be tried and
undoubtedly condemned to death. He is now in a safe retreat, and I have
no right to disclose it.”

Maurice’s safe retreat was, in fact, only a neighboring wood, where in
company with the corporal, he was awaiting Jean’s return.

But Jean could not resist the temptation to make this response, which
was far more insulting than if he had simply said:

“We fear informers!”

Strange as it may appear to one who knew Martial’s proud and violent
nature, he did not resent the insult.

“So you distrust me!” he said, sadly.

Jean Lacheneur was silent--another insult.

“But,” insisted Martial, “after what you have just seen and heard you
can no longer suspect me of having cut the ropes which I carried to the
baron.”

“No! I am convinced that you are innocent of that atrocious act.”

“You saw how I punished the man who dared to compromise the honor of the
name of Sairmeuse. And this man is the father of the young girl whom I
wedded to-day.”

“I have seen all this; but I must still reply: ‘Impossible.’”

Jean was amazed at the patience, we should rather say, the humble
resignation displayed by Martial de Sairmeuse.

Instead of rebelling against this manifest injustice, Martial drew from
his pocket the paper which he had just taken from his desk, and handing
it to Jean:

“Those who have brought upon me the shame of having my word doubted
shall be punished for it,” he said grimly. “You do not believe in my
sincerity, Jean. Here is a proof, which I expect you to give to Maurice,
and which cannot fail to convince even you.”

“What is this proof?”

“The letter written by my hand, in exchange for which my father assisted
in the baron’s escape. An inexplicable presentiment prevented me from
burning this compromising letter. To-day, I rejoice that such was the
case. Take it, and use it as you will.”

Anyone save Jean Lacheneur would have been touched by the generosity
of soul. But Jean was implacable. His was a nature which nothing can
disarm, which nothing can mollify; hatred in his heart was a passion
which, instead of growing weaker with time, increased and became more
terrible.

He would have sacrificed anything at that moment for the ineffable joy
of seeing this proud and detested marquis at his feet.

“Very well, I will give it to Maurice,” he responded, coldly.

“It should be a bond of alliance, it seems to me,” said Martial, gently.

Jean Lacheneur made a gesture terrible in its irony and menace.

“A bond of alliance!” he exclaimed. “You are too fast, Monsieur le
Marquis! Have you forgotten all the blood that flows between us? You did
not cut the ropes; but who condemned the innocent Baron d’Escorval to
death? Was it not the Duc de Sairmeuse? An alliance! You have forgotten
that you and yours sent my father to the scaffold! How have you rewarded
the man whose heroic honesty gave you back a fortune? By murdering him,
and by ruining the reputation of his daughter.”

“I offered my name and my fortune to your sister.”

“I would have killed her with my own hand had she accepted your offer.
Let this prove to you that I do not forget. If any great disgrace ever
tarnishes the proud name of Sairmeuse, think of Jean Lacheneur. My hand
will be in it.”

He was so frantic with passion that he forgot his usual caution. By a
violent effort he recovered his self-possession, and in calmer tones he
added:

“And if you are so desirous of seeing Maurice, be at the Reche to-morrow
at mid-day. He will be there.”

Having said this, he turned abruptly aside, sprang over the fence
skirting the avenue, and disappeared in the darkness.

“Jean,” cried Martial, in almost supplicating tones; “Jean, come
back--listen to me!”

No response.

A sort of bewilderment had seized the young marquis, and he stood
motionless and dazed in the middle of the road.

A horse and rider on their way to Montaignac, that nearly ran over him,
aroused him from his stupor, and the consciousness of his acts, which he
had lost while reading the letter from Maurice, came back to him.

Now he could judge of his conduct calmly.

Was it indeed he, Martial, the phlegmatic sceptic, the man who boasted
of his indifference and his insensibility, who had thus forgotten all
self-control?

Alas, yes. And when Blanche de Courtornieu, now and henceforth the
Marquise de Sairmeuse, accused Marie-Anne of being the cause of his
frenzy, she had not been entirely wrong.

Martial, who regarded the opinion of the entire world with disdain,
was rendered frantic by the thought that Marie-Anne despised him, and
considered him a traitor and a coward.

It was for her sake, that in his outburst of rage, he resolved upon
such a startling justification. And if he besought Jean to lead him to
Maurice d’Escorval, it was because he hoped to find Marie-Anne not far
off, and to say to her:

“Appearances were against me, but I am innocent; and I have proved it by
unmasking the real culprit.”

It was to Marie-Anne that he wished this famous letter to be given,
thinking that she, at least, could not fail to be surprised at his
generosity.

His expectations had been disappointed; and now he realized what a
terrible scandal he had created.

“It will be the devil to arrange!” he explained; “but nonsense! it will
be forgotten in a month. The best way will be to face those gossips at
once: I will return immediately.”

He said: “I will return,” in the most deliberate manner; but in
proportion as he neared the chateau, his courage failed him.

The guests must have departed ere this, and Martial concluded that he
would probably find himself alone with his young wife, his father, and
the Marquis de Courtornieu. What reproaches, tears, anger and threats he
would be obliged to encounter.

“No,” he muttered. “I am not such a fool! Let them have a night to calm
themselves. I will not appear until to-morrow.”

But where should he pass the night? He was in evening dress and
bareheaded; he began to feel cold. The house belonging to the duke in
Montaignac would afford him a refuge.

“I shall find a bed, some servants, a fire, and a change of clothing
there--and to-morrow, a horse to return.”

It was quite a distance to walk; but in his present mood this did not
displease him.

The servant who came to open the door when he rapped, was speechless
with astonishment on recognizing him.

“You, Monsieur!” he exclaimed.

“Yes, it is I. Light a good fire in the drawing-room for me, and bring
me a change of clothing.”

The valet obeyed, and soon Martial found himself alone, stretched upon a
sofa before the cheerful blaze.

“It would be a good thing to sleep and forget my troubles,” he said to
himself.

He tried; but it was not until early morning that he fell into a
feverish slumber.

He awoke about nine o’clock, ordered breakfast, concluded to return to
Sairmeuse, and he was eating with a good appetite, when suddenly:

“Have a horse saddled instantly!” he exclaimed.

He had just remembered the rendezvous with Maurice. Why should he not go
there?

He set out at once, and thanks to a spirited horse, he reached the Reche
at half-past eleven o’clock.

The others had not yet arrived; he fastened his horse to a tree near by,
and leisurely climbed to the summit of the hill.

This spot had been the site of Lacheneur’s house. The four walls
remained standing, blackened by fire.

Martial was contemplating the ruins, not without deep emotion, when he
heard a sharp crackling in the underbrush.

He turned; Maurice, Jean, and Corporal Bavois were approaching.

The old soldier carried under his arm a long and narrow package,
enveloped in a piece of green serge. It contained the swords which Jean
Lacheneur had gone to Montaignac during the night to procure from a
retired officer.

“We are sorry to have kept you waiting,” began Maurice, “but you will
observe that it is not yet midday. Since we scarcely expected to see
you----”

“I was too anxious to justify myself not to be here early,” interrupted
Martial.

Maurice shrugged his shoulders disdainfully.

“It is not a question of self-justification, but of fighting,” he said,
in a tone rude even to insolence.

Insulting as were the words and the gesture that accompanied them,
Martial never so much as winced.

“Sorrow has rendered you unjust,” said he, gently, “or Monsieur
Lacheneur here has told you nothing.”

“Jean has told me all.”

“Well, then?”

Martial’s coolness drove Maurice frantic.

“Well,” he replied, with extreme violence, “my hatred is unabated even
if my scorn is diminished. You have owed me an opportunity to avenge
myself, Monsieur, ever since the day we met on the square at Sairmeuse
in the presence of Mademoiselle Lacheneur. You said to me on that
occasion: ‘We shall meet again.’ Here we stand now face to face. What
insults must I heap upon you to decide you to fight?”

A flood of crimson dyed Martial’s face. He seized one of the swords
which Bavois offered him, and assumed an attitude of defence.

“You will have it so,” said he in a husky voice. “The thought of
Marie-Anne can no longer save you.”

But the blades had scarcely crossed before a cry from Jean and from
Corporal Bavois arrested the combat.

“The soldiers!” they exclaimed; “let us fly!”

A dozen soldiers were indeed approaching at the top of their speed.

“Ah! I spoke the truth!” exclaimed Maurice. “The coward came, but the
gendarmes accompanied him.”

He bounded back, and breaking his sword over his knee, he hurled the
fragments in Martial’s face, saying:

“Here, miserable wretch!”

“Wretch!” repeated Jean and Corporal Bavois, “traitor! coward!”

And they fled, leaving Martial thunderstruck.

He struggled hard to regain his composure. The soldiers were very near;
he ran to meet them, and addressing the officer in command, he said,
imperiously:

“Do you know who I am?”

“Yes,” replied the sergeant, respectfully, “you are the son of the Duc
de Sairmeuse.”

“Very well! I forbid you to follow those men.”

The sergeant hesitated at first; then, in a decided tone, he replied:

“I cannot obey you, sir. I have my orders.”

And addressing his men:

“Forward!” he exclaimed. He was about to set the example, when Martial
seized him by the arm.

“At least you will not refuse to tell me who sent you here?”

“Who sent us? The colonel, of course, in obedience to orders from the
_grand prevot_, Monsieur de Courtornieu. He sent the order last
night. We have been hidden in that grove since daybreak. But release
me--_tonnerre_! would you have my expedition fail entirely?”

He hurried away, and Martial, staggering like a drunken man, descended
the slope, and remounted his horse.

But he did not repair to the Chateau de Sairmeuse; he returned to
Montaignac, and passed the remainder of the afternoon in the solitude of
his own room.

That evening he sent two letters to Sairmeuse. One to his father, the
other to his wife.



CHAPTER XXXIX

Terrible as Martial imagined the scandal to be which he had created, his
conception of it by no means equalled the reality.

Had a thunder-bolt burst beneath that roof, the guests at Sairmeuse
could not have been more amazed and horrified.

A shudder passed over the assembly when Martial, terrible in his
passion, flung the crumbled letter full in the face of the Marquis de
Courtornieu.

And when the marquis sank half-fainting into an arm-chair some young
ladies of extreme sensibility could not repress a cry of fear.

For twenty seconds after Martial disappeared with Jean Lacheneur, the
guests stood as motionless as statues, pale, mute, stupefied.

It was Blanche who broke the spell.

While the Marquis de Courtornieu was panting for breath--while the Duc
de Sairmeuse was trembling and speechless with suppressed anger, the
young marquise made an heroic attempt to come to the rescue.

With her hand still aching from Martial’s brutal clasp, a heart swelling
with rage and hatred, and a face whiter than her bridal veil, she had
strength to restrain her tears and to compel her lips to smile.

“Really this is placing too much importance on a trifling
misunderstanding which will be explained to-morrow,” she said, almost
gayly, to those nearest her.

And stepping into the middle of the hall she made a sign to the
musicians to play a country-dance.

But when the first measures floated through the air, the company, as if
by unanimous consent, hastened toward the door.

One might have supposed the chateau on fire--the guests did not
withdraw, they actually fled.

An hour before, the Marquis de Courtornieu and the Duc de Sairmeuse had
been overwhelmed with the most obsequious homage and adulation.

But now there was not one in that assembly daring enough to take them
openly by the hand.

Just when they believed themselves all-powerful they were rudely
precipitated from their lordly eminence. Disgrace and perhaps punishment
were to be their portion.

Heroic to the last, the bride endeavored to stay the tide of retreating
guests.

Stationing herself near the door, with her most bewitching smile upon
her lips, Madame Blanche spared neither flattering words nor entreaties
in her efforts to reassure the deserters.

Vain attempt! Useless sacrifice! Many ladies were not sorry of an
opportunity to repay the young Marquise de Sairmeuse for the disdain and
the caustic words of Blanche de Courtornieu.

Soon all the guests, who had so eagerly presented themselves that
morning, had disappeared, and there remained only one old gentleman who,
on account of his gout, had deemed it prudent not to mingle with the
crowd.

He bowed in passing before the young marquise, and blushing at this
insult to a woman, he departed as the others had done.

Blanche was now alone. There was no longer any necessity for constraint.
There were no more curious witnesses to enjoy her sufferings and to make
comment upon them. With a furious gesture she tore her bridal veil and
the wreath of orange flowers from her head, and trampled them under
foot.

A servant was passing through the hall; she stopped him.

“Extinguish the lights everywhere!” she ordered, with an angry stamp
of her foot as if she had been in her own father’s house, and not at
Sairmeuse.

He obeyed her, and then, with flashing eyes and dishevelled hair, she
hastened to the little salon in which the _denouement_ had taken place.

A crowd of servants surrounded the marquis, who was lying like one
stricken with apoplexy.

“All the blood in his body has flown to his head,” remarked the duke,
with a shrug of his shoulders.

For the duke was furious with his former friends.

He scarcely knew with whom he was most angry, Martial or the Marquis de
Courtornieu.

Martial, by this public confession, had certainly imperilled, if he had
not ruined, their political future.

But, on the other hand, had not the Marquis de Courtornieu represented
a Sairmeuse as being guilty of an act of treason revolting to any
honorable heart?

Buried in a large arm-chair, he sat watching, with contracted brows, the
movements of the servants, when his daughter-in-law entered the room.

She paused before him, and with arms folded tightly across her breast,
she said, angrily:

“Why did you remain here while I was left alone to endure such
humiliation? Ah! had I been a man! All our guests have fled,
Monsieur--all!”

M. de Sairmeuse sprang up.

“Ah, well! what if they have? Let them go to the devil!”

Of the guests that had just left his house there was not one whom the
duke really regretted--not one whom he regarded as an equal. In giving
a marriage-feast for his son, he had bidden all the gentry of the
neighborhood. They had come--very well! They had fled--_bon voyage_!

If the duke cared at all for their desertion, it was only because it
presaged with terrible eloquence the disgrace that was to come.

Still he tried to deceive himself.

“They will return, Madame; you will see them return, humble and
repentant! But where can Martial be?”

The lady’s eyes flashed, but she made no reply.

“Did he go away with the son of that rascal, Lacheneur?”

“I believe so.”

“It will not be long before he returns----”

“Who can say?”

M. de Sairmeuse struck the marble mantel heavily with his clinched fist.

“My God!” he exclaimed; “this is an overwhelming misfortune.”

The young wife believed that he was anxious and angry on her account.
But she was mistaken. He was thinking only of his disappointed ambition.

Whatever he might pretend, the duke secretly confessed his son’s
superiority and his genius for intrigue, and he was now extremely
anxious to consult him.

“He has wrought this evil; it is for him to repair it! And he is capable
of it if he chooses,” he murmured.

Then, aloud, he resumed:

“Martial must be found--he must be found----”

With an angry gesture, Blanche interrupted him.

“You must seek Marie-Anne if you wish to find--my husband.”

The duke was of the same opinion, but he dared not avow it.

“Anger leads you astray, Marquise,” said he.

“I know what I know.”

“Martial will soon make his appearance, believe me. If he went away, he
will soon return. They shall go for him at once, or I will go for him
myself----”

He left the room with a muttered oath, and Blanche approached her
father, who still seemed to be unconscious.

She seized his arm and shook it roughly, saying, in the most peremptory
tone:

“Father! father!”

This voice, which had so often made the Marquis de Courtornieu tremble,
was far more efficacious than eau de cologne. He opened one eye the
least bit in the world, then quickly closed it; but not so quickly that
his daughter failed to discover it.

“I wish to speak with you,” she said; “get up.”

He dared not disobey, and slowly and with difficulty, he raised himself.

“Ah! how I suffer!” he groaned; “how I suffer!”

His daughter glanced at him scornfully; then, in a tone of bitter irony,
she remarked:

“Do you think I am in Paradise?”

“Speak,” sighed the marquis. “What do you wish to say?”

The bride turned haughtily to the servants.

“Leave the room!” she said, imperiously.

They obeyed, and, after she had locked the door:

“Let us speak of Martial,” she began.

At the sound of this name, the marquis bounded from his chair with
clinched fists.

“Ah, the wretch!” he exclaimed.

“Martial is my husband, father.”

“And you!--after what he has done--you dare to defend him?”

“I do not defend him; but I do not wish him to be murdered.”

At that moment the news of Martial’s death would have given the Marquis
de Courtornieu infinite satisfaction.

“You heard, father,” continued Blanche, “the rendezvous appointed
to-morrow, at mid-day, on the Reche. I know Martial; he has been
insulted, and he will go there. Will he encounter a loyal adversary? No.
He will find a crowd of assassins. You alone can prevent him from being
assassinated.”

“I! and how?”

“By sending some soldiers to the Reche, with orders to conceal
themselves in the grove--with orders to arrest these murderers at the
proper moment.”

The marquis gravely shook his head.

“If I do that,” said he, “Martial is quite capable--”

“Of anything! yes, I know it. But what does it matter to you, since I am
willing to assume the responsibility?”

M. de Courtornieu vainly tried to penetrate the bride’s real motive.

“The order to Montaignac must be sent at once,” she insisted.

Had she been less excited she would have discerned the gleam of malice
in her father’s eye. He was thinking that this would afford him an ample
revenge, since he could bring dishonor upon Martial, who had shown so
little regard for the honor of others.

“Very well; since you will have it so,” he said, with feigned
reluctance.

His daughter made haste to bring him ink and pens, and with trembling
hands he prepared a series of minute instructions for the commander at
Montaignac.

Blanche herself gave the letter to a servant, with directions to depart
at once; and it was not until she had seen him set off on a gallop that
she went to her own apartments--the apartments in which Martial had
gathered together all that was most beautiful and luxurious.

But this splendor only aggravated the misery of the deserted wife, for
that she was deserted she did not doubt for a moment. She was sure that
her husband would not return; she did not expect him.

The Duc de Sairmeuse was searching the neighborhood with a party of
servants, but she knew that it was labor lost; that they would not
encounter Martial.

Where could he be? Near Marie-Anne most assuredly--and at the thought a
wild desire to wreak her vengeance on her rival took possession of her
heart.

Martial, at Montaignac, had ended by going to sleep.

Blanche, when daylight came, exchanged the snowy bridal robes for a
black dress, and wandered about the garden like a restless spirit.

She spent most of the day shut up in her room, refusing to allow the
duke, or even her father, to enter.

In the evening, about eight o’clock, they received tidings from Martial.

A servant brought two letters; one, sent by Martial to his father, the
other, to his wife.

For a moment or more Blanche hesitated to open the one intended for her.
It would determine her destiny; she was afraid; she broke the seal and
read:


“Madame la marquise--Between you and me all is ended; reconciliation is
impossible.

“From this moment you are free. I esteem you enough to hope that you
will respect the name of Sairmeuse, from which I cannot relieve you.

“You will agree with me, I am sure, in thinking a quiet separation
preferable to the scandal of a divorce suit.

“My lawyer will pay you an allowance befitting the wife of a man whose
income amounts to three hundred thousand francs.

“Martial de Sairmeuse.”


Blanche staggered beneath this terrible blow. She was indeed deserted,
and deserted, as she supposed, for another.

“Ah!” she exclaimed, “that creature! that creature! I will kill her!”



CHAPTER XL

The twenty-four hours which Blanche had spent in measuring the extent of
her terrible misfortune, the duke had spent in raving and swearing.

He had not even thought of going to bed.

After his fruitless search for his son he returned to the chateau, and
began a continuous tramp to and fro in the great hall.

He was almost sinking from weariness when his son’s letter was handed
him.

It was very brief.

Martial did not vouchsafe any explanation; he did not even mention the
rupture between his wife and himself.


“I cannot return to Sairmeuse,” he wrote, “and yet it is of the utmost
importance that I should see you.

“You will, I trust, approve my determinations when I explain the reasons
that have guided me in making them.

“Come to Montaignac, then, the sooner the better. I am waiting for you.”


Had he listened to the prompting of his impatience, the duke would
have started at once. But how could he thus abandon the Marquis de
Courtornieu, who had accepted his hospitality, and especially Blanche,
his son’s wife?

He must, at least, see them, speak to them, and warn them of his
intended departure.

He attempted this in vain. Mme. Blanche had shut herself up in her own
apartments, and remained deaf to all entreaties for admittance. Her
father had been put to bed, and the physician who had been summoned to
attend him, declared the marquis to be at death’s door.

The duke was therefore obliged to resign himself to the prospect of
another night of suspense, which was almost intolerable to a character
like his.

“To-morrow, after breakfast, I will find some pretext to escape, without
telling them I am going to see Martial,” he thought.

He was spared this trouble. The next morning, at about nine o’clock,
while he was dressing, a servant came to inform him that M. de
Courtornieu and his daughter were awaiting him in the drawing-room.

Much surprised, he hastened down.

When he entered the room, the marquis, who was seated in an arm-chair,
rose, leaning heavily upon the shoulder of Aunt Medea.

Mme. Blanche came rapidly forward to meet the duke, as pale as if every
drop of blood had been drawn from her veins.

“We are going, Monsieur le Duc,” she said, coldly, “and we wish to make
our adieux.”

“What! you are going? Will you not----”

The young bride interrupted him by a sad gesture, and drawing Martial’s
letter from her bosom, she handed it to M. de Sairmeuse, saying.

“Will you do me the favor to peruse this, Monsieur?”

The duke glanced over the short epistle, and his astonishment was so
intense that he could not even find an oath.

“Incomprehensible!” he faltered; “incomprehensible!”

“Incomprehensible, indeed,” repeated the young wife, sadly, but without
bitterness. “I was married yesterday; to-day I am deserted. It would
have been generous to have reflected the evening before and not the next
day. Tell Martial, however, that I forgive him for having destroyed my
life, for having made me the most miserable of creatures. I also forgive
him for the supreme insult of speaking to me of his fortune. I trust he
may be happy. Adieu, Monsieur le Duc, we shall never meet again. Adieu!”

She took her father’s arm, and they were about to retire, when M. de
Sairmeuse hastily threw himself between them and the door.

“You shall not depart thus!” he exclaimed. “I will not suffer it. Wait,
at least, until I have seen Martial. Perhaps he is not as culpable as
you suppose--”

“Enough!” interrupted the marquis; “enough! This is one of those
outrages which can never be repaired. May your conscience forgive you,
as I, myself, forgive you. Farewell!”

This was said so perfectly, with such entire harmony of intonation and
gesture, that M. de Sairmeuse was bewildered.

With an absolutely wonderstruck air he watched the marquis and his
daughter depart, and they had been gone some moments before he recovered
himself sufficiently to exclaim:

“Old hypocrite! does he believe me his dupe?”

His dupe! M. de Sairmeuse was so far from being his dupe, that his next
thought was:

“What is to follow this farce? He says that he pardons us--that means
that he has some crushing blow in store for us.”

This conviction filled him with disquietude. He really felt unable to
cope successfully with the perfidious marquis.

“But Martial is a match for him!” he exclaimed. “Yes, I must see Martial
at once.”

So great was his anxiety that he lent a helping hand in harnessing the
horses he had ordered, and when the carriage was ready, he announced his
determination to drive himself.

As he urged the horses furiously on he tried to reflect, but the most
contradictory ideas seethed in his brain, and he lost all power to
consider the situation calmly.

He burst into Martial’s room like a tornado. “I think you must certainly
have gone mad, Marquis,” he exclaimed. “That is the only valid excuse
you can offer.”

But Martial, who had been expecting this visit, had prepared himself for
it.

“Never, on the contrary, have I felt more calm and composed in mind,”
 he replied. “Allow me to ask you one question. Was it you who sent the
soldiers to the rendezvous which Maurice d’Escorval had appointed?”

“Marquis!”

“Very well! Then it was another act of infamy on the part of the Marquis
de Courtornieu.”

The duke made no reply. In spite of his faults and his vices,
this haughty man possessed the characteristic of the old French
nobility--fidelity to his word and undoubted valor.

He thought it perfectly natural, even necessary, that Martial should
fight with Maurice; and he thought it a contemptible act to send armed
soldiers to seize an honest and confiding opponent.

“This is the second time,” pursued Martial, “that this scoundrel has
attempted to bring dishonor upon our name; and if I desire to convince
people of the truth of this assertion, I must break off all connection
with him and his daughter. I have done this. I do not regret it, since I
married her only out of deference to your wishes, and because it seemed
necessary for me to marry, and because all women, save one who can never
be mine, are alike to me.”

Such utterances were not at all calculated to reassure the duke.

“This sentiment is very noble, no doubt,” said he; “but it has none the
less ruined the political prospects of our house.”

An almost imperceptible smile curved Martial’s lips.

“I believe, on the contrary, that I have saved them,” he replied.

“It is useless for us to attempt to deceive ourselves; this whole affair
of the insurrection has been abominable, and you have good reason to
bless the opportunity of freeing yourself from the responsibility of it
which this quarrel gives you. With a little address, you can throw all
the odium upon the Marquis de Courtornieu, and keep for yourself only
the prestige of valuable service rendered.”

The duke’s face brightened.

“Zounds, Marquis!” he exclaimed; “that is a good idea! In the future I
shall be infinitely less afraid of Courtornieu.”

Martial remained thoughtful.

“It is not the Marquis de Courtornieu whom I fear,” he murmured, “but
his daughter--my wife.”



CHAPTER XLI

One must have lived in the country to know with what inconceivable
rapidity news flies from mouth to mouth.

Strange as it may seem, the news of the scene at the chateau reached
Father Poignot’s farm-house that same evening.

It had not been three hours since Maurice, Jean Lacheneur and Bavois
left the house, promising to re-cross the frontier that same night.

Abbe Midon had decided to say nothing to M. d’Escorval of his son’s
return, and to conceal Marie-Anne’s presence in the house. The baron’s
condition was so critical that the merest trifle might turn the scale.

About ten o’clock the baron fell asleep, and the abbe and Mme.
d’Escorval went downstairs to talk with Marie-Anne. As they were sitting
there Poignot’s eldest son entered in a state of great excitement.

After supper he had gone with some of his acquaintances to admire
the splendors of the fete, and he now came rushing back to relate the
strange events of the evening to his father’s guests.

“It is inconceivable!” murmured the abbe.

He knew but too well, and the others comprehended it likewise, that
these strange events rendered their situation more perilous than ever.

“I cannot understand how Maurice could commit such an act of folly after
what I had just said to him. The baron’s most cruel enemy has been his
own son. We must wait until to-morrow before deciding upon anything.”

The next day they heard of the meeting at the Reche. A peasant who, from
a distance, had witnessed the preliminaries of the duel which had not
been fought, was able to give them the fullest details.

He had seen the two adversaries take their places, then the soldiers run
to the spot, and afterward pursue Maurice, Jean and Bavois.

But he was sure that the soldiers had not overtaken them. He had met
them five hours afterward, harassed and furious; and the officer in
charge of the expedition declared their failure to be the fault of the
Marquis de Sairmeuse, who had detained them.

That same day Father Poignot informed the abbe that the Duc de Sairmeuse
and the Marquis de Courtornieu were at variance. It was the talk of the
country. The marquis had returned to his chateau, accompanied by his
daughter, and the duke had gone to Montaignac.

The abbe’s anxiety on receiving this intelligence was so poignant that
he could not conceal it from Baron d’Escorval.

“You have heard something, my friend,” said the baron.

“Nothing, absolutely nothing.”

“Some new danger threatens us.”

“None, I swear it.”

The priest’s protestations did not convince the baron.

“Oh, do not deny it!” he exclaimed. “Night before last, when you entered
my room after I awoke, you were paler than death, and my wife had
certainly been crying. What does all this mean?”

Usually, when the cure did not wish to reply to the sick man’s
questions, it was sufficient to tell him that conversation and
excitement would retard his recovery; but this time the baron was not so
docile.

“It will be very easy for you to restore my tranquillity,” he said.
“Confess now, that you are trembling lest they discover my retreat.
This fear is torturing me also. Very well, swear to me that you will not
allow them to take me alive, and then my mind will be at rest.”

“I cannot take such an oath as that,” said the cure, turning pale.

“And why?” insisted M. d’Escorval. “If I am recaptured, what will
happen? They will nurse me, and then, as soon as I can stand upon my
feet, they will shoot me down. Would it be a crime to save me from
such suffering? You are my best friend; swear to render me this supreme
service. Would you have me curse you for saving my life?”

The abbe made no response; but his eye, voluntarily or involuntarily,
turned with a peculiar expression to the box of medicine standing upon
the table near by.

Did he wish to be understood as saying:

“I will do nothing; but you will find a poison there.”

M. d’Escorval understood it in this way, for it was with an accent of
gratitude that he murmured:

“Thanks!”

Now that he felt that he was master of his life he breathed more freely.
From that moment his condition, so long desperate, began to improve.

“I can defy all my enemies from this hour,” he said, with a gayety which
certainly was not feigned.

Day after day passed and the abbe’s sinister apprehensions were not
realized; he, too, began to regain confidence.

Instead of causing an increase of severity, Maurice’s and Jean
Lacheneur’s frightful imprudence had been, as it were, the point of
departure for a universal indulgence.

One might reasonably have supposed that the authorities of Montaignac
had forgotten, and desired to have forgotten, if that were possible,
Lacheneur’s conspiracy, and the abominable slaughter for which it had
been made the pretext.

They soon heard at the farm that Maurice and the brave corporal had
succeeded in reaching Piedmont.

No allusion was made to Jean Lacheneur, so it was supposed that he had
not left the country; but they had no reason to fear for his safety,
since he was not upon the proscribed list.

Later, it was rumored that the Marquis de Courtornieu was ill, and that
Mme. Blanche did not leave his bedside.

Soon afterward, Father Poignot, on returning from Montaignac, reported
that the duke had just passed a week in Paris, and that he was now on
his way home with one more decoration--another proof of royal favor--and
that he had succeeded in obtaining an order for the release of all the
conspirators, who were now in prison.

It was impossible to doubt this intelligence, for the Montaignac papers
mentioned this fact, with all the circumstances on the following day.

The abbe attributed this sudden and happy change entirely to the rupture
between the duke and the marquis, and this was the universal opinion in
the neighborhood. Even the retired officers remarked:

“The duke is decidedly better than he is supposed to be, and if he has
been severe, it is only because he was influenced by that odious Marquis
de Courtornieu.”

Marie-Anne alone suspected the truth. A secret presentiment told her
that it was Martial de Sairmeuse who had shaken off his wonted apathy,
and was working these changes and using and abusing his ascendancy over
the mind of his father.

“And it is for your sake,” whispered an inward voice, “that Martial is
thus working. What does this careless egotist care for these obscure
peasants, whose names he does not even know? If he protects them, it is
only that he may have a right to protect you, and those whom you love!”

With these thoughts in her mind, she could not but feel her aversion to
Martial diminish.

Was not such conduct truly heroic in a man whose dazzling offers she had
refused? Was there not real moral grandeur in the feeling that induced
Martial to reveal a secret which might ruin the political fortunes of
his house, rather than be suspected of an unworthy action? And still
the thought of this _grande passion_ which she had inspired in so truly
great a man never once made her heart quicken its throbbing.

Alas! nothing was capable of touching her heart now; nothing seemed to
reach her through the gloomy sadness that enveloped her.

She was but the ghost of the formerly beautiful and radiant Marie-Anne.
Her quick, alert tread had become slow and dragging, often she sat for
whole days motionless in her chair, her eyes fixed upon vacancy, her
lips contracted as if by a spasm, while great tears rolled silently down
her cheeks.

Abbe Midon, who was greatly disquieted on her account, often attempted
to question her.

“You are suffering, my child,” he said, kindly. “What is the matter?”

“I am not ill, Monsieur.”

“Why do you not confide in me? Am I not your friend? What do you fear?”

She shook her head sadly and replied:

“I have nothing to confide.”

She said this, and yet she was dying of sorrow and anguish.

Faithful to the promise she had made Maurice, she had said nothing of
her condition, or of the marriage solemnized in the little church at
Vigano. And she saw with inexpressible terror, the approach of
the moment when she could no longer keep her secret. Her agony was
frightful; but what could she do!

Fly? but where should she go? And by going, would she not lose all
chance of hearing from Maurice, which was the only hope that sustained
her in this trying hour?

She had almost determined on flight when circumstances--providentially,
it seemed to her--came to her aid.

Money was needed at the farm. The guests were unable to obtain any
without betraying their whereabouts, and Father Poignot’s little store
was almost exhausted.

Abbe Midon was wondering what they were to do, when Marie-Anne told him
of the will which Chanlouineau had made in her favor, and of the money
concealed beneath the hearth-stone in the best chamber.

“I might go to the Borderie at night,” suggested Marie-Anne, “enter the
house, which is unoccupied, obtain the money and bring it here. I have a
right to do so, have I not?”

But the priest did not approve this step.

“You might be seen,” said he, “and who knows--perhaps arrested. If you
were questioned, what plausible explanation could you give?”

“What shall I do, then?”

“Act openly; you are not compromised. Make your appearance in Sairmeuse
to-morrow as if you had just returned from Piedmont; go to the notary,
take possession of your property, and install yourself at the Borderie.”

Marie-Anne shuddered.

“Live in Chanlouineau’s house,” she faltered. “I alone!”

“Heaven will protect you, my dear child. I can see only advantages in
your installation at the Borderie. It will be easy to communicate with
you; and with ordinary precautions there can be no danger. Before your
departure we will decide upon a place of rendezvous, and two or three
times a week you can meet Father Poignot there. And, in the course of
two or three months you can be still more useful to us. When people have
become accustomed to your residence at the Borderie, we will take the
baron there. His convalescence will be much more rapid there, than here
in this cramped and narrow loft, where we are obliged to conceal him
now, and where he is really suffering for light and air.”

So it was decided that Father Poignot should accompany Marie-Anne to the
frontier that very night; there she would take the diligence that
ran between Piedmont and Montaignac, passing through the village of
Sairmeuse.

It was with the greatest care that the abbe dictated to Marie-Anne the
story she was to tell of her sojourn in foreign lands. All that she
said, and all her answers to questions must tend to prove that Baron
d’Escorval was concealed near Turin.

The plan was carried out in every particular; and the next day, about
eight o’clock, the people of Sairmeuse were greatly astonished to see
Marie-Anne alight from the diligence.

“Monsieur Lacheneur’s daughter has returned!”

The words flew from lip to lip with marvellous rapidity, and soon all
the inhabitants of the village were gathered at the doors and windows.

They saw the poor girl pay the driver, and enter the inn, followed by a
boy bearing a small trunk.

In the city, curiosity has some shame; it hides itself while it spies
into the affairs of its neighbors; but in the country it has no such
scruples.

When Marie-Anne emerged from the inn, she found a crowd awaiting her
with open mouths and staring eyes.

And more than twenty people making all sorts of comments, followed her
to the door of the notary.

He was a man of importance, this notary, and he welcomed Marie-Anne with
all the deference due an heiress of an unencumbered property, worth from
forty to fifty thousand francs.

But jealous of his renown for perspicuity, he gave her clearly to
understand that he, being a man of experience, had divined that love
alone had dictated Chanlouineau’s last will and testament.

Marie-Anne’s composure and resignation made him really angry.

“You forget what brings me here,” she said; “you do not tell me what I
have to do!”

The notary, thus interrupted, made no further attempts at consolation.

“_Pestet!_” he thought, “she is in a hurry to get possession of her
property--the avaricious creature!”

Then aloud:

“The business can be terminated at once, for the justice of the peace
is at liberty to-day, and he can go with us to break the seals this
afternoon.”

So, before evening, all the legal requirements were complied with, and
Marie-Anne was formally installed at the Borderie.

She was alone in Chanlouineau’s house--alone! Night came on and a great
terror seized her heart. It seemed to her that the doors were about to
open, that this man who had loved her so much would appear before her,
and that she would hear his voice as she heard it for the last time in
his grim prison-cell.

She fought against these foolish fears, lit a lamp, and went through
this house--now hers--in which everything spoke so forcibly of its
former owner.

Slowly she examined the different rooms on the lower floor, noting the
recent repairs which had been made and the conveniences which had been
added, and at last she ascended to that room above which Chanlouineau
had made the tabernacle of his passion.

Here, everything was magnificent, far more so than his words had led her
to suppose. The poor peasant who made his breakfast off a crust and a
bit of onion had lavished a small fortune on the decorations of this
apartment, designed as a sanctuary for his idol.

“How he loved me!” murmured Marie-Anne, moved by that emotion, the bare
thought of which had awakened the jealousy of Maurice.

But she had neither the time nor the right to yield to her feelings.
Father Poignot was doubtless, even then, awaiting her at the rendezvous.

She lifted the hearth-stone, and found the sum of money which
Chanlouineau had named.

The next morning, when he awoke, the abbe received the money.

Now, Marie-Anne could breathe freely; and this peace, after so many
trials and agitations, seemed to her almost happiness.

Faithful to the abbe’s instructions, she lived alone; but, by frequent
visits, she accustomed the people of the neighborhood to her presence.

Yes, she would have been almost happy, could she have had news of
Maurice. What had become of him? Why did he give no sign of life? What
would she not have given in exchange for some word of counsel and of
love from him?

The time was fast approaching when she would require a confidant; and
there was no one in whom she could confide.

In this hour of extremity, when she really felt that her reason was
failing her, she remembered the old physician at Vigano, who had been
one of the witnesses to her marriage.

“He would help me if I called upon him for aid,” she thought.

She had no time to temporize or to reflect; she wrote to him
immediately, giving the letter in charge of a youth in the neighborhood.

“The gentleman says you may rely upon him,” said the messenger on his
return.

That very evening Marie-Anne heard someone rap at her door. It was the
kind-hearted old man who had come to her relief.

He remained at the Borderie nearly a fortnight.

When he departed one morning, before daybreak, he took away with him
under his large cloak an infant--a boy--whom he had sworn to cherish as
his own child.



CHAPTER XLII

To quit Sairmeuse without any display of violence had cost Blanche an
almost superhuman effort.

The wildest anger convulsed her soul at the very moment, when, with
an assumption of melancholy dignity, she murmured those words of
forgiveness.

Ah! had she obeyed the dictates of her resentment!

But her indomitable vanity aroused within her the heroism of a gladiator
dying on the arena, with a smile upon his lips.

Falling, she intended to fall gracefully.

“No one shall see me weep; no one shall hear me complain,” she said to
her despondent father; “try to imitate me.”

And on her return to the Chateau de Courtornieu, she was a stoic.

Her face, although pale, was as immobile as marble, beneath the curious
gaze of the servants.

“I am to be called mademoiselle as in the past,” she said, imperiously.
“Anyone forgetting this order will be dismissed.”

A maid forgot that very day, and uttered the prohibited word, “madame.”
 The poor girl was instantly dismissed, in spite of her tears and
protestations.

All the servants were indignant.

“Does she hope to make us forget that she is married and that her
husband has deserted her?” they queried.

Alas! she wished to forget it herself. She wished to annihilate all
recollection of that fatal day whose sun had seen her a maiden, a wife,
and a widow.

For was she not really a widow?

Only it was not death which had deprived her of her husband, but an
odious rival--an infamous and perfidious creature lost to all sense of
shame.

And yet, though she had been disdained, abandoned, and repulsed, she was
no longer free.

She belonged to the man whose name she bore like a badge of
servitude--to the man who hated her, who fled from her.

She was not yet twenty; and this was the end of her youth, of her life,
of her hopes, and even of her dreams.

Society condemned her to solitude, while Martial was free to rove
wheresoever fancy might lead him.

Now she saw the disadvantage of isolating one’s self. She had not been
without friends in her school-girl days; but after leaving the convent
she had alienated them by her haughtiness, on finding them not as high
in rank, nor as rich as herself. She was now reduced to the irritating
consolations of Aunt Medea, who was a worthy person, undoubtedly, but
her tears flowed quite as freely for the loss of a cat, as for the death
of a relative.

But Blanche bravely resolved that she would conceal her grief and
despair in the recesses of her own heart.

She drove about the country; she wore the prettiest dresses in her
_trousseau_; she forced herself to appear gay and indifferent.

But on going to attend high mass in Sairmeuse the following Sunday, she
realized the futility of her efforts.

People did not look at her haughtily, or even curiously; but they turned
away their heads to laugh, and she overheard remarks upon the maiden
widow which pierced her very soul.

They mocked her; they ridiculed her!

“Oh! I will have my revenge!” she muttered.

But she had not waited for these insults before thinking of vengeance;
and she had found her father quite ready to assist her in her plans.

For the first time the father and the daughter were in accord.

“The Duc de Sairmeuse shall learn what it costs to aid in the escape
of a prisoner and to insult a man like me. Fortune, favor, position--he
shall lose all! I hope to see him ruined and dishonored at my feet.
You shall see that day! you shall see that day!” said the marquis,
vehemently.

But, unfortunately for him and his plans, he was extremely ill for three
days, after the scene at Sairmeuse; then he wasted three days more in
composing a report, which was intended to crush his former ally.

This delay ruined him, since it gave Martial time to perfect his plans
and to send the Duc de Sairmeuse to Paris skilfully indoctrinated.

And what did the duke say to the King, who accorded him such a gracious
reception?

He undoubtedly pronounced the first reports false, reduced the
Montaignac revolution to its proper proportions, represented Lacheneur
as a fool, and his followers as inoffensive idiots.

Perhaps he led the King to suppose that the Marquis de Courtornieu
might have provoked the outbreak by undue severity. He had served under
Napoleon, and possibly had thought it necessary to make a display of his
zeal. There have been such cases.

So far as he himself was concerned, he deeply deplored the mistakes into
which he had been led by the ambitious marquis, upon whom he cast most
of the responsibility for the blood which had been shed.

The result of all this was, that when the Marquis de Courtornieu’s
report reached Paris, it was answered by a decree depriving him of the
office of _grand prevot_.

This unexpected blow crushed him.

To think that a man as shrewd, as subtle-minded, as quick-witted, and
adroit as himself--a man who had passed through so many troubled epochs,
who had served with the same obsequious countenance all the masters who
would accept his services--to think that such a man should have been
thus duped and betrayed!

“It must be that old imbecile, the Duc de Sairmeuse, who has manoeuvred
so skilfully, and with so much address,” he said. “But who advised him?
I cannot imagine who it could have been.”

Who it was Mme. Blanche knew only too well.

She recognized Martial’s hand in all this, as Marie-Anne had done.

“Ah! I was not deceived in him,” she thought; “he is the great
diplomatist I believed him to be. At his age to outwit my father, an old
politician of such experience and acknowledged astuteness! And he does
all this to please Marie-Anne,” she continued, frantic with rage. “It
is the first step toward obtaining pardon for the friends of that vile
creature. She has unbounded influence over him, and so long as she lives
there is no hope for me. But, patience.”

She was patient, realizing that he who wishes to surely attain his
revenge must wait, dissimulate, _prepare_ an opportunity, but not force
it.

What her revenge should be she had not yet decided; but she already had
her eye upon a man whom she believed would be a willing instrument in
her hands, and capable of doing anything for money.

But how had such a man chanced to cross the path of Mme. Blanche? How
did it happen that she was cognizant of the existence of such a person?

It was the result of one of those simple combinations of circumstances
which go by the name of chance.

Burdened with remorse, despised and jeered at, and stoned whenever he
showed himself upon the street, and horror-stricken whenever he thought
of the terrible threats of Balstain, the Piedmontese innkeeper, Chupin
left Montaignac and came to beg an asylum at the Chateau de Sairmeuse.

In his ignorance, he thought that the _grand seigneur_ who had employed
him, and who had profited by his treason, owed him, over and above the
promised reward, aid and protection.

But the servants shunned him. They would not allow him a seat at the
kitchen-table, nor would the grooms allow him to sleep in the stables.
They threw him a bone, as they would have thrown it to a dog; and he
slept where he could.

He bore all this uncomplainingly, deeming himself fortunate in being
able to purchase comparative safety at such a price.

But when the duke returned from Paris with a policy of forgetfulness and
conciliation in his pocket, he would no longer tolerate the presence of
this man, who was the object of universal execration.

He ordered the dismissal of Chupin.

The latter resisted, swearing that he would not leave Sairmeuse unless
he was forcibly expelled, or unless he received the order from the lips
of the duke himself.

This obstinate resistance was reported to the duke. It made him
hesitate; but the necessity of the moment, and a word from Martial,
decided him.

He sent for Chupin and told him that he must not visit Sairmeuse again
under any pretext whatever, softening the harshness of expulsion,
however, by the offer of a small sum of money.

But Chupin sullenly refused the money, gathered his belongings together,
and departed, shaking his clinched fist at the chateau, and vowing
vengeance on the Sairmeuse family. Then he went to his old home, where
his wife and his two boys still lived.

He seldom left the house, and then only to satisfy his passion for
hunting. At such times, instead of hiding and surrounding himself with
every precaution, as he had done, before shooting a squirrel or a few
partridges, in former times, he went boldly to the Sairmeuse or the
Courtornieu forests, shot his game, and brought it home openly, almost
defiantly.

The rest of the time he spent in a state of semi-intoxication, for he
drank constantly and more and more immoderately. When he had taken more
than usual, his wife and his sons generally attempted to obtain money
from him, and if persuasions failed they resorted to blows.

For he had never given them the reward of his treason. What had he done
with the twenty thousand francs in gold which had been paid him? No one
knew. His sons believed he had buried it somewhere; but they tried in
vain to wrest his secret from him.

All the people in the neighborhood were aware of this state of affairs,
and regarded it as a just punishment for the traitor. Mme. Blanche
overheard one of the gardeners telling the story to two of his
assistants:

“Ah, the man is an old scoundrel!” he said, his face crimson with
indignation. “He should be in the galleys, and not at large among
respectable people.”

“He is a man who would serve your purpose,” the voice of hatred
whispered in Blanche’s ear.

“But how can I find an opportunity to confer with him?” she wondered.
Mme. Blanche was too prudent to think of hazarding a visit to his house,
but she remembered that he hunted occasionally in the Courtornieu woods,
and that it might be possible for her to meet him there.

“It will only require a little perseverance and a few long walks,” she
said to herself.

But it cost poor Aunt Medea, the inevitable chaperon, two long weeks of
almost continued walking.

“Another freak!” groaned the poor relative, overcome with fatigue; “my
niece is certainly crazy!”

But one lovely afternoon in May Blanche discovered what she sought.

It was in a sequestered spot near the lake. Chupin was tramping sullenly
along with his gun and glancing suspiciously on every side! Not that
he feared the game-keeper or a verbal process, but wherever he went, he
fancied he saw Balstain walking in his shadow, with that terrible knife
in his hand.

Seeing Mme. Blanche he tried to hide himself in the forest, but she
prevented it by calling:

“Father Chupin!”

He hesitated for a moment, then he paused, dropped his gun, and waited.

Aunt Medea was pale with fright.

“Blessed Jesus!” she murmured, pressing her niece’s arm; “why do you
call that terrible man?”

“I wish to speak with him.”

“What, Blanche, do you dare----”

“I must!”

“No, I cannot allow it. _I_ must not----”

“There, that is enough,” said Blanche, with one of those imperious
glances that deprive a dependent of all strength and courage; “quite
enough.”

Then, in gentler tones:

“I must talk with this man,” she added.

“You, Aunt Medea, will remain at a little distance. Keep a close watch
on every side, and if you see anyone approaching, call me, whoever it
may be.”

Aunt Medea, submissive as she was ever wont to be, obeyed; and Mme.
Blanche advanced toward the old poacher, who stood as motionless as the
trunks of the giant trees around him.

“Well, my good Father Chupin, what sort of sport have you had to-day?”
 she began, when she was a few steps from him.

“What do you want with me?” growled Chupin; “for you do want something,
or you would not trouble yourself about such as I.”

It required all Blanche’s determination to repress a gesture of fright
and of disgust; but, in a resolute tone, she replied:

“Yes, it is true that I have a favor to ask you.”

“Ah, ha! I supposed so.”

“A mere trifle which will cost you no trouble and for which you shall be
well paid.”

She said this so carelessly that one would really have supposed the
service was unimportant; but cleverly as she played her part, Chupin was
not deceived.

“No one asks trifling services of a man like me,” he said coarsely.

“Since I have served the good cause, at the peril of my life, people
seem to suppose that they have a right to come to me with their money in
their hands, when they desire any dirty work done. It is true that I was
well paid for that other job; but I would like to melt all the gold and
pour it down the throats of those who gave it to me.

“Ah! I know what it costs the humble to listen to the words of the
great! Go your way; and if you have any wickedness in your head, do it
yourself!”

He shouldered his gun and was moving away, when Mme. Blanche said,
coldly:

“It was because I knew your wrongs that I stopped you; I thought you
would be glad to serve me, because I hate the Sairmeuse.”

These words excited the interest of the old poacher, and he paused.

“I know very well that you hate the Sairmeuse now--but----”

“But what!”

“In less than a month you will be reconciled. And you will pay the
expenses of the war and of the reconciliation? That old wretch,
Chupin----”

“We shall never be reconciled.”

“Hum!” he growled, after deliberating awhile. “And if I should aid you,
what compensation will you give me?”

“I will give you whatever you desire--money, land, a house----”

“Many thanks. I desire something quite different.”

“What? Name your conditions.”

Chupin reflected a moment, then he replied:

“This is what I desire. _I_ have enemies--I do not even feel safe in my
own house. My sons abuse me when I have been drinking; my wife is quite
capable of poisoning my wine; I tremble for my life and for my money.
I cannot endure this existence much longer. Promise me an asylum in the
Chateau de Courtornieu, and I am yours. In your house I shall be safe.
But let it be understood, I will not be ill-treated by the servants as I
was at Sairmeuse.”

“It shall be as you desire.”

“Swear it by your hope of heaven.”

“I swear.”

There was such an evident sincerity in her accent that Chupin was
reassured. He leaned toward her, and said, in a low voice:

“Now tell me your business.”

His small gray eyes glittered with a demoniac light; his thin lips were
tightly drawn over his sharp teeth; he was evidently expecting some
proposition to murder, and he was ready.

His attitude showed this so plainly that Blanche shuddered.

“Really, what I ask of you is almost nothing,” she replied. “I only wish
you to watch the Marquis de Sairmeuse.”

“Your husband?”

“Yes; my husband. I wish to know what he does, where he goes, and what
persons he sees. I wish to know how each moment of his time is spent.”

“What! seriously, frankly, is this all that you desire of me?” Chupin
asked.

“For the present, yes. My plans are not yet decided. It depends upon
circumstances what action I shall take.”

“You can rely upon me,” he responded; “but I must have a little time.”

“Yes, I understand. To-day is Saturday; will you be ready to report on
Thursday?”

“In five days? Yes, probably.”

“In that case, meet me here on Thursday, at this same hour.”

A cry from Aunt Medea interrupted them.

“Someone is coming!” Mme. Blanche exclaimed. “Quick! we must not be seen
together. Conceal yourself.”

With a bound the old poacher disappeared in the forest.

A servant had approached Aunt Medea, and was speaking to her with great
animation.

Blanche hastened toward them.

“Ah! Mademoiselle,” exclaimed the servant, “we have been seeking you
everywhere for three hours. Your father, monsieur le marquis--_mon
Dieu_! what a misfortune! A physician has been summoned.”

“Is my father dead?”

“No, Mademoiselle, no; but--how can I tell you? When the marquis went
out this morning his actions were very strange, and--and--when he
returned----”

As he spoke the servant tapped his forehead with the end of his
forefinger.

“You understand me, Mademoiselle--when he returned, reason had fled!”

Without waiting for her terrified aunt, Blanche darted in the direction
of the chateau.

“How is the marquis?” she inquired of the first servant whom she met.

“He is in his room on the bed; he is more quiet now.”

She had already reached his room. He was seated upon the bed, and two
servants were watching his every movement. His face was livid, and
a white foam had gathered upon his lips. Still, he recognized his
daughter.

“Here you are,” said he. “I was waiting for you.”

She remained upon the threshold, quite overcome, although she was
neither tender-hearted nor impressionable.

“My father!” she faltered. “Good heavens! what has happened?”

He uttered a discordant laugh.

“Ah, ha!” he exclaimed, “I met him. Do you doubt me? I tell you that I
saw the wretch. I know him well; have I not seen his cursed face before
my eyes for more than a month--for it never leaves me. I saw him. It was
in the forest near the Sanguille rocks. You know the place; it is always
dark there, on account of the trees. I was returning slowly, thinking of
him, when suddenly he sprang up before me, extending his arms as if to
bar my passage.

“‘Come,’ said he, ‘you must come and join me.’ He was armed with a gun;
he fired----”

The marquis paused, and Blanche summoned sufficient courage to approach
him. For more than a minute she fastened upon him that cold and
persistent look that is said to exercise such power over those who have
lost their reason; then, shaking him energetically by the arm, she said,
almost roughly:

“Control yourself, father. You are the victim of an hallucination. It is
impossible that you have seen the man of whom you speak.”

Who it was that M. de Courtornieu supposed he had seen, Blanche knew
only too well; but she dared not, could not, utter the name.

But the marquis had resumed his incoherent narrative.

“Was I dreaming?” he continued. “No, it was certainly Lacheneur who
confronted me. I am sure of it, and the proof is, that he reminded me of
a circumstance which occurred in my youth, and which was known only to
him and me. It happened during the Reign of Terror. He was all-powerful
in Montaignac; and I was accused of being in correspondence with the
_emigres_. My property had been confiscated; and every moment I was
expecting to feel the hand of the executioner upon my shoulder, when
Lacheneur took me into his house. He concealed me; he furnished me with
a passport; he saved my money, and he saved my head--I sentenced him to
death. That is the reason why I have seen him again. I must rejoin him;
he told me so--I am a dying man!”

He fell back upon his pillows, pulled the sheet up over his face, and,
lying there, rigid and motionless, one might readily have supposed it
was a corpse, whose outlines could be vaguely discerned through the
bed-coverings.

Mute with horror, the servants exchanged frightened glances.

Such baseness and ingratitude amazed them. It seemed incomprehensible
to them, under such circumstances, that the marquis had not pardoned
Lacheneur.

Mme. Blanche alone retained her presence of mind. Turning to her
father’s valet, she said:

“It is not possible that anyone has attempted to injure my father?”

“I beg your pardon, Mademoiselle, a little more and he would have been
killed.”

“How do you know this?”

“In undressing the marquis I noticed that he had received a wound in
the head. I also examined his hat, and in it I found three holes, which
could only have been made by bullets.”

The worthy _valet de chambre_ was certainly more agitated than the
daughter.

“Then someone must have attempted to assassinate my father,” she
murmured, “and this attack of delirium has been brought on by fright.
How can we find out who the would-be murderer was?”

The servant shook his head.

“I suspect that old poacher, who is always prowling around, is the
guilty man--Chupin.”

“No, it could not have been he.”

“Ah! I am almost sure of it. There is no one else in the neighborhood
capable of such an evil deed.”

Mme. Blanche could not give her reasons for declaring Chupin innocent.
Nothing in the world would have induced her to admit that she had met
him, talked with him for more than half an hour, and just parted from
him.

She was silent. In a few moments the physician arrived.

He removed the covering from M. de Courtornieu’s face--he was almost
compelled to use force to do it--examined the patient with evident
anxiety, then ordered mustard plasters, applications of ice to the head,
leeches, and a potion, for which a servant was to gallop to Montaignac
at once. All was bustle and confusion.

When the physician left the sick-room, Mme. Blanche followed him.

“Well, Doctor,” she said, with a questioning look.

With considerable hesitation, he replied:

“People sometimes recover from such attacks.”

It really mattered little to Blanche whether her father recovered or
died, but she felt that an opportunity to recover her lost _prestige_
was now afforded her. If she desired to turn public opinion against
Martial, she must improvise for herself an entirely different
reputation. If she could erect a pedestal upon which she could pose as a
patient victim, her satisfaction would be intense. Such an occasion now
offered itself, and she seized it at once.

Never did a devoted daughter lavish more touching and delicate
attentions upon a sick father. It was impossible to induce her to leave
his bedside for a moment. It was only with great difficulty that they
could persuade her to sleep for a couple of hours, in an armchair in the
sick-room.

But while she was playing the role of Sister of Charity, which she had
imposed upon herself, her thoughts followed Chupin. What was he doing in
Montaignac? Was he watching Martial as he had promised? How slow the day
appointed for the meeting was in coming!

It came at last, however, and after intrusting her father to the care of
Aunt Medea, Blanche made her escape.

The old poacher was awaiting her at the appointed place.

“Speak!” said Mme. Blanche.

“I would do so willingly, only I have nothing to tell you.”

“What! you have not watched the marquis?”

“Your husband? Excuse me, I have followed him; like his own shadow. But
what would you have me say to you; since the duke left for Paris, your
husband has charge of everything. Ah! you would not recognize him! He
is always busy now. He is up at cock-crow and he goes to bed with
the chickens. He writes letters all the morning. In the afternoon he
receives all who call upon him. The retired officers are hand and glove
in with him. He has reinstated five or six of them, and he has granted
pensions to two others. He seldom goes out, and never in the evening.”

He paused and for more than a minute Blanche was silent. She was
confused and agitated by the question that rose to her lips. What
humiliation! But she conquered her embarrassment, and turning away her
head to hide her crimson face, she said:

“But he certainly has a mistress!”

Chupin burst into a noisy laugh.

“Well, we have come to it at last,” he said, with an audacious
familiarity that made Blanche shudder. “You mean that scoundrel
Lacheneur’s daughter, do you not? that stuck-up minx, Marie-Anne?”

Blanche felt that denial was useless.

“Yes,” she answered; “it is Marie-Anne that I mean.”

“Ah, well! she has been neither seen nor heard from. She must have fled
with another of her lovers, Maurice d’Escorval.”

“You are mistaken.”

“Oh, not at all! Of all the Lacheneurs only Jean remains, and he lives
like the vagabond that he is, by poaching and stealing. Day and night he
rambles through the woods with his gun on his shoulder. He is frightful
to look upon, a perfect skeleton, and his eyes glitter like live coals.
If he ever meets me, my account will be settled then and there.”

Blanche turned pale. It was Jean Lacheneur who had fired at the marquis
then. She did not doubt it in the least.

“Very well!” said she, “I, myself, am sure that Marie-Anne is in the
neighborhood, concealed in Montaignac, probably. I must know. Endeavor
to discover her retreat before Monday, when I will meet you here again.”

“I will try,” Chupin answered.

He did indeed try; he exerted all his energy and cunning, but in vain.
He was fettered by the precautions which he took against Balstain and
against Jean Lacheneur. On the other hand, no one in the neighborhood
would have consented to give him the least information.

“Still no news!” he said to Mme. Blanche at each interview.

But she would not yield. Jealousy will not yield even to evidence.

Blanche had declared that Marie-Anne had taken her husband from her,
that Martial and Marie-Anne loved each other, hence it must be so, all
proofs to the contrary notwithstanding.

But one morning she found her spy jubilant.

“Good news!” he cried, as soon as he saw her; “we have caught the minx
at last.”



CHAPTER XLIII

It was the second day after Marie-Anne’s installation at the Borderie.

That event was the general topic of conversation; and Chanlouineau’s
will was the subject of countless comments.

“Here is Monsieur Lacheneur’s daughter with an income of more than
two thousand francs, without counting the house,” said the old people,
gravely.

“An honest girl would have had no such luck as that!” muttered the
unattractive maidens who had not been fortunate enough to secure
husbands.

This was the great news which Chupin brought to Mme. Blanche.

She listened to it, trembling with anger, her hands so convulsively
clinched that the nails penetrated the flesh.

“What audacity!” she exclaimed. “What impudence!”

The old poacher seemed to be of the same opinion.

“If each of her lovers gives her as much she will be richer than a
queen. She will have enough to buy both Sairmeuse and Courtornieu, if
she chooses,” he remarked, maliciously.

If he had desired to augment the rage of Mme. Blanche, he had good
reason to be satisfied.

“And this is the woman who has alienated Martial’s heart from me!” she
exclaimed. “It is for this miserable wretch that he abandons me!”

The unworthiness of the unfortunate girl whom she regarded as her
rival, incensed her to such a degree that she entirely forgot Chupin’s
presence. She made no attempt to restrain herself or to hide the secret
of her sufferings.

“Are you sure that what you tell me is true?” she asked.

“As sure as that you stand there.”

“Who told you all this?”

“No one--I have eyes. I went to the Borderie yesterday to see for
myself, and all the shutters were open. Marie-Anne was leaning out of a
window. She does not even wear mourning, the heartless hussy!”

Poor Marie-Anne, indeed, had no dress but the one which Mme. d’Escorval
had given her on the night of the insurrection, when she laid aside her
masculine habiliments.

Chupin wished to irritate Mme. Blanche still more by other malicious
remarks, but she checked him by a gesture.

“So you know the way to the Borderie?” she inquired.

“Perfectly.”

“Where is it?”

“Opposite the mills of the Oiselle, near the river, about a league and a
half from here.”

“That is true. I remember now. Were you ever in the house?”

“More than a hundred times while Chanlouineau was living.”

“Explain the topography of the dwelling!”

Chupin’s eyes dilated to their widest extent.

“What do you wish?” he asked, not understanding in the least what was
required of him.

“I mean, explain how the house is constructed.”

“Ah! now I understand. The house is built upon an open space a little
distance from the road. Before it is a small garden, and behind it an
orchard enclosed by a hedge. Back of the orchard, to the right, are the
vineyards; but on the left side is a small grove that shades a spring.”

He paused suddenly, and with a knowing wink, inquired:

“But what use do you expect to make of all this information?”

“What does that matter to you? How is the interior arranged?”

“There are three large square rooms on the ground floor, besides the
kitchen and a small dark room.”

“Now, what is on the floor above?”

“I have never been up there.”

“How are the rooms furnished which you have visited?”

“Like those in any peasant’s house.”

Certainly no one was aware of the existence of the luxurious apartment
which Chanlouineau had intended for Marie-Anne. He had never spoken of
it, and had even taken the greatest precautions to prevent anyone from
seeing him transport the furniture.

“How many doors are there?” inquired Blanche.

“Three; one opening into the garden, another into the orchard, another
communicating with the stables. The staircase leading to the floor above
is in the middle room.”

“And is Marie-Anne alone at the Borderie?”

“Entirely alone at present; but I suppose it will not be long before her
brigand of a brother joins her.”

Mme. Blanche fell into a revery so deep and so prolonged that Chupin at
last became impatient.

He ventured to touch her upon the arm, and, in a wily voice, he said:
“Well, what shall we decide?”

Blanche shuddered like a wounded man on hearing the terrible click of
the surgeon’s instruments.

“My mind is not yet made up,” she replied. “I must reflect--I will see.”

And remarking the old poacher’s discontented face, she said, vehemently:

“I will do nothing lightly. Do not lose sight of Martial. If he goes
to the Borderie, and he will go there, I must be informed of it. If he
writes, and he will write, try to procure one of his letters. I must see
you every other day. Do not rest! Strive to deserve the good place I am
reserving for you at Courtornieu. Go!”

He departed without a word, but also without attempting to conceal his
disappointment and chagrin.

“It serves you right for listening to a silly, affected woman,” he
growled. “She fills the air with her ravings; she wishes to kill
everybody, to burn and destroy everything. She only asks for an
opportunity. The occasion presents itself, and her heart fails her. She
draws back--she is afraid!”

Chupin did Mme. Blanche great injustice. The movement of horror which
he had observed was the instinctive revolt of the flesh, and not a
faltering of her inflexible will.

Her reflections were not of a nature to appease her rancor.

Whatever Chupin and all Sairmeuse might say to the contrary, Blanche
regarded this story of Marie-Anne’s travels as a ridiculous fable.
In her opinion, Marie-Anne had simply emerged from the retreat where
Martial had deemed it prudent to conceal her.

But why this sudden reappearance? The vindictive woman was ready to
swear that it was out of mere bravado, and intended only as an insult to
her.

“And I will have my revenge,” she thought. “I would tear my heart out if
it were capable of cowardly weakness under such provocation!”

The voice of conscience was unheard in this tumult of passion. Her
sufferings, and Jean Lacheneur’s attempt upon her father’s life seemed
to justify the most extreme measures.

She had plenty of time now to brood over her wrongs, and to concoct
schemes of vengeance. Her father no longer required her care. He had
passed from the frenzied ravings of insanity and delirium to the stupor
of idiocy.

The physician declared his patient cured.

Cured! The body was cured, perhaps, but reason had succumbed. All traces
of intelligence had disappeared from this once mobile face, so ready to
assume any expression which the most consummate hypocrisy required.

There was no longer a sparkle in the eye which had formerly gleamed with
cunning, and the lower lip hung with a terrible expression of stupidity.

And there was no hope of any improvement.

A single passion, the table, took the place of all the passions which
had formerly swayed the life of this ambitious man.

The marquis, who had always been temperate in his habits, now ate and
drank with the most disgusting voracity, and he was becoming immensely
corpulent. A soulless body, he wandered about the chateau and its
surroundings without projects, without aim. Self-consciousness, all
thought of dignity, knowledge of good and evil, memory--he had lost
all these. Even the instinct of self-preservation, the last which dies
within us, had departed, and he had to be watched like a child.

Often, as the marquis roamed about the large gardens, his daughter
regarded him from her window with a strange terror in her heart.

But this warning of Providence only increased her desire for revenge.

“Who would not prefer death to such a misfortune?” she murmured. “Ah!
Jean Lacheneur’s revenge is far more terrible than it would have been
had his bullet pierced my father’s heart. It is a revenge like this that
I desire. It is due me; I will have it!”

She saw Chupin every two or three days; sometimes going to the place of
meeting alone, sometimes accompanied by Aunt Medea.

The old poacher came punctually, although he was beginning to tire of
his task.

“I am risking a great deal,” he growled. “I supposed that Jean Lacheneur
would go and live at the Borderie with his sister. Then, I should be
safe. But no; the brigand continues to prowl around with his gun under
his arm, and to sleep in the woods at night. What game is he hunting?
Father Chupin, of course. On the other hand, I know that my rascally
innkeeper over there has abandoned his inn and mysteriously disappeared.
Where is he? Hidden behind one of these trees, perhaps, deciding in
which portion of my body he shall plunge his knife.”

What irritated the old poacher most of all was, that after two months of
surveillance, he had arrived at the conclusion that, whatever might have
been the relations existing between Martial and Marie-Anne in the past,
all was now over between them.

But Blanche would not admit this.

“Say that they are more cunning than you, Father Chupin.”

“Cunning--and how? Since I have been watching the marquis, he has not
once passed outside the fortifications. On the other hand, the postman
at Sairmeuse, who has been adroitly questioned by my wife, declares that
he has not taken a single letter to the Borderie.”

Had it not been for the hope of a safe and pleasant retreat at
Courtornieu, Chupin would have abandoned his task; and, in spite of
the tempting rewards that were promised him, he had relaxed his
surveillance.

If he still came to the rendezvous, it was only because he had fallen
into the habit of claiming some money for his expenses each time.

And when Mme. Blanche demanded an account of everything that Martial had
done, he told her anything that came into his head.

Mme. Blanche soon discovered this. One day, early in September, she
interrupted him as he began the same old story, and, looking him
steadfastly in the eye, she said:

“Either you are betraying me, or you are a fool. Yesterday Martial and
Marie-Anne spent a quarter of an hour together at the Croix d’Arcy.”



CHAPTER XLIV

The old physician at Vigano, who had come to Marie-Anne’s aid, was an
honorable man. His intellect was of a superior order, and his heart was
equal to his intelligence. He knew life; he had loved and suffered, and
he possessed two sublime virtues--forbearance and charity.

It was easy for such a man to read Marie-Anne’s character; and while he
was at the Borderie he endeavored in every possible way to reassure her,
and to restore the self-respect of the unfortunate girl who had confided
in him.

Had he succeeded? He certainly hoped so.

But when he departed and Marie-Anne was again left in solitude, she
could not overcome the feeling of despondency that stole over her.

Many, in her situation, would have regained their serenity of mind,
and even rejoiced. Had she not succeeded in concealing her fault? Who
suspected it, except, perhaps, the abbe.

Hence, Marie-Anne had nothing to fear, and everything to hope.

But this conviction did not appease her sorrow. Hers was one of those
pure and proud natures that are more sensitive to the whisperings of
conscience than to the clamors of the world.

She had been accused of having three lovers--Chanlouineau, Martial, and
Maurice. The calumny had not moved her. What tortured her was what these
people did not know--the truth.

Nor was this all. The sublime instinct of maternity had been awakened
within her. When she saw the physician depart, bearing her child, she
felt as if soul and body were being rent asunder. When could she hope
to see again this little son who was doubly dear to her by reason of the
very sorrow and anguish he had cost her? The tears gushed to her eyes
when she thought that his first smile would not be for her.

Ah! had it not been for her promise to Maurice, she would unhesitatingly
have braved public opinion, and kept her precious child.

Her brave and honest nature could have endured any humiliation far
better than the continual lie she was forced to live.

But she had promised; Maurice was her husband, and reason told her that
for his sake she must preserve not her honor, alas! but the semblance of
honor.

And when she thought of her brother, her blood froze in her veins.

Having learned that Jean was roving about the country, she sent for him;
but it was not without much persuasion that he consented to come to the
Borderie.

It was easy to explain Chupin’s terror when one saw Jean Lacheneur.
His clothing was literally in tatters, his face wore an expression of
ferocious despair, and a fierce unextinguishable hatred burned in his
eyes.

When he entered the cottage, Marie-Anne recoiled in horror. She did not
recognize him until he spoke.

“It is I, sister,” he said, gloomily.

“You--my poor Jean! you!”

He surveyed himself from head to foot, and said, with a sneering laugh:

“Really, I should not like to meet myself at dusk in the forest.”

Marie-Anne shuddered. She fancied that a threat lurked beneath these
ironical words, beneath this mockery of himself.

“What a life yours must be, my poor brother! Why did you not come
sooner? Now, I have you here, I shall not let you go. You will not
desert me. I need protection and love so much. You will remain with me?”

“It is impossible, Marie-Anne.”

“And why?”

A fleeting crimson suffused Jean Lacheneur’s cheek; he hesitated for a
moment, then:

“Because I have a right to dispose of my own life, but not of yours,” he
replied. “We can no longer be anything to each other. I deny you to-day,
that you may be able to deny me to-morrow. Yes, I renounce you, who are
my all--the only person on earth whom I love. Your most cruel enemies
have not calumniated you more foully than I----”

He paused an instant, then he added:

“I have said openly, before numerous witnesses, that I would never set
foot in a house that had been given you by Chanlouineau.”

“Jean! you, my brother! said that?”

“I said it. It must be supposed that there is a deadly feud between us.
This must be, in order that neither you nor Maurice d’Escorval can be
accused of complicity in any deed of mine.”

Marie-Anne stood as if petrified.

“He is mad!” she murmured.

“Do I really have that appearance?”

She shook off the stupor that paralyzed her, and seizing her brother’s
hands:

“What do you intend to do?” she exclaimed. “What do you intend to do?
Tell me; I will know.”

“Nothing! let me alone.”

“Jean!”

“Let me alone,” he said, roughly, disengaging himself.

A horrible presentiment crossed Marie-Anne’s mind.

She stepped back, and solemnly, entreatingly, she said:

“Take care, take care, my brother. It is not well to tamper with these
matters. Leave to God’s justice the task of punishing those who have
wronged us.”

But nothing could move Jean Lacheneur, or divert him from his purpose.
He uttered a hoarse, discordant laugh, then striking his gun heavily
with his hand, he exclaimed:

“Here is justice!”

Appalled and distressed beyond measure, Marie-Anne sank into a chair.
She discerned in her brother’s mind the same fixed, fatal idea which had
lured her father on to destruction--the idea for which he had sacrificed
all--family, friends, fortune, the present and the future--even his
daughter’s honor--the idea which had caused so much blood to flow,
which had cost the life of so many innocent men, and which had finally
conducted him to the scaffold.

“Jean,” she murmured, “remember our father.”

The young man’s face became livid; his hands clinched involuntarily, but
he controlled his anger.

Advancing toward his sister, in a cold, quiet tone that added a
frightful violence to his threats, he said:

“It is because I remember my father that justice shall be done. Ah!
these miserable nobles would not display such audacity if all sons had
my resolution. A scoundrel would hesitate before attacking a good man if
he was obliged to say to himself: ‘I cannot strike this honest man, for
though he die, his children will surely call me to account. Their fury
will fall on me and mine; they will pursue us sleeping and waking,
pursue us without ceasing, everywhere, and pitilessly. Their hatred
always on the alert, will accompany us and surround us. It will be
an implacable, merciless warfare. I shall never venture forth without
fearing a bullet; I shall never lift food to my lips without dread of
poison. And until we have succumbed, they will prowl about our house,
trying to slip in through tiniest opening, death, dishonor, ruin,
infamy, and misery!’”

He paused with a nervous laugh, and then, still more slowly, he added:

“That is what the Sairmeuse and Courtornieu have to expect from me.”

It was impossible to mistake the meaning of Jean Lacheneur’s words. His
threats were not the wild ravings of anger. His quiet manner, his icy
tones, his automatic gestures betrayed one of those cold rages which
endure so long as the man lives.

He took good care to make himself understood, for between his teeth he
added:

“Undoubtedly, these people are very high, and I am very low; but when
a tiny worm fastens itself to the roots of a giant oak, that tree is
doomed.”

Marie-Anne knew all too well the uselessness of prayers and entreaties.

And yet she could not, she must not allow her brother to depart in this
mood.

She fell upon her knees, and with clasped hands and supplicating voice:

“Jean,” said she, “I implore you to renounce these projects. In the name
of our mother, return to your better self. These are crimes which you
are meditating!”

With a glance of scorn and a shrug of the shoulders, he replied:

“Have done with this. I was wrong to confide my hopes to you. Do not
make me regret that I came here.”

Then the sister tried another plan. She rose, forced her lips to smile,
and as if nothing unpleasant had passed between them, she begged Jean to
remain with her that evening, at least, and share her frugal supper.

“Remain,” she entreated; “that is not much to do--and it will make me
so happy. And since it will be the last time we shall see each other
for years, grant me a few hours. It is so long since we have met. I
have suffered so much. I have so many things to tell you! Jean, my dear
brother, can it be that you love me no longer?”

One must have been bronze to remain insensible to such prayers. Jean
Lacheneur’s heart swelled almost to bursting; his stern features
relaxed, and a tear trembled in his eye.

Marie-Anne saw that tear. She thought she had conquered, and clapping
her hands in delight, she exclaimed:

“Ah! you will remain! you will remain!”

No. Jean had already mastered his momentary weakness, though not without
a terrible effort; and in a harsh voice:

“Impossible! impossible!” he repeated.

Then, as his sister clung to him imploringly, he took her in his arms
and pressed her to his heart.

“Poor sister--poor Marie-Anne--you will never know what it costs me
to refuse you, to separate myself from you. But this must be. In
even coming here I have been guilty of an imprudent act. You do not
understand to what perils you will be exposed if people suspect any bond
between us. I trust you and Maurice may lead a calm and happy life. It
would be a crime for me to mix you up with my wild schemes. Think of me
sometimes, but do not try to see me, or even to learn what has become of
me. A man like me struggles, triumphs, or perishes alone.”

He kissed Marie-Anne passionately, then lifted her, placed her in a
chair, and freed himself from her detaining hands.

“Adieu!” he cried; “when you see me again, our father will be avenged!”

She sprang up to rush after him and to call him back. Too late!

He had fled.

“It is over,” murmured the wretched girl; “my brother is lost. Nothing
will restrain him now.”

A vague, inexplicable, but horrible fear, contracted her heart. She felt
that she was being slowly but surely drawn into a whirlpool of passion,
rancor, vengeance, and crime, and a voice whispered that she would be
crushed.

But other thoughts soon replaced these gloomy presentiments.

One evening, while she was preparing her little table, she heard a
rustling sound at the door. She turned and looked; someone had slipped a
letter under the door.

Courageously, and without an instant’s hesitation, she sprang to the
door and opened it. No one was there!

The night was dark, and she could distinguish nothing in the gloom
without. She listened; not a sound broke the stillness.

Agitated and trembling she picked up the letter, approached the light,
and looked at the address.

“The Marquis de Sairmeuse!” she exclaimed, in amazement.

She recognized Martial’s handwriting. So he had written to her! He had
dared to write to her!

Her first impulse was to burn the letter; she held it to the flame, then
the thought of her friends concealed at Father Poignot’s farm made her
withdraw it. “For their sake,” she thought, “I must read it.” She broke
the seal with the arms of the De Sairmeuse family inscribed upon it, and
read:


“My dear Marie-Anne--Perhaps you have suspected who it is that has given
an entirely new, and certainly surprising, direction to events.

“Perhaps you have also understood the motives that guided him. In that
case I am amply repaid for my efforts, for you cannot refuse me your
friendship and your esteem.

“But my work of reparation is not yet accomplished. I have prepared
everything for a revision of the judgment that condemned Baron
d’Escorval to death, or for procuring a pardon.

“You must know where the baron is concealed. Acquaint him with my plans
and ascertain whether he prefers a revision of judgment, or a simple
pardon.

“If he desires a new trial, I will give him a letter of license from the
King.

“I await your reply before acting.

“Martial de Sairmeuse.”


Marie-Anne’s head whirled.

This was the second time that Martial had astonished her by the grandeur
of his passion.

How noble the two men who had loved her and whom she had rejected, had
proved themselves to be.

One, Chanlouineau, after dying for her sake, protected her still.

Martial de Sairmeuse had sacrificed the convictions of his life and
the prejudice of his race for her sake; and, with a noble recklessness,
hazarded for her the political fortunes of his house.

And yet the man whom she had chosen, the father of her child, Maurice
d’Escorval, had not given a sign of life since he quitted her, five
months before.

But suddenly, and without reason, Marie-Anne passed from the most
profound admiration to the deepest distrust.

“What if Martial’s offer is only a trap?” This was the suspicion that
darted through her mind.

“Ah!” she thought, “the Marquis de Sairmeuse would be a hero if he were
sincere!”

And she did not wish him to be a hero.

The result of these suspicions was that she hesitated five days before
repairing to the rendezvous where Father Poignot usually awaited her.

When she did go, she found, not the worthy farmer, but Abbe Midon, who
had been greatly alarmed by her long absence.

It was night, but Marie-Anne, fortunately, knew Martial’s letter by
heart.

The abbe made her repeat it twice, the second time very slowly, and when
she had concluded:

“This young man,” said the priest, “has the voice and the prejudices of
his rank and of his education; but his heart is noble and generous.”

And when Marie-Anne disclosed her suspicions:

“You are wrong, my child,” said he; “the Marquis is certainly sincere.
It would be wrong not to take advantage of his generosity. Such, at
least, is my opinion. Intrust this letter to me. I will consult the
baron, and to-morrow I will tell you our decision.”

The abbe was awaiting her with feverish impatience on the same spot,
when she rejoined him twenty-four hours later.

“Monsieur d’Escorval agrees with me that we must trust ourselves to the
Marquis de Sairmeuse. Only the baron, being innocent, cannot, will not,
accept a pardon. He demands a revision of the iniquitous judgment which
condemned him.”

Although she must have foreseen this determination, Marie-Anne seemed
stupefied.

“What!” said she. “Monsieur d’Escorval will give himself up to his
enemies? Does not the Marquis de Sairmeuse promise him a letter of
license, a safe-conduct from the King?”

“Yes.”

She could find no objection, so in a submissive tone, she said:

“In this case, Monsieur, I must ask you for a rough draft of the letter
I am to write to the marquis.”

The priest did not reply for a moment. It was evident that he felt some
misgivings. At last, summoning all his courage, he said:

“It would be better not to write.”

“But----”

“It is not that I distrust the marquis, not by any means, but a
letter is dangerous; it does not always reach the person to whom it is
addressed. You must see Monsieur de Sairmeuse.”

Marie-Anne recoiled in horror.

“Never! never!” she exclaimed.

The abbe did not seem surprised.

“I understand your repugnance, my child,” he said, gently; “your
reputation has suffered greatly through the attentions of the marquis.”

“Oh! sir, I entreat you.”

“But one should not hesitate, my child, when duty speaks. You owe this
sacrifice to an innocent man who has been ruined through your father.”

He explained to her all that she must say, and did not leave her until
she had promised to see the marquis in person. But the cause of her
repugnance was not what the abbe supposed. Her reputation! Alas! she
knew that was lost forever. No, it was not that.

A fortnight before she would not have been disquieted by the prospect
of this interview. Then, though she no longer hated Martial, he was
perfectly indifferent to her, while now----

Perhaps in choosing the Croix d’Arcy for the place of meeting, she hoped
that this spot, haunted by so many cruel memories, would restore her
former aversion.

On pursuing the path leading to the place of rendezvous, she said to
herself that Martial would undoubtedly wound her by the tone of careless
gallantry which was habitual to him.

But in this she was mistaken. Martial was greatly agitated, but he did
not utter a word that was not connected with the baron.

It was only when the conference was ended, and he had consented to all
the conditions, that he said, sadly:

“We are friends, are we not?”

In an almost inaudible voice she answered:

“Yes.”

And that was all. He remounted his horse which had been held by a
servant, and departed in the direction of Montaignac.

Breathless, with cheeks on fire, Marie-Anne watched him as he
disappeared; and then her inmost heart was revealed as by a lightning
flash.

“_Mon Dieu_! wretch that I _am_!” she exclaimed. “Do I not love? is it
possible that I could ever love any other than Maurice, my husband, the
father of my child?”

Her voice was still trembling with emotion when she recounted the
details of the interview to the abbe. But he did not perceive it. He was
thinking only of the baron.

“I was sure that Martial would agree to everything; I was so certain
of it that I have made all the arrangements for the baron to leave the
farm. He will await, at your house, a safe-conduct from His Majesty.

“The close air and the heat of the loft are retarding the baron’s
recovery,” the abbe pursued, “so be prepared for his coming to-morrow
evening. One of the Poignot boys will bring over all our baggage. About
eleven o’clock we will put Monsieur d’Escorval in a carriage; and we
will all sup together at the Borderie.”

“Heaven comes to my aid!” thought Marie-Anne as she walked homeward.

She thought that she would no longer be alone, that Mme. d’Escorval
would be with her to talk to her of Maurice, and that all the friends
who would surround her would aid her in driving away the thoughts of
Martial, which haunted her.

So the next day she was more cheerful than she had been for months, and
once, while putting her little house in order, she was surprised to find
herself singing at her work.

Eight o’clock was sounding when she heard a peculiar whistle.

It was the signal of the younger Poignot, who came bringing an arm-chair
for the sick man, the abbe’s box of medicine, and a bag of books.

These articles Marie-Anne deposited in the room which Chanlouineau had
adorned for her, and which she intended for the baron. After arranging
them to her satisfaction she went out to meet young Poignot, who had
told her that he would soon return with other articles.

The night was very dark, and Marie-Anne, as she hastened on, did not
notice two motionless figures in the shadow of a clump of lilacs in her
little garden.



CHAPTER XLV

Detected by Mme. Blanche in a palpable falsehood, Chupin was quite
crestfallen for a moment.

He saw the pleasing vision of a retreat at Courtornieu vanish; he saw
himself suddenly deprived of frequent gifts which permitted him to spare
his hoarded treasure, and even to increase it.

But he soon regained his assurance, and with an affectation of frankness
he said:

“I may be stupid, but I could not deceive an infant. Someone must have
told you falsely.”

Mme. Blanche shrugged her shoulders.

“I obtained my information from two persons who were ignorant of the
interest it would possess for me.”

“As truly as the sun is in the heavens I swear----”

“Do not swear; simply confess that you have been wanting in zeal.”

The young lady’s manner betrayed such positive certainty that Chupin
ceased his denials and changed his tactics.

With the most abject humility, he admitted that the evening before he
had relaxed his surveillance; he had been very busy; one of his boys had
injured his foot; then he had encountered some friends who persuaded
him to enter a drinking-saloon, where he had taken more than usual, so
that----

He told this story in a whining tone, and every moment he interrupted
himself to affirm his repentance and to cover himself with reproaches.

“Old drunkard!” he said, “this will teach you----”

But these protestations, far from reassuring Mme. Blanche, made her
still more suspicious,

“All this is very well, Father Chupin,” she said, dryly, “but what are
you going to do now to repair your negligence?”

“What do I intend to do?” he exclaimed, feigning the most violent
anger. “Oh! you will see. I will prove that no one can deceive me with
impunity. Near the Borderie is a small grove. I shall station myself
there; and may the devil seize me if a cat enters that house unbeknown
to me.”

Mme. Blanche drew her purse from her pocket, and taking out three louis,
she gave them to Chupin, saying:

“Take these, and be more careful in future. Another blunder like this,
and I shall be compelled to ask the aid of some other person.”

The old poacher went away, whistling quite reassured; but he was wrong.
The lady’s generosity was only intended to allay his suspicions.

And why should she not suppose he had betrayed her--this miserable
wretch, who made it his business to betray others? What reason had she
for placing any confidence in his reports? She paid him! Others, by
paying him more, would certainly have the preference!

But how could she ascertain what she wished to know? Ah! she saw but one
way--a very disagreeable, but a sure way. She, herself, would play the
spy.

This idea took such possession of her mind that, after dinner was
concluded, and twilight had enveloped the earth in a mantle of gray, she
summoned Aunt Medea.

“Get your cloak, quickly, aunt,” she commanded. “I am going for a walk,
and you must accompany me.”

Aunt Medea extended her hand to the bell-rope, but her niece stopped
her.

“You will dispense with the services of your maid,” said she. “I do not
wish anyone in the chateau to know that we have gone out.”

“Are we going alone?”

“Alone.”

“Alone, and on foot, at night----”

“I am in a hurry, aunt,” interrupted Blanche, “and I am waiting for
you.”

In the twinkling of an eye Aunt Medea was ready.

The marquis had just been put to bed, the servants were at dinner, and
Blanche and Aunt Medea reached the little gate leading from the garden
into the open fields without being observed.

“Good heavens! Where are we going?” groaned Aunt Medea.

“What is that to you? Come!”

Mme. Blanche was going to the Borderie.

She could have followed the banks of the Oiselle, but she preferred
to cut across the fields, thinking she would be less likely to meet
someone.

The night was still, but very dark, and the progress of the two women
was often retarded by hedges and ditches. Twice Blanche lost her way.
Again and again, Aunt Medea stumbled over the rough ground, and bruised
herself against the stones; she groaned, she almost wept, but her
terrible niece was pitiless.

“Come!” she said, “or I will leave you to find your way as best you
can.”

And the poor dependent struggled on.

At last, after a tramp of more than an hour, Blanche ventured to
breathe. She recognized Chanlouineau’s house, and she paused in the
little grove of which Chupin had spoken.

“Are we at our journey’s end?” inquired Aunt Medea, timidly.

“Yes, but be quiet. Remain where you are, I wish to look about a
little.”

“What! you are leaving me alone? Blanche, I entreat you! What are you
going to do? _Mon Dieu_! you frighten me. I am afraid, Blanche!”

But her niece had gone. She was exploring the grove, seeking Chupin. She
did not find him.

“I knew the wretch was deceiving me,” she muttered through her set
teeth. “Who knows but Martial and Marie-Anne are there in that house
now, mocking me, and laughing at my credulity?”

She rejoined Aunt Medea, whom she found half dead with fright, and both
advanced to the edge of the woods, which commanded a view of the front
of the house.

A flickering, crimson light gleamed through two windows in the second
story. Evidently there was a fire in the room.

“That is right,” murmured Blanche, bitterly; “Martial is such a chilly
person!”

She was about to approach the house, when a peculiar whistle rooted her
to the spot.

She looked about her, and, in spite of the darkness, she discerned in
the footpath leading to the Borderie, a man laden with articles which
she could not distinguish.

Almost immediately a woman, certainly Marie-Anne, left the house and
advanced to meet him.

They exchanged a few words and then walked together to the house. Soon
after the man emerged without his burden and went away.

“What does this mean?” murmured Mme. Blanche.

She waited patiently for more than half an hour, and as nothing stirred:

“Let us go nearer,” she said to Aunt Medea, “I wish to look through the
windows.”

They were approaching the house when, just as they reached the little
garden, the door of the cottage opened so suddenly that they had
scarcely time to conceal themselves in a clump of lilac-bushes.

Marie-Anne came out, imprudently leaving the key in the door, passed
down the narrow path, gained the road, and disappeared.

Blanche pressed Aunt Medea’s arm with a violence that made her cry out.

“Wait for me here,” she said, in a strained, unnatural voice, “and
whatever happens, whatever you hear, if you wish to finish your days at
Courtornieu, not a word! Do not stir from this spot; I will return.”

And she entered the cottage.

Marie-Anne, on going out, had left a candle burning on the table in the
front room.

Blanche seized it and boldly began an exploration of the dwelling.

She had gone over the arrangement of the Borderie so often in her own
mind that the rooms seemed familiar to her, she seemed to recognize
them.

In spite of Chupin’s description the poverty of this humble abode
astonished her. There was no floor save the ground; the walls were
poorly whitewashed; all kinds of grain and bunches of herbs hung
suspended from the ceiling; a few heavy tables, wooden benches, and
clumsy chairs constituted the entire furniture.

Marie-Anne evidently occupied the back room. It was the only apartment
that contained a bed. This was one of those immense country affairs,
very high and broad, with tall fluted posts, draped with green serge
curtains, sliding back and forth on iron rings.

At the head of the bed, fastened to the wall, hung a receptacle for
holy-water. Blanche dipped her finger in the bowl; it was full to the
brim.

Beside the window was a wooden shelf supported by a hook, and on the
shelf stood a basin and bowl of the commonest earthenware.

“It must be confessed that my husband does not provide a very sumptuous
abode for his idol,” said Mme. Blanche, with a sneer.

She was almost on the point of asking herself if jealousy had not led
her astray.

She remembered Martial’s fastidious tastes, and she did not know how
to reconcile them with these meagre surroundings. Then, there was the
holy-water!

But her suspicions became stronger when she entered the kitchen.
Some savory compound was bubbling in a pot over the fire, and several
saucepans, in which fragrant stews were simmering, stood among the warm
ashes.

“All this cannot be for her,” murmured Blanche.

Then she remembered the two windows in the story above which she had
seen illuminated by the trembling glow of the fire-light.

“I must examine the rooms above,” she thought.

The staircase led up from the middle of the room; she knew this. She
quickly ascended the stairs, pushed open a door, and could not repress a
cry of surprise and rage.

She found herself in the sumptuously appointed room which Chanlouineau
had made the sanctuary of his great love, and upon which he had
lavished, with the fanaticism of passion, all that was costly and
luxurious.

“Then it is true!” exclaimed Blanche. “And I thought just now that all
was too meagre and too poor! Miserable dupe that I am! Below, all is
arranged for the eyes of comers and goers. Here, everything is intended
exclusively for themselves. Now, I recognize Martial’s astonishing
talent for dissimulation. He loves this vile creature so much that he
is anxious in regard to her reputation; he keeps his visits to her a
secret, and this is the hidden paradise of their love. Here they laugh
at me, the poor forsaken wife, whose marriage was but a mockery.”

She had desired to know the truth; certainty was less terrible to endure
than this constant suspicion, And, as if she found a little enjoyment
in proving the extent of Martial’s love for a hated rival, she took an
inventory, as it were, of the magnificent appointments of the chamber,
feeling the heavy brocaded silk stuff that formed the curtains, and
testing the thickness of the rich carpet with her foot.

Everything indicated that Marie-Anne was expecting someone; the bright
fire, the large arm-chair placed before the hearth, the embroidered
slippers lying beside the chair.

And whom could she expect save Martial? The person who had been there a
few moments before probably came to announce the arrival of her lover,
and she had gone out to meet him.

For a trifling circumstance would seem to indicate that this messenger
had not been expected.

Upon the mantel stood a bowl of still smoking bouillon.

It was evident that Marie-Anne was on the point of drinking this when
she heard the signal.

Mme. Blanche was wondering how she could profit by her discovery, when
her eyes fell upon a large oaken box standing open upon a table near the
glass door leading into the dressing-room, and filled with tiny boxes
and vials.

Mechanically she approached it, and among the bottles she saw two of
blue glass, upon which the word “poison” was inscribed.

“Poison!” Blanche could not turn her eyes from this word, which seemed
to exert a kind of fascination over her.

A diabolical inspiration associated the contents of these vials with the
bowl standing upon the mantel.

“And why not?” she murmured. “I could escape afterward.”

A terrible thought made her pause. Martial would return with Marie-Anne;
who could say that it would not be he who would drink the contents of
the bowl.

“God shall decide!” she murmured. “It is better one’s husband should be
dead than belong to another!”

And with a firm hand, she took up one of the vials.

Since her entrance into the cottage Blanche had scarcely been conscious
of her acts. Hatred and despair had clouded her brain like fumes of
alcohol.

But when her hand came in contact with the glass containing the deadly
drug, the terrible shock dissipated her bewilderment; she regained
the full possession of her faculties; the power of calm deliberation
returned.

This is proved by the fact that her first thought was this:

“I am ignorant even of the name of the poison which I hold. What dose
must I administer, much or little?”

She opened the vial, not without considerable difficulty, and poured
a few grains of its contents into the palm of her hand. It was a fine,
white powder, glistening like pulverized glass, and looking not unlike
sugar.

“Can it really be sugar?” she thought.

Resolved to ascertain, she moistened the tip of her finger, and
collected upon it a few atoms of the powder which she placed upon her
tongue.

The taste was like that of an extremely acid apple.

Without hesitation, without remorse, without even turning pale, she
poured into the bowl the entire contents of the vial.

Her self-possession was so perfect, she even recollected that the powder
might be slow in dissolving, and she stirred it gently for a moment or
more.

Having done this--she seemed to think of everything--she tasted
the bouillon. She noticed a slightly bitter taste, but it was not
sufficiently perceptible to awaken distrust.

Now Mme. Blanche breathed freely. If she could succeed in making her
escape she was avenged.

She was going toward the door when a sound on the stairs startled her.

Two persons were ascending the staircase.

Where should she go? where could she conceal herself?

She was now so sure she would be detected that she almost decided to
throw the bowl into the fire, and then boldly face the intruders.

But no--a chance remained--she darted into the dressing-room. She dared
not close the door; the least click of the latch would have betrayed
her.

Marie-Anne entered the chamber, followed by a peasant, bearing a large
bundle.

“Ah! here is my candle!” she exclaimed, as she crossed the threshold.
“Joy must be making me lose my wits! I could have sworn that I left it
on the table downstairs.” Blanche shuddered. She had not thought of this
circumstance.

“Where shall I put this clothing?” asked the young peasant.

“Lay it down here. I will arrange the articles by and by,” replied Marie
Anne.

The boy dropped his heavy burden with a sigh of relief.

“This is the last,” he exclaimed. “Now, our gentleman can come.”

“At what hour will he start?” inquired Marie-Anne.

“At eleven o’clock. It will be nearly midnight when he gets here.”

Marie-Anne glanced at the magnificent clock on the mantel.

“I have still three hours before me,” said she; “more time than I shall
need. Supper is ready; I am going to set the table here, by the fire.
Tell him to bring a good appetite.”

“I will tell him, and many thanks, Mademoiselle, for having come to meet
me and aid me with my second load. It was not so very heavy, but it was
clumsy to handle.”

“Will you not accept a glass of wine?”

“No, thank you. I must hasten back. _Au revoir_, Mademoiselle
Lacheneur.”

“_Au revoir_, Poignot.”

This name Poignot had no significance in the ears of Blanche.

Ah! had she heard Monsieur d’Escorval’s or the abbe’s name mentioned,
she might have felt some doubt of Marie-Anne’s guilt; her resolution
might have wavered, and--who knows?

But no. Young Poignot, in referring to the baron had said: “our
gentleman,” Marie-Anne said: “he.”

Is not “he” always the person who is uppermost in our minds, the husband
whom one hates or the lover whom one adores?

“Our gentleman!” “he!” Blanche translated Martial.

Yes, it was the Marquis de Sairmeuse who was to arrive at midnight. She
was sure of it. It was he who had been preceded by a messenger bearing
clothing. This could only mean that he was about to establish himself
at the Borderie. Perhaps he would cast aside all secrecy and live there
openly, regardless of his rank, of his dignity, and of his duties;
forgetful even of his prejudices.

These conjectures inflamed her fury still more.

Why should she hesitate or tremble after that?

Her only dread now, was lest she should be discovered.

Aunt Medea was, it is true, in the garden; but after the orders she
had received the poor woman would remain motionless as stone behind the
clump of lilacs, the entire night if necessary.

For two hours and a half Marie-Anne would be alone at the Borderie.
Blanche reflected that this would give her ample time to watch the
effects of the poison upon her hated rival.

When the crime was discovered she would be far away. No one knew she
had been absent from Courtornieu; no one had seen her leave the chateau;
Aunt Medea would be as silent as the grave. And besides, who would dare
to accuse her, Marquise de Sairmeuse _nee_ Blanche de Courtornieu, of
being the murderer? “But she does not drink it!” Blanche thought.

Marie-Anne had, in fact, forgotten the bouillon entirely. She had opened
the bundle of clothing, and was busily arranging the articles in a
wardrobe near the bed.

Who talks of presentiments. She was as gay and vivacious as in her days
of happiness; and as she worked, she hummed an air that Maurice had
often sung.

She felt that her troubles were nearly over; her friends would soon be
around her.

When her task of putting away the clothing was completed and the
wardrobe closed, she drew a small table up before the fire.

Not until then did she notice the bowl standing upon the mantel.

“Stupid!” she said, with a laugh; and taking the bowl she raised it to
her lips.

From her hiding-place Blanche had heard Marie-Anne’s exclamation; she
saw the movement, and yet not the slightest remorse struck her soul.

Marie-Anne drank but one mouthful, then, in evident disgust, set the
bowl down.

A horrible dread made the watcher’s heart stand still. “Does she notice
a peculiar taste in the bouillon?” she thought.

No; but it had grown cold, and a slight coating of grease had formed
over the top. Marie-Anne took the spoon, skimmed the bouillon, and then
stirred it up for some time, to divide the greasy particles.

After she had done this she drank the liquid, put the bowl back upon the
mantel, and resumed her work.

It was done. The _denouement_ no longer depended upon Blanche de
Courtornieu’s will. Come what would, she was a murderess.

But though she was conscious of her crime, the excess of her hatred
prevented her from realizing its enormity. She said to herself that
it was only an act of justice which she had accomplished; that the
vengeance she had taken was not proportionate to the offence, and that
nothing could atone for the torture she had endured.

But in a few moments a sinister apprehension took possession of her
mind.

Her knowledge of the effects of poison was extremely limited. She had
expected to see Marie-Anne fall dead before her, as if stricken down by
a thunder-bolt.

But no. The moments slipped by, and Marie-Anne continued her
preparations for supper as if nothing had occurred.

She spread a white cloth over the table, smoothed it with her hands, and
placed a dish upon it.

“What if she should come in here!” thought Blanche.

The fear of punishment which precedes remorse, made her heart beat with
such violence that she could not understand why its throbbing were
not heard in the adjoining room. Her terror increased when she saw
Marie-Anne take the light and go downstairs. Blanche was left alone. The
thought of making her escape occurred to her; but how, and by what way
could she leave the house without being seen?

“It must be that poison does not work!” she said, in a rage.

Alas! no. She knew better when Marie-Anne reappeared.

In the few moments she had spent below, her features had become
frightfully changed. Her face was livid and mottled with purple spots,
her eyes were distended and glittered with a strange brilliancy. She let
the plates which she held fall upon the table with a crash.

“The poison! it begins!” thought Blanche.

Marie-Anne stood on the hearth, gazing wildly around her, as if seeking
the cause of her incomprehensible suffering. She passed and re-passed
her hand across her forehead, which was bathed in a cold perspiration;
she gasped for breath. Then suddenly, overcome with nausea, she
staggered, pressed her hands convulsively upon her breast, and sank into
the armchair, crying:

“Oh, God! how I suffer!”



CHAPTER XLVI

Kneeling by the half-open door, Blanche eagerly watched the workings of
the poison which she had administered.

She was so near her victim that she could distinguish the throbbing of
her temples, and sometimes she fancied she could feel upon her cheek her
rival’s breath, which scorched like flame.

An utter prostration followed Marie-Anne’s paroxysm of agony. One would
have supposed her dead had it not been for the convulsive workings of
the jaws and her labored breathing.

But soon the nausea returned, and she was seized with vomiting. Each
effort to relieve seemed to wrench her whole body; and gradually a
ghastly tint crept over her face, the spots upon her cheeks became more
pronounced in tint, her eyes appeared ready to burst from their sockets,
and great drops of perspiration rolled down her cheeks.

Her sufferings must have been intolerable. She moaned feebly at times,
and occasionally rendered heart-rending shrieks. Then she faltered
fragmentary sentences; she begged piteously for water or entreated God
to shorten her torture.

“Ah, it is horrible! I suffer too much! Death! My God! grant me death!”

She invoked all the friends she had ever known, calling for aid in a
despairing voice.

She called Mme. d’Escorval, the abbe, Maurice, her brother,
Chanlouineau, Martial!

Martial, this name was more than sufficient to extinguish all pity in
the heart of Mme. Blanche.

“Go on! call your lover, call!” she said to herself, bitterly. “He will
come too late.”

And as Marie-Anne repeated the name in a tone of agonized entreaty:

“Suffer!” continued Mme. Blanche, “suffer, you who have inspired Martial
with the odious courage to forsake me, his wife, as a drunken lackey
would abandon the lowest of degraded creatures! Die, and my husband will
return to me repentant.”

No, she had no pity. She felt a difficulty in breathing, but that
resulted simply from the instinctive horror which the sufferings of
others inspire--an entirely different physical impression, which is
adorned with the fine name of sensibility, but which is, in reality, the
grossest selfishness.

And yet, Marie-Anne was perceptibly sinking. Soon she had not strength
even to moan; her eyes closed, and after a spasm which brought a bloody
foam to her lips, her head sank back, and she lay motionless.

“It is over,” murmured Blanche.

She rose, but her limbs trembled so that she could scarcely stand.

Her heart remained firm and implacable; but the flesh failed.

Never had she imagined a scene like that which she had just witnessed.
She knew that poison caused death; she had not suspected the agony of
that death.

She no longer thought of augmenting Marie-Anne’s sufferings by
upbraiding her. Her only desire now was to leave this house, whose very
floor seemed to scorch her feet.

A strange, inexplicable sensation crept over her; it was not yet fright,
it was the stupor that follows the commission of a terrible crime--the
stupor of the murderer.

Still, she compelled herself to wait a few moments longer; then seeing
that Marie-Anne still remained motionless and with closed eyes, she
ventured to softly open the door and to enter the room in which her
victim was lying.

But she had not advanced three steps before Marie-Anne suddenly, and as
if she had been galvanized by an electric battery, rose and extended her
arms to bar her enemy’s passage.

This movement was so unexpected and so frightful that Mme. Blanche
recoiled.

“The Marquise de Sairmeuse,” faltered Marie-Anne. “You, Blanche--here!”

And her suffering, explained by the presence of this young girl who once
had been her friend, but who was now her bitterest enemy, she exclaimed:

“You are my murderer!”

Blanche de Courtornieu’s was one of those iron natures that break, but
never bend.

Since she had been discovered, nothing in the world would induce her to
deny her guilt.

She advanced resolutely, and in a firm voice:

“Yes,” she said, “I have taken my revenge. Do you think I did not suffer
that evening when you sent your brother to take away my newly wedded
husband, upon whose face I have not gazed since?”

“Your husband! I sent to take him away! I do not understand you.”

“Do you then dare to deny that you are not Martial’s mistress!”

“The Marquis de Sairmeuse! I saw him yesterday for the first time since
Baron d’Escorval’s escape.”

The effort which she had made to rise and to speak had exhausted her
strength. She fell back in the armchair.

But Blanche was pitiless.

“You have not seen Martial! Tell me, then, who gave you this costly
furniture, these silken hangings, all the luxury that surrounds you?”

“Chanlouineau.”

Blanche shrugged her shoulders.

“So be it,” she said, with an ironical smile, “but is it Chanlouineau
for whom you are waiting this evening? Is it for Chanlouineau you have
warmed these slippers and laid this table? Was it Chanlouineau who sent
his clothing by a peasant named Poignot? You see that I know all----”

But her victim was silent.

“For whom are you waiting?” she insisted. “Answer!”

“I cannot!”

“You know that it is your lover! wretched woman--my husband, Martial!”

Marie-Anne was considering the situation as well as her intolerable
sufferings and troubled mind would permit.

Could she tell what guests she was expecting?

To name Baron d’Escorval to Blanche, would it not ruin and betray him?
They hoped for a safe-conduct, a revision of judgment, but he was none
the less under sentence of death, executory in twenty-four hours.

“So you refuse to tell me whom you expect here in an hour--at midnight.”

“I refuse.”

But a sudden impulse took possession of the sufferer’s mind.

Though the slightest movement caused her intolerable agony, she tore
open her dress and drew from her bosom a folded paper.

“I am not the mistress of the Marquis de Sairmeuse,” she said, in an
almost inaudible voice; “I am the wife of Maurice d’Escorval. Here is
the proof--read.”

No sooner had Blanche glanced at the paper, than she became as pale as
her victim. Her sight failed her; there was a strange ringing in her
ears, a cold sweat started from every pore.

This paper was the marriage-certificate of Maurice and Marie-Anne, drawn
up by the cure of Vigano, witnessed by the old physician and Bavois, and
sealed with the seal of the parish.

The proof was indisputable. She had committed a useless crime; she had
murdered an innocent woman.

The first good impulse of her life made her heart beat more quickly.
She did not stop to consider; she forgot the danger to which she exposed
herself, and in a ringing voice she cried:

“Help! help!”

Eleven o’clock was sounding; the whole country was asleep. The
farm-house nearest the Borderie was half a league distant.

The voice of Blanche was lost in the deep stillness of the night.

In the garden below Aunt Medea heard it, perhaps; but she would have
allowed herself to be chopped in pieces rather than stir from her place.

And yet, there was one who heard that cry of distress. Had Blanche and
her victim been less overwhelmed with despair, they would have heard a
noise upon the staircase which creaked beneath the tread of a man who
was cautiously ascending it. But it was not a saviour, for he did not
answer the appeal. But even though there had been aid near at hand, it
would have come too late.

Marie-Anne felt that there was no longer any hope for her, and that it
was the chill of death which was creeping up to her heart. She felt that
her life was fast ebbing away.

So, when Blanche seemed about to rush out in search of assistance, she
detained her by a gesture, and gently said:

“Blanche.”

The murderess paused.

“Do not summon anyone; it would do no good. Remain; be calm, that I may
at least die in peace. It will not be long now.”

“Hush! do not speak so. You must not, you shall not die! If you should
die--great God! what would my life be afterward?”

Marie-Anne made no reply. The poison was pursuing its work of
dissolution. Her breath made a whistling sound as it forced its way
through her inflamed throat; her tongue, when she moved it, produced in
her mouth the terrible sensation of a piece of red-hot iron; her lips
were parched and swollen; her hands, inert and paralyzed, would no
longer obey her will.

But the horror of the situation restored Blanche’s calmness.

“All is not yet lost,” she exclaimed. “It was in that great box
there upon the table, where I found”--she dared not utter the word
poison--“the white powder which I poured into the bowl. You know this
powder; you must know the antidote.”

Marie-Anne sadly shook her head.

“Nothing can save me now,” she murmured, in an almost inaudible voice;
“but I do not complain. Who knows the misery from which death may
preserve me? I do not crave life; I have suffered so much during the
past year; I have endured such humiliation; I have wept so much! A curse
was upon me!”

She was suddenly endowed with that clearness of mental vision so often
granted to the dying. She saw how she had wrought her own undoing by
consenting to accept the perfidious role imposed upon her by her father,
and how she, herself, had paved the way for the falsehoods, slander,
crimes and misfortunes of which she had been the victim.

Her voice grew fainter and fainter. Worn out by suffering, a sensation
of drowsiness stole over her. She was falling asleep in the arms of
death.

Suddenly such a terrible thought pierced the stupor which enveloped her
that she uttered a heart-breaking cry:

“My child!”

Collecting, by a superhuman effort, all the will, energy, and strength
that the poison had left her, she straightened herself in her arm-chair,
her features contracted by mortal anguish.

“Blanche!” she said, with an energy of which one would have supposed her
incapable. “Blanche, listen to me. It is the secret of my life which I
am about to disclose; no one suspects it. I have a son by Maurice. Alas!
many months have elapsed since my husband disappeared. If he is dead,
what will become of my child? Blanche, you, who have killed me, must
swear to me that you will be a mother to my child!”

Blanche was utterly overcome.

“I swear!” she sobbed, “I swear!”

“On that condition, but on that condition alone, I pardon you. But take
care! Do not forget your oath! Blanche, God sometimes permits the dead
to avenge themselves! You have sworn, remember.

“My spirit will allow you no rest if you do not fulfil your vow.”

“I will remember,” sobbed Blanche; “I will remember. But the child----”

“Ah! I was afraid--cowardly creature that I was! I dreaded the
shame--then Maurice insisted--I sent my child away--your jealousy and
my death are my punishment. Poor child! I abandoned him to strangers.
Wretched woman that I am! Ah! this suffering is too horrible. Blanche,
remember----”

She spoke again, but her words were indistinct, inaudible.

Blanche frantically seized the dying woman’s arm, and endeavored to
arouse her.

“To whom have you confided your child?” she repeated; “to whom?
Marie-Anne--a word more--a single word--a name, Marie-Anne!”

The unfortunate woman’s lips moved, but the death-rattle sounded in her
throat; a terrible convulsion shook her form; she slid down from the
chair, and fell full length upon the floor.

Marie-Anne was dead--dead, and she had not disclosed the name of the old
physician at Vigano to whom she had intrusted her child. She was dead,
and the terrified murderess stood in the middle of the room, as rigid
and motionless as a statue. It seemed to her that madness--a madness
like that which had stricken her father--was developing itself in her
brain.

She forgot everything; she forgot that a guest was expected at midnight,
that time was flying, and that she would surely be discovered if she did
not flee.

But the man who had entered when she cried for aid was watching over
her. When he saw that Marie-Anne had breathed her last, he made a slight
noise at the door, and thrust his leering face into the room.

“Chupin!” faltered Mme. Blanche.

“In the flesh,” he responded. “This was a grand chance for you. Ah, ha!
The business riled your stomach a little, but nonsense! that will soon
pass off. But we must not dawdle here; someone may come in. Let us make
haste.”

Mechanically the murderess advanced; but Marie-Anne’s dead body lay
between her and the door, barring the passage. To leave the room it
was necessary to step over the lifeless form of her victim. She had not
courage to do this, and recoiled with a shudder.

But Chupin was troubled by no such scruples. He sprang across the body,
lifted Blanche as if she had been a child and carried her out of the
house.

He was drunk with joy. Fears for the future no longer disquieted
him, now that Mme. Blanche was bound to him by the strongest of
chains--complicity in crime.

He saw himself on the threshold of a life of ease and continual
feasting. Remorse for Lacheneur’s betrayal had ceased to trouble him. He
saw himself sumptuously fed, lodged and clothed; above all, effectually
guarded by an army of servants.

Blanche, who had experienced a feeling of deadly faintness, was revived
by the cool night air.

“I wish to walk,” said she.

Chupin placed her on the ground about twenty paces from the house.

“And Aunt Medea!” she exclaimed.

Her relative was beside her; like one of those dogs who are left at the
door when their master enters a house, she had, instinctively followed
her niece on seeing her borne from the cottage by the old poacher.

“We must not stop to talk,” said Chupin. “Come, I will lead the way.”

And taking Blanche by the arm, he hastened toward the grove.

“Ah! so Marie-Anne had a child,” he said, as they hurried on. “She was
pretending to be such a saint! But where the devil has she put it?”

“I shall find it.”

“Hum! That is easier said than done.”

A shrill laugh, resounding in the darkness, interrupted him. He released
his hold on the arm of Blanche and assumed an attitude of defence.

Vain precaution! A man concealed behind a tree bounded upon him, and,
plunging his knife four times into the old poacher’s writhing body,
cried:

“Holy Virgin! now is my vow fulfilled! I shall no longer be obliged to
eat with my fingers!”

“The innkeeper!” groaned the wounded man, sinking to the earth.

For once in her life, Aunt Medea manifested some energy.

“Come!” she shrieked, wild with fear, dragging her niece away. “Come--he
is dead!”

Not quite. The traitor had strength to crawl home and knock at the door.

His wife and youngest son were sleeping soundly. His eldest son, who had
just returned home, opened the door.

Seeing his father prostrate on the ground, he thought he was
intoxicated, and tried to lift him and carry him into the house, but the
old poacher begged him to desist.

“Do not touch me,” said he. “It is all over with me; but listen;
Lacheneur’s daughter has just been poisoned by Madame Blanche. It was
to tell you this that I dragged myself here. This knowledge is worth a
fortune, my boy, if you are not a fool!”

And he died, without being able to tell his family where he had
concealed the price of Lacheneur’s blood.



CHAPTER XLVII

Of all the persons who witnessed Baron d’Escorval’s terrible fall, the
abbe was the only one who did not despair.

What a learned doctor would not have dared to do, he did.

He was a priest; he had faith. He remembered the sublime saying of
Ambroise Pare: “I dress the wound: God heals it.”

After a six months’ sojourn in Father Poignot’s secluded farm-house, M.
d’Escorval was able to sit up and to walk about a little, with the aid
of crutches.

Then he began to be seriously inconvenienced by his cramped quarters
in the loft, where prudence compelled him to remain; and it was with
transports of joy that he welcomed the idea of taking up his abode at
the Borderie with Marie-Anne.

When the day of departure had been decided upon, he counted the minutes
as impatiently as a school-boy pining for vacation.

“I am suffocating here,” he said to his wife. “I am suffocating. Time
drags so slowly. When will the happy day come?”

It came at last. During the morning all the articles which they
had succeeded in procuring during their stay at the farm-house were
collected and packed; and when night came, Poignot’s son began the
moving.

“Everything is at the Borderie,” said the honest fellow, on returning
from his last trip, “and Mademoiselle Lacheneur bids the baron bring a
good appetite.”

“I shall have one, never fear!” responded the baron, gayly. “We shall
all have one.”

Father Poignot himself was busily engaged in harnessing his best horse
to the cart which was to convey M. d’Escorval to his new home.

The worthy man’s heart grew sad at the thought of the departure of these
guests, for whose sake he had incurred such danger. He felt that he
should miss them, that the house would seem gloomy and deserted after
they left it.

He would allow no one else to perform the task of arranging the mattress
comfortably in the cart. When this had been done to his satisfaction, he
heaved a deep sigh, and exclaimed:

“It is time to start!”

Slowly he ascended the narrow staircase leading to the loft.

M. d’Escorval had not thought of the moment of parting.

At the sight of the honest farmer, who came toward him, his face
crimsoned with emotion to bid him farewell, he forgot all the comforts
that awaited him at the Borderie, in the remembrance of the loyal and
courageous hospitality he had received in the house he was about to
leave. The tears sprang to his eyes.

“You have rendered me a service which nothing can repay, Father
Poignot,” he said, with intense feeling. “You have saved my life.”

“Oh! we will not talk of that, Baron. In my place, you would have done
the same--neither more nor less.”

“I shall not attempt to express my thanks, but I hope to live long
enough to prove that I am not ungrateful.”

The staircase was so narrow that they had considerable difficulty in
carrying the baron down; but finally they had him comfortably extended
upon his mattress and threw over him a few handsful of straw, which
concealed him entirely.

“Farewell, then!” said the old farmer, when the last hand-shake had been
exchanged, “or rather _au revoir_, Monsieur le Baron, Madame, and you,
my good cure.”

“All ready?” inquired young Poignot.

“Yes,” replied the invalid.

The cart, driven with the utmost caution by the young peasant, started
slowly on its way.

Mme. d’Escorval, leaning upon the abbe’s arm, walked about twenty paces
in the rear.

It was very dark, but had it been as light as day the former cure of
Sairmeuse might have encountered any of his old parishioners without the
least danger of detection.

His hair and his beard had been allowed to grow; his tonsure had
entirely disappeared, and his sedentary life had caused him to become
much stouter. He was clad like all the well-to-do peasants of the
neighborhood, and his face was hidden by a large slouch hat.

He had not felt so tranquil in mind for months. Obstacles which had
appeared almost insurmountable had vanished. In the near future he
saw the baron declared innocent by impartial judges; he saw himself
reinstalled in the presbytery of Sairmeuse.

The recollection of Maurice was the only thing that marred his
happiness. Why did he not give some sign of life?

“But if he had met with any misfortune we should have heard of it,”
 thought the priest. “He has with him a brave man--an old soldier who
would risk anything to come and tell us.”

He was so absorbed in these thoughts that he did not observe that Mme.
d’Escorval was leaning more and more heavily upon his arm.

“I am ashamed to confess it,” she said at last, “but I can go no
farther. It has been so long since I was out of doors that I have almost
forgotten how to walk.”

“Fortunately, we are almost there,” replied the priest.

A moment after young Poignot stopped his cart in the road, at the
entrance of the little footpath leading to the Borderie.

“Our journey is ended!” he remarked to the baron. Then he uttered a
low whistle, like that which he had given a few hours before, to warn
Marie-Anne of his arrival.

No one appeared; he whistled again, louder this time; then with all his
might--still no response.

Mme. d’Escorval and the abbe had now overtaken the cart.

“It is very strange that Marie-Anne does not hear me,” remarked young
Poignot, turning to them. “We cannot take the baron to the house until
we have seen her. She knows that very well. Shall I run up and warn
her?”

“She is asleep, perhaps,” replied the abbe; “you stay with your horse,
my boy, and I will go and wake her.”

Certainly he did not feel the slightest disquietude. All was calm and
still; a bright light was shining through the windows of the second
story.

Still, when he saw the open door, a vague presentiment of evil stirred
his heart.

“What can this mean?” he thought.

There was no light in the lower rooms, and the abbe was obliged to feel
for the staircase with his hands. At last he found it and went up. But
upon the threshold of the chamber he paused, petrified with horror by
the spectacle before him.

Poor Marie-Anne was lying on the floor. Her eyes, which were wide open,
were covered with a white film; her black and swollen tongue was hanging
from her mouth.

“Dead!” faltered the priest, “dead!”

But this could not be. The abbe conquered his weakness, and approaching
the poor girl, he took her hand.

It was icy cold; the arm was rigid as iron.

“Poisoned!” he murmured; “poisoned with arsenic.”

He rose to his feet, and cast a bewildered glance around the room. His
eyes fell upon his medicine-chest, open upon the table.

He rushed to it and unhesitatingly took out a vial, uncorked it, and
inverted it on the palm of his hand--it was empty.

“I was not mistaken!” he exclaimed.

But he had no time to lose in conjectures.

The first thing to be done was to induce the baron to return to the
farm-house without telling him the terrible misfortune which had
occurred.

To find a pretext was easy enough.

The priest hastened back to the wagon, and with well-affected calmness
told the baron that it would be impossible for him to take up his abode
at the Borderie at present, that several suspicious-looking characters
had been seen prowling about, and that they must be more prudent than
ever, now they could rely upon the kindly intervention of Martial de
Sairmeuse.

At last, but not without considerable reluctance, the baron yielded.

“You desire it, cure,” he sighed, “so I obey. Come, Poignot, my boy,
take me back to your father’s house.”

Mme. d’Escorval took a seat in the cart beside her husband; the priest
watched them as they drove away, and not until the sound of their
carriage-wheels had died away in the distance did he venture to go back
to the Borderie.

He was ascending the stairs when he heard moans that seemed to issue
from the chamber of death. The sound sent all his blood wildly rushing
to his heart. He darted up the staircase.

A man was kneeling beside Marie-Anne, weeping bitterly. The expression
of his face, his attitude, his sobs betrayed the wildest despair. He was
so lost in grief that he did not observe the abbe’s entrance.

Who was this mourner who had found his way to the house of death?

After a moment, the priest divined who the intruder was, though he did
not recognize him.

“Jean!” he cried, “Jean Lacheneur!”

With a bound the young man was on his feet, pale and menacing; a flame
of anger drying the tears in his eyes.

“Who are you?” he demanded, in a terrible voice. “What are you doing
here? What do you wish with me?”

By his peasant dress and by his long beard, the former cure of Sairmeuse
was so effectually disguised that he was obliged to tell who he really
was.

As soon as he uttered his name, Jean uttered a cry of joy.

“God has sent you here!” he exclaimed. “Marie-Anne cannot be dead! You,
who have saved so many others, will save her.”

As the priest sadly pointed to heaven, Jean paused, his face more
ghastly than before. He understood now that there was no hope.

“Ah!” he murmured, with an accent of frightful despondency, “fate
shows us no mercy. I have been watching over Marie-Anne, though from
a distance; and this very evening I was coming to say to her: ‘Beware,
sister--be cautious!’”

“What! you knew----”

“I knew she was in great danger; yes, Monsieur. An hour ago, while I was
eating my supper in a restaurant at Sairmeuse, Grollet’s son entered.
‘Is this you, Jean?’ said he. ‘I just saw Chupin hiding near your
sister’s house; when he observed me he slunk away.’ I ran here like
one crazed. But when fate is against a man, what can he do? I came too
late!”

The abbe reflected for a moment.

“Then you suppose that it was Chupin?”

“I do not suppose, sir; I _swear_ that it was he--the miserable
traitor!--who committed this foul deed.”

“Still, what motive could he have had?”

Jean burst into one of those discordant laughs that are, perhaps, the
most frightful signs of despair.

“You may rest assured that the blood of the daughter will yield him
a richer reward than did the father’s. Chupin has been the vile
instrument; but it was not he who conceived the crime. You will have to
seek higher for the culprit, much higher, in the finest chateau of the
country, in the midst of an army of valets at Sairmeuse, in short!”

“Wretched man, what do you mean?”

“What I say.”

And coldly, he added:

“Martial de Sairmeuse is the assassin.” The priest recoiled, really
appalled by the looks and manner of the grief-stricken man.

“You are mad!” he said, severely.

But Jean gravely shook his head.

“If I seem so to you, sir,” he replied, “it is only because you are
ignorant of Martial’s wild passion for Marie-Anne. He wished to make
her his mistress. She had the audacity to refuse this honor; that was
a crime for which she must be punished. When the Marquis de Sairmeuse
became convinced that Lacheneur’s daughter would never be his, he
poisoned her that she might not belong to another.”

Any attempt to convince Jean of the folly of his accusation would have
been vain at that moment. No proofs would have convinced him. He would
have closed his eyes to all evidence.

“To-morrow, when he is more calm, I will reason with him,” thought the
abbe; then, turning to Jean, he said:

“We cannot allow the body of the poor girl to remain here upon the
floor. Assist me, and we will place it upon the bed.”

Jean trembled from head to foot, and his hesitation was apparent.

“Very well!” he said, at last, after a severe struggle.

No one had ever slept upon this bed which poor Chanlouineau had destined
for Marie-Anne.

“It shall be for her,” he said to himself, “or for no one.”

And it was Marie-Anne who rested there first--dead.

When this sad task was accomplished, he threw himself into the same
arm-chair in which Marie-Anne had breathed her last, and with his face
buried in his hands, and his elbows supported upon his knees, he sat
there as silent and motionless as the statues of sorrow placed above the
last resting-places of the dead.

The abbe knelt at the head of the bed and began the recital of the
prayers for the dead, entreating God to grant peace and happiness in
heaven to her who had suffered so much upon earth.

But he prayed only with his lips. In spite of his efforts, his mind
would persist in wandering.

He was striving to solve the mystery that enshrouded Marie-Anne’s death.
Had she been murdered? Could it be that she had committed suicide?

This explanation recurred to him, but he could not believe it.

But, on the other hand, how could her death possibly be the result of a
crime?

He had carefully examined the room, and he had discovered nothing that
betrayed the presence of a stranger.

All that he could prove was, that his vial of arsenic was empty, and
that Marie-Anne had been poisoned by the bouillon, a few drops of which
were left in the bowl that was standing upon the mantel.

“When daylight comes,” thought the abbe, “I will look outside.”

When morning broke, he went into the garden, and made a careful
examination of the premises.

At first he saw nothing that gave him the least clew, and was about to
abandon the investigations, when, upon entering the little grove, he saw
in the distance a large dark stain upon the grass. He went nearer--it
was blood!

Much excited, he summoned Jean, to inform him of the discovery.

“Someone has been assassinated here,” said Lacheneur; “and it happened
last night, for the blood has not had time to dry.”

“The victim lost a great deal of blood,” the priest remarked; “it might
be possible to discover who he was by following up these stains.”

“I am going to try,” responded Jean. “Go back to the house, sir; I will
soon return.”

A child might have followed the track of the wounded man, the
blood-stains left in his passage were so frequent and so distinct.

These tell-tale marks stopped at Chupin’s house. The door was closed;
Jean rapped without the slightest hesitation.

The old poacher’s eldest son opened the door, and Jean saw a strange
spectacle.

The traitor’s body had been thrown on the ground, in a corner of the
room, the bed was overturned and broken, all the straw had been torn
from the mattress, and the wife and sons of the dead man, armed with
pickaxes and spades, were wildly overturning the beaten soil that formed
the floor of the hovel. They were seeking the hidden treasures.

“What do you want?” demanded the widow, rudely.

“Father Chupin.”

“You can see very plainly that he has been murdered,” replied one of the
sons.

And brandishing his pick a few inches from Jean’s head, he exclaimed:

“And you, perhaps, are the assassin. But that is for justice to
determine. Now, decamp; if you do not----”

Had he listened to the promptings of anger, Jean Lacheneur would
certainly have attempted to make the Chupins repent their menaces.

But a conflict was scarcely permissible under the circumstances.

He departed without a word, and hastened back to the Borderie.

The death of Chupin overturned all his plans, and greatly irritated him.

“I had sworn that the vile wretch who betrayed my father should perish
by my hand,” he murmured; “and now my vengeance has escaped me. Someone
has robbed me of it.”

Then he asked himself who the murderer could be.

“Is it possible that Martial assassinated Chupin after he murdered
Marie-Anne? To kill an accomplice is an effectual way of assuring one’s
self of his silence.”

He had reached the Borderie, and was about going upstairs, when he
thought he heard the sound of voices in the back room.

“That is strange,” he said to himself. “Who can it be?”

And impelled by curiosity, he went and tapped upon the communicating
door.

The abbe instantly made his appearance, hurriedly closing the door
behind him. He was very pale, and visibly agitated.

“Who is it?” inquired Jean, eagerly.

“It is--it is. Guess who it is.”

“How can I guess?”

“Maurice d’Escorval and Corporal Bavois.”

“My God!”

“And it is a miracle that he has not been upstairs.”

“But whence does he come? Why have we received no news of him?”

“I do not know. He has been here only five minutes. Poor boy! after
I told him that his father was safe, his first words were: ‘And
Marie-Anne?’ He loves her more devotedly than ever. He comes with his
heart full of her, confident and hopeful; and I tremble--I fear to tell
him the truth.”

“Oh, terrible! terrible!”

“I have warned you; be prudent--and now, come in.”

They entered the room together; and Maurice and the old soldier greeted
Jean with the most ardent expressions of friendship.

They had not seen each other since the duel on the Reche, which had been
interrupted by the arrival of the soldiers; and when they parted that
day they scarcely expected to meet again.

“And now we are together once more,” said Maurice, gayly, “and we have
nothing to fear.”

Never had the unfortunate man seemed so cheerful; and it was with the
most jubilant air that he explained the reason of his long silence.

“Three days after we crossed the frontier,” said he, “Corporal Bavois
and I reached Turin. It was time, for we were tired out. We went to a
small inn, and they gave us a room with two beds.

“That evening, while we were undressing, the corporal said to me: ‘I
am capable of sleeping two whole days without waking.’ I, too, promised
myself a rest of at least twelve hours. We reckoned without our host, as
you will see.

“It was scarcely daybreak when we were awakened by a great tumult. A
dozen rough-looking men entered our room, and ordered us, in Italian, to
dress ourselves. They were too strong for us, so we obeyed; and an hour
later we were in prison, confined in the same cell. Our reflections, I
confess, were not _couleur de rose_.

“I well remember how the corporal said again and again, in that cool way
of his: ‘It will require four days to obtain our extradition, three days
to take us back to Montaignac--that is seven days; it will take one day
more to try me; so I have in all eight days to live.’”

“Upon my word! that was exactly what I thought,” said the old soldier,
approvingly.

“For five months,” continued Maurice, “instead of saying ‘good-night’ to
each other, we said: ‘To-morrow they will come for us.’ But they did not
come.

“We were kindly treated. They did not take away my money; and they
willingly sold us little luxuries; they also granted us two hours of
exercise each day in the court-yard, and even loaned us books to read.
In short, I should not have had any particular cause to complain, if I
had been allowed to receive or to forward letters, or if I had been able
to communicate with my father or with Marie-Anne. But we were in the
secret cells, and were not allowed to have any intercourse with the
other prisoners.

“At length our detention seemed so strange and became so insupportable
to us, that we resolved to obtain some explanation of it, cost what it
might.

“We changed our tactics. Up to that time we had been quite submissive;
we suddenly became violent and intractable. We made the prison resound
with our cries and protestations; we were continually sending for the
superintendent; we claimed the intervention of the French ambassador. We
were not obliged to wait long for the result.

“One fine afternoon, the superintendent released us, not without
expressing much regret at being deprived of the society of such amiable
and charming guests.

“Our first act, as you may suppose, was to run to the ambassador. We did
not see that dignitary, but his secretary received us. He knit his brows
when I told my story, and became excessively grave. I remember each word
of his reply.

“‘Monsieur,’ said he, ‘I can swear that the persecution of which you
have been the object in France had nothing whatever to do with your
detention here.’

“And as I expressed my astonishment:

“‘One moment,’ he added. ‘I shall express my opinion very frankly. One
of your enemies--I leave you to discover which one--must exert a very
powerful influence in Turin. You were in his way, perhaps; he had you
imprisoned by the Piedmontese police.’”

With a heavy blow of his clinched fist, Jean Lacheneur made the table
beside him reel.

“Ah! the secretary was right!” he exclaimed. “Maurice, it was Martial de
Sairmeuse who caused your arrest----”

“Or the Marquis de Courtornieu,” interrupted the abbe, with a warning
glance at Jean.

A wrathful light gleamed for an instant in the eyes of Maurice; but it
vanished almost immediately, and he shrugged his shoulders carelessly.

“Nonsense,” said he, “I do not wish to trouble myself any more about
the past. My father is well again, that is the main thing. We can easily
find some way of getting him safely across the frontier. Marie-Anne
and I, by our devotion, will strive to make him forget that my rashness
almost cost him his life. He is so good, so indulgent to the faults of
others. We will take up our residence in Italy or in Switzerland. You
will accompany us, Monsieur l’Abbe, and you also, Jean. As for you,
corporal, it is decided that you belong to our family.”

Nothing could be more horrible than to see this man, upon whose life
such a terrible blight was about to fall, so bright and full of hope and
confidence.

The impression produced upon Jean and the abbe was so terrible, that,
in spite of their efforts, it showed itself in their faces; and Maurice
remarked their agitation.

“What is the matter?” he inquired, in evident surprise.

They trembled, hung their heads, but did not say a word.

The unfortunate man’s astonishment changed to a vague, inexpressible
fear.

He enumerated all the misfortunes which could possibly have befallen
him.

“What has happened?” he asked, in a stifled voice. “My father is safe,
is he not? You said that my mother would desire nothing, if I were with
her again. Is it Marie-Anne----”

He hesitated.

“Courage, Maurice,” murmured the abbe. “Courage!”

The stricken man tottered as if about to fall; his face grew whiter than
the plastered wall against which he leaned for support.

“Marie-Anne is dead!” he exclaimed.

Jean and the abbe were silent.

“Dead!” Maurice repeated--“and no secret voice warned me! Dead! when?”

“She died only last night,” replied Jean.

Maurice rose.

“Last night?” said he. “In that case, then, she is still here. Where?
upstairs?”

And without waiting for any response, he darted toward the staircase so
quickly that neither Jean nor the abbe had time to intercept him.

With three bounds he reached the chamber; he walked straight to the
bed, and with a firm hand turned back the sheet that hid the face of the
dead.

He recoiled with a heart-broken cry.

Was this indeed the beautiful, the radiant Marie-Anne, whom he had loved
to his own undoing! He did not recognize her.

He could not recognize these distorted features, this face swollen and
discolored by poison, these eyes which were almost concealed by the
purple swelling around them.

When Jean and the priest entered the room they found him standing with
head thrown back, eyes dilated with terror, and rigid arm extended
toward the corpse.

“Maurice,” said the priest, gently, “be calm. Courage!”

He turned with an expression of complete bewilderment upon his features.

“Yes,” he faltered, “that is what I need--courage!”

He staggered; they were obliged to support him to an arm-chair.

“Be a man,” continued the priest; “where is your energy? To live, is to
suffer.”

He listened, but did not seem to comprehend.

“Live!” he murmured, “why should I desire to live since she is dead?”

The dread light of insanity glittered in his dry eyes. The abbe was
alarmed.

“If he does not weep, he will lose his reason!” he thought.

And in an imperious voice, he said:

“You have no right to despair thus; you owe a sacred duty to your
child.”

He recoiled with a heart-broken cry.

The recollection which had given Marie-Anne strength to hold death at
bay for a moment, saved Maurice from the dangerous torpor into which he
was sinking. He trembled as if he had received an electric shock, and
springing from his chair:

“That is true,” he cried. “Take me to my child.”

“Not just now, Maurice; wait a little.”

“Where is it? Tell me where it is.”

“I cannot; I do not know.”

An expression of unspeakable anguish stole over the face of Maurice, and
in a husky voice he said:

“What! you do not know! Did she not confide in you?”

“No. I suspected her secret. I alone----”

“You, alone! Then the child is dead, perhaps. Even if it is living, who
can tell me where it is?”

“We shall undoubtedly find something that will give us a clew.”

“You are right,” faltered the wretched man. “When Marie-Anne knew that
her life was in danger, she would not have forgotten her child. Those
who cared for her in her last moments must have received some message
for me. I wish to see those who watched over her. Who were they?”

The priest averted his face.

“I asked you who was with her when she died,” repeated Maurice, in a
sort of frenzy.

And, as the abbe remained silent, a terrible light dawned on the mind
of the stricken man. He understood the cause of Marie-Anne’s distorted
features now.

“She perished the victim of a crime!” he exclaimed.

“Some monster has killed her. If she died such a death, our child is
lost forever! And it was I who recommended, who commanded the greatest
precautions! Ah! it is a curse upon me!”

He sank back in his chair, overwhelmed with sorrow and remorse, and
silent tears rolled slowly down his cheeks.

“He is saved!” thought the abbe, whose heart bled at the sight of such
despair. Suddenly someone plucked him by the sleeve.

It was Jean Lacheneur, and he drew the priest into the embrasure of a
window.

“What is this about a child?” he asked, harshly.

A flood of crimson suffused the brow of the priest.

“You have heard,” he responded, laconically.

“Am I to understand that Marie-Anne was the mistress of Maurice, and
that she had a child by him? Is this true? I will not--I cannot believe
it! She, whom I revered as a saint! Did her pure forehead and her
chaste looks lie? And he--Maurice--he whom I loved as a brother! So, his
friendship was only a mask assumed to enable him to steal our honor!”

He hissed these words through his set teeth in such low tones that
Maurice, absorbed in his agony of grief, did not overhear him.

“But how did she conceal her shame?” he continued. “No one suspected
it--absolutely no one. And what has she done with her child? Appalled by
a dread of disgrace, did she commit the crime committed by so many other
ruined and forsaken women? Did she murder her own child?”

A hideous smile curved his thin lips.

“If the child is alive,” he added, “I will find it, and Maurice shall
be punished for his perfidy as he deserves.” He paused; the sound of
horses’ hoofs upon the road attracted his attention, and that of Abbe
Midon.

They glanced out of the window and saw a horseman stop before the little
footpath, alight from his horse, throw the reins to his groom, and
advance toward the Borderie.

At the sight of the visitor, Jean Lacheneur uttered the frightful howl
of an infuriated wild beast.

“The Marquis de Sairmeuse here!” he exclaimed.

He sprang to Maurice, and shaking him violently, he cried:

“Up! here is Martial, Marie-Anne’s murderer! Up! he is coming! he is at
our mercy!”

Maurice sprang up in a fury of passion, but the abbe darted to the door
and intercepted the infuriated men as they were about to leave the room.

“Not a word, young men, not a threat!” he said, imperiously. “I forbid
it. At least respect the dead who is lying here!”

There was such an irresistible authority in his words and glance, that
Jean and Maurice stood as if turned to stone.

Before the priest had time to say more, Martial was there.

He did not cross the threshold. With a glance he took in the whole
scene; he turned very pale, but not a gesture, not a word escaped his
lips.

Wonderful as was his accustomed control over himself, he could not
articulate a syllable; and it was only by pointing to the bed upon which
Marie-Anne’s lifeless form was reposing, that he asked an explanation.

“She was infamously poisoned last evening,” replied the abbe, sadly.

Maurice, forgetting the priest’s commands, stepped forward.

“She was alone and defenceless. I have been at liberty only two days.
But I know the name of the man who had me arrested at Turin, and thrown
into prison. They told me the coward’s name!”

Instinctively Martial recoiled.

“It was you, infamous wretch!” exclaimed Maurice. “You confess your
guilt, scoundrel?”

Once again the abbe interposed; he threw himself between the rivals,
persuaded that Martial was about to attack Maurice.

But no; the Marquis de Sairmeuse had resumed the haughty and indifferent
manner which was habitual to him. He took from his pocket a bulky
envelope, and throwing it upon the table:

“Here,” he said coldly, “is what I was bringing to Mademoiselle
Lacheneur. It contains first a safe-conduct from His Majesty for
Monsieur d’Escorval. From this moment, he is at liberty to leave
Poignot’s farm-house and return to Escorval. He is free, he is saved, he
is granted a new trial, and there can be no doubt of his acquittal. Here
is also a decree of his non-complicity rendered in favor of Abbe Midon,
and an order from the bishop which reinstates him as Cure of Sairmeuse;
and lastly, a discharge, drawn up in due form, and an acknowledged right
to a pension in the name of Corporal Bavois.”

He paused, and as his astonished hearers stood rooted to their places
with wonder, he turned and approached Marie-Anne’s bedside.

With hand uplifted to heaven over the lifeless form of her whom he had
loved, and in a voice that would have made the murderess tremble in her
innermost soul, he said, solemnly:

“To you, Marie-Anne, I swear that I will avenge you!”

For a few seconds he stood motionless, then suddenly he stopped, pressed
a kiss upon the dead girl’s brow, and left the room.

“And you think that man can be guilty!” exclaimed the abbe. “You see,
Jean, that you are mad!”

“And this last insult to my dead sister is an honor, I suppose,” said
Jean, with a furious gesture.

“And the wretch binds my hands by saving my father!” exclaimed Maurice.

From his place by the window, the abbe saw Martial remount his horse.

But the marquis did not take the road to Montaignac. It was toward the
Chateau de Courtornieu that he hastened.



CHAPTER XLVIII

The reason of Mme. Blanche had sustained a frightful shock, when Chupin
was obliged to lift her and carry her from Marie-Anne’s chamber.

But she lost consciousness entirely when she saw the old poacher
stricken down by her side.

On and after that night Aunt Medea took her revenge for all the slights
she had received.

Scarcely tolerated until then at Courtornieu, she henceforth made
herself respected, and even feared.

She, who usually swooned if a kitten hurt itself, did not utter a cry.
Her extreme fear gave her the courage that not unfrequently animates
cowards when they are in some dire extremity.

She seized the arm of her bewildered niece, and, by dint of dragging and
pushing, had her back at the chateau in much less time than it had taken
them to go to the Borderie.

It was half-past one o’clock when they reached the little garden-gate,
by which they had left the grounds.

No one in the chateau was aware of their long absence.

This was due to several different circumstances. First, to the
precautions taken by Blanche, who had given orders, before going out,
that no one should come to her room, on any pretext whatever, unless she
rang.

It also chanced to be the birthday of the marquis’s _valet de chambre_.
The servants had dined more sumptuously than usual. They had toasts
and songs over their dessert; and at the conclusion of the repast, they
amused themselves by an extempore ball.

They were still dancing at half-past one; all the doors were open, and
the two ladies succeeded in gaining the chamber of Blanche without being
observed.

When the doors of the apartment had been securely closed, and when there
was no longer any fear of listeners, Aunt Medea attacked her niece.

“Now will you explain what happened at the Borderie; and what you were
doing there?” she inquired.

Blanche shuddered.

“Why do you wish to know?” she asked.

“Because I suffered agony during the three hours that I spent in waiting
for you. What was the meaning of those despairing cries that I heard?
Why did you call for aid? I heard a death-rattle that made my hair stand
on end with terror. Why was it necessary for Chupin to bring you out in
his arms?”

Aunt Medea would have packed her trunks, perhaps, that very evening, had
she seen the glance which her niece bestowed upon her.

Blanche longed for power to annihilate this relative--this witness who
might ruin her by a word, but whom she would ever have beside her, a
living reproach for her crime.

“You do not answer me,” insisted Aunt Medea.

Blanche was trying to decide whether it would be better for her to
reveal the truth, horrible as it was, or to invent some plausible
explanation.

To confess all! It would be intolerable. She would place herself, body
and soul, in Aunt Medea’s power.

But, on the other hand, if she deceived her, was it not more than
probable that her aunt would betray her by some involuntary exclamation
when she heard of the crime which had been committed at the Borderie?

“For she is so stupid!” thought Blanche.

She felt that it would be the wisest plan, under such circumstances, to
be perfectly frank, to teach her relative her lesson, and to imbue her
with some of her own firmness.

Having come to this conclusion, she disdained all concealment.

“Ah, well!” she said, “I was jealous of Marie-Anne. I thought she was
Martial’s mistress. I was half crazed, and I killed her.”

She expected despairing cries, or a fainting fit; nothing of the kind.
Stupid though Aunt Medea was, she had divined the truth before she
interrogated her niece. Besides, the insults she had received for years
had extinguished every generous sentiment, dried up the springs of
emotion, and destroyed every particle of moral sensibility she had ever
possessed.

“Ah!” she exclaimed, “it is terrible! What if it should be discovered!”

Then she shed a few tears, but not more than she had often wept for some
trifle.

Blanche breathed more freely. Surely she could count upon the silence
and absolute submission of her dependent relative. Convinced of this,
she began to recount all the details of the frightful drama which had
been enacted at the Borderie.

She yielded to a desire which was stronger than her own will; to the
wild longing that sometimes unbinds the tongue of the worst criminals,
and forces them--irresistibly impels them--to talk of their crimes, even
when they distrust their confidant.

But when she came to the proofs which had convinced her of her
lamentable mistake, she suddenly paused in dismay.

That certificate of marriage signed by the Cure of Vigano; what had she
done with it? where was it? She remembered holding it in her hands.

She sprang up, examined the pocket of her dress and uttered a cry of
joy. She had it safe. She threw it into a drawer, and turned the key.

Aunt Medea wished to retire to her own room, but Blanche entreated her
to remain. She was unwilling to be left alone--she dared not--she was
afraid.

And as if she desired to silence the inward voice that tormented her,
she talked with extreme volubility, repeating again and again that she
was ready to do anything in expiation of her crime, and that she would
brave impossibilities to recover Marie-Anne’s child.

And certainly, the task was both difficult and dangerous.

If she sought the child openly, it would be equivalent to a confession
of guilt. She would be compelled to act secretly, and with great
caution.

“But I shall succeed,” she said. “I will spare no expense.”

And remembering her vow, and the threats of her dying victim, she added:

“I must succeed. I have sworn--and I was forgiven under those
conditions.”

Astonishment dried the ever ready tears of Aunt Medea.

That her niece, with her dreadful crime still fresh in her mind, could
coolly reason, deliberate, and make plans for the future, seemed to her
incomprehensible.

“What an iron will!” she thought.

But in her bewilderment she quite overlooked something that would have
enlightened any ordinary observer.

Blanche was seated upon her bed, her hair was unbound, her eyes were
glittering with delirium, and her incoherent words and her excited
gestures betrayed the frightful anxiety that was torturing her.

And she talked and talked, exclaiming, questioning Aunt Medea, and
forcing her to reply, only that she might escape from her own thoughts.

Morning had dawned some time before, and the servants were heard
bustling about the chateau, and Blanche, oblivious to all around
her, was still explaining how she could, in less than a year, restore
Marie-Anne’s child to Maurice d’Escorval.

She paused abruptly in the middle of a sentence.

Instinct had suddenly warned her of the danger she incurred in making
the slightest change in her habits.

She sent Aunt Medea away, then, at the usual hour, rang for her maid.

It was nearly eleven o’clock, and she was just completing her toilet,
when the ringing of the bell announced a visitor.

Almost immediately a maid appeared, evidently in a state of great
excitement.

“What is it?” inquired Blanche, eagerly. “Who has come?”

“Ah, Madame--that is, Mademoiselle, if you only knew----”

“_Will_ you speak?”

“The Marquis de Sairmeuse is below, in the blue drawing-room; and he
begs Mademoiselle to grant him a few moments’ conversation.”

Had a thunder-bolt riven the earth at the feet of the murderess, she
could not have been more terrified.

“All must have been discovered!” this was her first thought. That alone
would have brought Martial there.

She almost decided to reply that she was not at home, or that she
was extremely ill; but reason told her that she was alarming herself
needlessly, perhaps, and that, in any case, the worst was preferable to
suspense.

“Tell the marquis that I will be there in a moment,” she replied.

She desired a few minutes of solitude to compose her features, to regain
her self-possession, if possible, and to conquer the nervous trembling
that made her shake like a leaf.

But just as she was most disquieted by the thought of her peril, a
sudden inspiration brought a malicious smile to her lip.

“Ah!” she thought, “my agitation will seem perfectly natural. It may
even be made of service.”

As she descended the grand staircase, she could not help saying to
herself:

“Martial’s presence here is incomprehensible.”

It was certainly very extraordinary; and it had not been without much
hesitation that he resolved upon this painful step.

But it was the only means of procuring several important documents which
were indispensable in the revision of M. d’Escorval’s case.

These documents, after the baron’s condemnation, had been left in the
hands of the Marquis de Courtornieu. Now that he had lost his reason, it
was impossible to ask him for them; and Martial was obliged to apply
to the daughter for permission to search for them among her father’s
papers.

This was why Martial said to himself that morning:

“I will carry the baron’s safe-conduct to Marie-Anne, and then I will
push on to Courtornieu.”

He arrived at the Borderie gay and confident, his heart full of hope.
Alas! Marie-Anne was dead.

No one would ever know what a terrible blow it had been to Martial; and
his conscience told him that he was not free from blame; that he had, at
least, rendered the execution of the crime an easy matter.

For it was indeed he who, by abusing his influence, had caused the
arrest of Maurice at Turin.

But though he was capable of the basest perfidy when his love was at
stake, he was incapable of virulent animosity.

Marie-Anne was dead; he had it in his power to revoke the benefits he
had conferred, but the thought of doing so never once occurred to him.
And when Jean and Maurice insulted him, he revenged himself only by
overwhelming them by his magnanimity. When he left the Borderie, pale
as a ghost, his lips still cold from the kiss pressed on the brow of the
dead, he said to himself:

“For her sake, I will go to Courtornieu. In memory of her, the baron
must be saved.”

By the expression on the faces of the valets when he dismounted in the
court-yard of the chateau and asked to see Mme. Blanche, the marquis
was again reminded of the profound sensation which this unexpected visit
would produce. But, what did it matter to him? He was passing through
one of those crises in which the mind can conceive of no further
misfortune, and is therefore indifferent to everything.

Still he trembled when they ushered him into the blue drawing-room.
He remembered the room well. It was here that Blanche had been wont to
receive him in days gone by, when his fancy was vacillating between her
and Marie-Anne.

How many pleasant hours they had passed together here! He seemed to see
Blanche again, as she was then, radiant with youth, gay and laughing.
Her naivete was affected, perhaps, but was it any the less charming on
that account?

At this very moment Blanche entered the room. She looked so careworn
and sad that he scarcely knew her. His heart was touched by the look of
patient sorrow imprinted upon her features.

“How much you must have suffered, Blanche,” he murmured, scarcely
knowing what he said.

It cost her an effort to repress her secret joy. She saw that he knew
nothing of her crime. She noticed his emotion, and saw the profit she
could derive from it.

“I can never cease to regret having displeased you,” she replied, humbly
and sadly. “I shall never be consoled.”

She had touched the vulnerable spot in every man’s heart.

For there is no man so sceptical, so cold, or so _blase_ that his vanity
is not pleased with the thought that a woman is dying for his sake.

There is no man who is not moved by this most delicious flattery,
and who is not ready and willing to give, at least, a tender pity in
exchange for such devotion.

“Is it possible that you could forgive me?” stammered Martial.

The wily enchantress averted her face as if to prevent him from reading
in her eyes a weakness of which she was ashamed. It was the most
eloquent of replies.

But Martial said no more on this subject. He made known his petition,
which was granted, then fearing, perhaps, to promise too much, he said:

“Since you do not forbid it, Blanche, I will return--to-morrow--another
day.”

As he rode back to Montaignac, Martial’s thoughts were busy.

“She really loves me,” he thought; “that pallor, that weakness could
not be feigned. Poor girl! she is my wife, after all. The reasons that
influenced me in my rupture with her father exist no longer, and the
Marquis de Courtornieu may be regarded as dead.”

All the inhabitants of Sairmeuse were congregated on the public square
when Martial passed through the village. They had just heard of the
murder at the Borderie, and the abbe was now closeted with the justice
of the peace, relating the circumstances of the poisoning.

After a prolonged inquest the following verdict was rendered: “That a
man known as Chupin, a notoriously bad character, had entered the house
of Marie-Anne Lacheneur, and taken advantage of her absence to mingle
poison with her food.”

The report added that: “Said Chupin had been himself assassinated, soon
after his crime, by a certain Balstain, whose whereabouts were unknown.”

But this affair interested the community much less than the visits which
Martial was paying to Mme. Blanche.

It was soon rumored that the Marquis and the Marquise de Sairmeuse were
reconciled, and in a few weeks they left for Paris with the intention of
residing there permanently. A few days after their departure, the eldest
of the Chupins announced his determination of taking up his abode in the
same great city.

Some of his friends endeavored to dissuade him, assuring him that he
would certainly die of starvation.

“Nonsense!” he replied, with singular assurance; “I, on the contrary,
have an idea that I shall not want for anything there.”



CHAPTER XLIX

Time gradually heals all wounds, and in less than a year it was
difficult to discern any trace of the fierce whirlwind of passion which
had devastated the peaceful valley of the Oiselle.

What remained to attest the reality of all these events, which, though
they were so recent, had already been relegated to the domain of the
legendary?

A charred ruin on the Reche.

A grave in the cemetery, upon which was inscribed:

“Marie-Anne Lacheneur, died at the age of twenty. Pray for her!”

Only a few, the oldest men and the politicians of the village, forgot
their solicitude in regard to the crops to remember this episode.

Sometimes, during the long winter evenings, when they had gathered
at the Boeuf Couronne, they laid down their greasy cards and gravely
discussed the events of the past years.

They never failed to remark that almost all the actors in that bloody
drama at Montaignac had, in common parlance, “come to a bad end.”

Victors and vanquished seemed to be pursued by the same inexorable
fatality.

Look at the names already upon the fatal list!

Lacheneur, beheaded.

Chanlouineau, shot.

Marie-Anne, poisoned.

Chupin, the traitor, assassinated.

The Marquis de Courtornieu lived, or rather survived, but death would
have seemed a mercy in comparison with such total annihilation of
intelligence. He had fallen below the level of the brute, which is, at
least, endowed with instinct. Since the departure of his daughter he had
been cared for by two servants, who did not allow him to give them much
trouble, and when they desired to go out they shut him up, not in his
chamber, but in the cellar, to prevent his ravings and shrieks from
being heard from without.

If people supposed for awhile that the Sairmeuse would escape the fate
of the others, they were mistaken. It was not long before the curse fell
upon them.

One fine morning in the month of December, the duke left the chateau to
take part in a wolf-hunt in the neighborhood.

At nightfall, his horse returned, panting, covered with foam, and
riderless.

What had become of its master?

A search was instituted at once, and all night long twenty men, bearing
torches, wandered through the woods, shouting and calling at the top of
their voices.

Five days went by, and the search for the missing man was almost
abandoned, when a shepherd lad, pale with fear, came to the chateau one
morning to tell them that he had discovered, at the base of a precipice,
the bloody and mangled body of the Duc de Sairmeuse.

It seemed strange that such an excellent rider should have met with such
a fate. There might have been some doubt as to its being an accident,
had it not been for the explanation given by the grooms.

“The duke was riding an exceedingly vicious beast,” said these men. “She
was always taking fright and shying at everything.”

The following week Jean Lacheneur left the neighborhood.

The conduct of this singular man had caused much comment. When
Marie-Anne died, he at first refused his inheritance.

“I wish nothing that came to her through Chanlouineau!” he said
everywhere, thus calumniating the memory of his sister as he had
calumniated her when alive.

Then, after a short absence, and without any apparent reason, he
suddenly changed his mind.

He not only accepted the property, but made all possible haste to obtain
possession of it. He made many excuses; and, if one might believe him,
he was not acting in his own interest, but merely conforming to the
wishes of his deceased sister; and he declared that not a penny would go
into his pockets.

This much is certain, as soon as he obtained legal possession of the
estate, he sold all the property, troubling himself but little in regard
to the price he received, provided the purchasers paid cash.

He reserved only the furniture of the sumptuously adorned chamber at the
Borderie. These articles he burned.

This strange act was the talk of the neighborhood.

“The poor young man has lost his reason!” was the almost universal
opinion.

And those who doubted it, doubted it no longer when it became known
that Jean Lacheneur had formed an engagement with a company of strolling
players who stopped at Montaignac for a few days.

But the young man had not wanted for good advice and kind friends. M.
d’Escorval and the abbe had exerted all their eloquence to induce him to
return to Paris, and complete his studies; but in vain.

The necessity for concealment no longer existed, either in the case of
the baron or the priest.

Thanks to Martial de Sairmeuse they were now installed, the one in the
presbytery, the other at Escorval, as in days gone by.

Acquitted at his new trial, restored to the possession of his property,
reminded of his frightful fall only by a very slight lameness, the baron
would have deemed himself a fortunate man, had it not been for his great
anxiety on his son’s account.

Poor Maurice! his heart was broken by the sound of the clods of earth
falling upon Marie-Anne’s coffin; and his very life now seemed dependent
upon the hope of finding his child.

Assured of the powerful assistance of Abbe Midon, he had confessed all
to his father, and confided his secret to Corporal Bavois, who was an
honored guest at Escorval; and these devoted friends had promised him
all possible aid.

The task was very difficult, however, and certain resolutions on the
part of Maurice greatly diminished the chance of success.

Unlike Jean, he was determined to guard religiously the honor of the
dead; and he had made _his_ friends promise that Marie-Anne’s name
should not be mentioned in prosecuting the search.

“We shall succeed all the same,” said the abbe, kindly; “with time and
patience any mystery can be solved.”

He divided the department into a certain number of districts; then one
of the little band went each day from house to house questioning
the inmates, but not without extreme caution, for fear of arousing
suspicion, for a peasant becomes intractable at once if his suspicions
are aroused.

But the weeks went by, and the quest was fruitless. Maurice was deeply
discouraged.

“My child died on coming into the world,” he said, again and again.

But the abbe reassured him.

“I am morally certain that such was not the case,” he replied. “I know,
by Marie-Anne’s absence, the date of her child’s birth. I saw her after
her recovery; she was comparatively gay and smiling. Draw your own
conclusions.”

“And yet there is not a nook or corner for miles around which we have
not explored.”

“True; but we must extend the circle of our investigations.”

The priest, now, was only striving to gain time, knowing full well that
it is the sovereign balm for all sorrows.

His confidence, which had been very great at first, had been sensibly
diminished by the responses of an old woman, who passed for one of the
greatest gossips in the community.

Adroitly interrogated, the worthy dame replied that she knew nothing of
such a child, but that there must be one in the neighborhood, since it
was the third time she had been questioned on the subject.

Intense as was his surprise, the abbe succeeded in hiding it.

He set the old gossip to talking, and after a two hours’ conversation,
he arrived at the conclusion that two persons besides Maurice were
searching for Marie-Anne’s child.

Why, with what aim, and who these persons could be the abbe was unable
to ascertain.

“Ah! rascals have their uses after all,” he thought. “If we only had a
man like Chupin to set upon the track!”

But the old poacher was dead, and his eldest son--the one who knew
Blanche de Courtornieu’s secret--was in Paris.

Only the widow and the second son remained in Sairmeuse.

They had not, as yet, succeeded in discovering the twenty thousand
francs, but the fever for gold was burning in their veins, and they
persisted in their search. From morning until night the mother and son
toiled on, until the earth around their hut had been explored to the
depth of six feet.

A word dropped by a peasant one day put an end to these researches.

“Really, my boy,” he said, addressing young Chupin, “I did not suppose
you were such a fool as to persist in hunting birds’ nests after the
birds have flown. Your brother, who is in Paris, can undoubtedly tell
you where the treasure was concealed.”

The younger Chupin uttered the fierce roar of a wild beast.

“Holy Virgin! you are right!” he exclaimed. “Wait until I get money
enough to take me to Paris, and we will see.”



CHAPTER L

Martial de Sairmeuse’s unexpected visit to the Chateau de Courtornieu
had alarmed Aunt Medea even more than Blanche.

In ten seconds, more ideas passed through her brain than had visited it
for ten years.

She saw the gendarmes at the chateau; she saw her niece arrested,
incarcerated in the Montaignac prison, and brought before the Court of
Assizes.

If this were all she had to fear! But suppose she, too, were
compromised, suspected of complicity, dragged before the judge, and even
accused of being the sole culprit!

Finding the suspense intolerable, she left her room; and, stealing on
tiptoe to the great drawing-room, she applied her ear to the door of the
little blue salon, in which Blanche and Martial were seated.

The conversation which she heard convinced her that her fears were
groundless.

She drew a long breath, as if a mighty burden had been lifted from her
breast. But a new idea, which was to grow, flourish, and bear fruit, had
just taken root in her brain.

When Martial left the room, Aunt Medea at once opened the communicating
door and entered the blue salon, thus avowing that she had been a
listener.

Twenty-four hours earlier she would not have dreamed of committing such
an enormity.

“Well, Blanche, we were frightened at nothing,” she exclaimed.

Blanche did not reply.

She was deliberating, forcing herself to weigh the probable consequences
of all these events which had succeeded each other with such marvellous
rapidity.

“Perhaps the hour of my revenge is almost here,” murmured Blanche, as if
communing with herself.

“What do you say?” inquired Aunt Medea, with evident curiosity.

“I say, aunt, that in less than a month I shall be Marquise de Sairmeuse
in reality as well as in name. My husband will return to me, and
then--oh, then!”

“God grant it!” said Aunt Medea, hypocritically.

In her secret heart she had but little faith in this prediction, and
whether it was realized or not mattered little to her.

“Still another proof that your jealousy led you astray; and that--that
what you did at the Borderie was unnecessary,” she said, in that low
tone that accomplices always use in speaking of their crime.

Such had been the opinion of Blanche; but she now shook her head, and
gloomily replied:

“You are wrong; that which took place at the Borderie has restored my
husband to me. I understand it all, now. It is true that Marie-Anne was
not Martial’s mistress, but Martial loved her. He loved her, and the
rebuffs which he received only increased his passion. It was for her
sake that he abandoned me; and never, while she lived, would he have
thought of me. His emotion on seeing me was the remnant of the emotion
which had been awakened by another. His tenderness was only the
expression of his sorrow. Whatever happens, I shall have only her
leavings--what she has disdained!” the young marquise added, bitterly;
and her eyes flashed, and she stamped her foot in ungovernable anger.
“And shall I regret what I have done?” she exclaimed; “never! no,
never!”

From that moment, she was herself again, brave and determined.

But horrible fears assailed her when the inquest began.

Officials came from Montaignac charged with investigating the affair.
They examined a host of witnesses, and there was even talk of sending
to Paris for one of those detectives skilled in unravelling all the
mysteries of crime.

Aunt Medea was half crazed with terror; and her fear was so apparent
that it caused Blanche great anxiety.

“You will end by betraying us,” she remarked, one evening.

“Ah! my terror is beyond my control.”

“If that is the case, do not leave your room.”

“It would be more prudent, certainly.”

“You can say that you are not well; your meals shall be served in your
own apartment.”

Aunt Medea’s face brightened. In her inmost heart she was enraptured. To
have her meals served in her own room, in her bed in the morning, and
on a little table by the fire in the evening, had long been the ambition
and the dream of the poor dependent. But how to accomplish it! Two or
three times, being a trifle indisposed, she had ventured to ask if her
breakfast might be brought to her room, but her request had been harshly
refused.

“If Aunt Medea is hungry, she will come down and take her place at the
table as usual,” had been the response of Mme. Blanche.

To be treated in this way in a chateau where there were a dozen servants
standing about idle was hard indeed.

But now----

Every morning, in obedience to a formal order from Blanche, the cook
came up to receive Aunt Medea’s commands; she was permitted to dictate
the bill-of-fare each day, and to order the dishes that she preferred.

These new joys awakened many strange thoughts in her mind, and
dissipated much of the regret which she had felt for the crime at the
Borderie.

The inquest was the subject of all her conversation with her niece. They
had all the latest information in regard to the facts developed by the
investigation through the butler, who took a great interest in such
matters, and who had won the good-will of the agents from Montaignac, by
making them familiar with the contents of his wine-cellar.

Through him, Blanche and her aunt learned that suspicion pointed to the
deceased Chupin. Had he not been seen prowling around the Borderie on
the very evening that the crime was committed? The testimony of the
young peasant who had warned Jean Lacheneur seemed decisive.

The motive was evident; at least, everyone thought so. Twenty persons
had heard Chupin declare, with frightful oaths, that he should never be
tranquil in mind while a Lacheneur was left upon earth.

So that which might have ruined Blanche, saved her; and the death of the
old poacher seemed really providential.

Why should she suspect that Chupin had revealed her secret before his
death?

When the butler told her that the judges and the police agents had
returned to Montaignac, she had great difficulty in concealing her joy.

“There is no longer anything to fear,” she said to Aunt Medea.

She had, indeed, escaped the justice of man. There remained the justice
of God.

A few weeks before, this thought of “the justice of God” might, perhaps,
have brought a smile to the lips of Mme. Blanche.

She then regarded it as an imaginary evil, designed to hold timorous
spirits in check.

On the morning that followed her crime, she almost shrugged her
shoulders at the thought of Marie-Anne’s dying threats.

She remembered her promise, but she did not intend to fulfil it.

She had considered the matter, and she saw the terrible risk to which
she exposed herself if she endeavored to find the missing child.

“The father will be sure to discover it,” she thought.

But she was to realize the power of her victim’s threats that same
evening.

Overcome with fatigue, she retired to her room at an early hour, and
instead of reading, as she was accustomed to do before retiring, she
extinguished her candle as soon as she had undressed, saying:

“I must sleep.”

But sleep had fled. Her crime was ever in her thoughts; it rose before
her in all its horror and atrocity. She knew that she was lying upon
her bed, at Courtornieu; and yet it seemed as if she was there in
Chanlouineau’s house, pouring out poison, then watching its effects,
concealed in the dressing-room.

She was struggling against these thoughts; she was exerting all her
strength of will to drive away these terrible memories, when she thought
she heard the key turn in the lock. She lifted her head from the pillow
with a start.

Then, by the uncertain light of her night-lamp, she thought she saw the
door open slowly and noiselessly. Marie-Anne entered--gliding in like
a phantom. She seated herself in an arm-chair near the bed. Great tears
were rolling down her cheeks, and she looked sadly, yet threateningly,
around her.

The murderess hid her face under the bed-covers; and her whole body
was bathed in an icy perspiration. For her, this was not a mere
apparition--it was a frightful reality.

But hers was not a nature to submit unresistingly to such an impression.
She shook off the stupor that was creeping over her, and tried to reason
with herself aloud, as if the sound of her voice would reassure her.

“I am dreaming!” she said. “Do the dead return to life? Am I childish
enough to be frightened by phantoms born of my own imaginations?”

She said this, but the phantom did not disappear.

She shut her eyes, but still she saw it through her closed
eyelids--through the coverings which she had drawn up over her head, she
saw it still.

Not until daybreak did Mme. Blanche fall asleep.

And it was the same the next night, and the night following that, and
always and always; and the terrors of each night were augmented by the
terrors of the nights which had preceded it.

During the day, in the bright sunshine, she regained her courage, and
became sceptical again. Then she railed at herself.

“To be afraid of something that does not exist, is folly!” she said,
vehemently. “To-night I will conquer my absurd weakness.”

But when evening came all her brave resolution vanished, and the same
fear seized her when night appeared with its _cortege_ of spectres.

It is true that Mme. Blanche attributed her tortures at night to the
disquietude she suffered during the day.

For the officials were at Sairmeuse then, and she trembled. A mere
nothing might divert suspicion from Chupin and direct it toward her.
What if some peasant had seen her with Chupin? What if some trifling
circumstance should furnish a clew which would lead straight to
Courtornieu?

“When the investigation is over, I shall forget,” she thought.

It ended, but she did not forget.

Darwin has said:

“It is when their safety is assured that great criminals really feel
remorse.”

Mme. Blanche might have vouched for the truth of this assertion, made by
the most profound thinker and closest observer of the age.

And yet, the agony she was enduring did not make her abandon, for a
single moment, the plan she had conceived on the day of Martial’s visit.

She played her part so well, that, deeply moved, almost repentant, he
returned five or six times, and at last, one day, he besought her to
allow him to remain.

But even the joy of this triumph did not restore her peace of mind.

Between her and her husband rose that dread apparition; and Marie-Anne’s
distorted features were ever before her. She knew only too well that
this heart-broken man had no love to give her, and that she would never
have the slightest influence over him. And to crown all, to her already
intolerable sufferings was added another, more poignant than all the
rest.

Speaking one evening of Marie-Anne’s death, Martial forgot himself,
and spoke of his oath of vengeance. He deeply regretted that Chupin was
dead, he remarked, for he should have experienced an intense delight in
making the wretch who murdered her _die_ a lingering death in the midst
of the most frightful tortures.

He spoke with extreme violence and in a voice vibrant with his still
powerful passion.

And Blanche, in terror, asked herself what would be her fate if her
husband ever discovered that she was the culprit--and he might discover
it.

She now began to regret that she had not kept the promise she had made
to her victim; and she resolved to commence the search for Marie-Anne’s
child.

To do this effectually it was necessary for her to be in a large
city--Paris, for example--where she could procure discreet and skilful
agents.

It was necessary to persuade Martial to remove to the capital. Aided by
the Duc de Sairmeuse, she did not find this a very difficult task; and
one morning, Mme. Blanche, with a radiant face, announced to Aunt Medea:

“Aunt, we leave just one week from to-day.”



CHAPTER LI

Beset by a thousand fears and anxieties, Blanche had failed to notice
that Aunt Medea was no longer the same.

The change, it is true, had been gradual; it had not struck the
servants, but it was none the less positive and real, and it betrayed
itself in numberless trifles.

For example, though the poor dependent still retained her humble,
resigned manner; she had lost, little by little, the servile fear that
had showed itself in her every movement. She no longer trembled when
anyone addressed her, and there was occasionally a ring of independence
in her voice.

If visitors were present, she no longer kept herself modestly in
the background, but drew forward her chair and took part in the
conversation. At table, she allowed her preferences and her dislikes to
appear. On two or three occasions she had ventured to differ from her
niece in opinion, and had even been so bold as to question the propriety
of some of her orders.

Once Mme. Blanche, on going out, asked Aunt Medea to accompany her; but
the latter declared she had a cold, and remained at home.

And, on the following Sunday, although Blanche did not wish to attend
vespers, Aunt Medea declared her intention of going; and as it rained,
she requested the coachman to harness the horses to the carriage, which
was done.

All this was nothing, in appearance; in reality, it was monstrous,
amazing. It was quite plain that the humble relative was becoming bold,
even audacious, in her demands.

As this departure, which her niece had just announced so gayly, had
never been discussed before her, she was greatly surprised.

“What! you are going away,” she repeated; “you are leaving Courtornieu?”

“And without regret.”

“To go where, pray?”

“To Paris. We shall reside there; that is decided. That is the place for
my husband. His name, his fortune, his talents, the favor of the King,
assure him a high position there. He will repurchase the Hotel de
Sairmeuse, and furnish it magnificently. We shall have a princely
establishment.”

All the torments of envy were visible upon Aunt Medea’s countenance.

“‘And what is to become of me?” she asked, in plaintive tones.

“You, aunt! You will remain here; you will be mistress of the chateau. A
trustworthy person must remain to watch over my poor father. You will be
happy and contented here, I hope.”

But no; Aunt Medea did not seem satisfied.

“I shall never have courage to stay all alone in this great chateau,”
 she whined.

“You foolish woman! will you not have the servants, the gardeners, and
the concierge to protect you?”

“That makes no difference. I am afraid of insane people. When the
marquis began to rave and howl this evening, I felt as if I should go
mad myself.”

Blanche shrugged her shoulders.

“What _do_ you wish, then?” she asked, in a still more sarcastic manner.

“I thought--I wondered--if you would not take me with you.”

“To Paris! You are crazy, I do believe. What would you do there?”

“Blanche, I entreat you, I beseech you, to do so!”

“Impossible, aunt; impossible!”

Aunt Medea seemed to be in despair.

“And what if I should tell you that I cannot remain here--that I dare
not--that I should die!”

A flush of impatience dyed the cheek of Mme. Blanche.

“You weary me beyond endurance,” she said, rudely.

And with a gesture that increased the harshness of her words, she added:

“If Courtornieu displeases you so much, there is nothing to prevent you
from seeking a home more to your taste. You are free and of age.”

Aunt Medea turned very pale, and she bit her lips until the blood came.

“That is to say,” she said, at last, “you permit me to take my choice
between dying of fear at Courtornieu and ending my days in a hospital.
Thanks, my niece, thanks. That is like you. I expected nothing less of
you. Thanks!”

She raised her head, and a dangerous light gleamed in her eyes. There
was the hiss of a serpent in the voice in which she continued:

“Very well! this decides me. I entreated you, and you brutally refused
to heed my prayer, now I command and I say: ‘I will go!’ Yes, I intend
to go with you to Paris--and I shall go. Ah! it surprises you to hear
poor, meek, much-abused Aunt Medea speak in this way. I have endured in
silence for a long time, but I have rebelled at last. My life in this
house has been a hell. It is true that you have given me shelter--that
you have fed and lodged me; but you have taken my entire life in
exchange. What servant ever endured what I have endured? Have you ever
treated one of your maids as you have treated me, your own flesh and
blood? And I have had no wages; on the contrary, I was expected to
be grateful since I lived by your tolerance. Ah! you have made me pay
dearly for the crime of being poor. How you have insulted me--humiliated
me--trampled me under foot!”

She paused.

The bitter rancor which had been accumulating for years fairly choked
her; but after a moment she resumed, in a tone of intense irony:

“You ask me what would I do in Paris? I, too, would enjoy myself. What
will you do, yourself? You will go to Court, to balls, and to the play,
will you not? Very well, I will accompany you. I will attend these
fetes. I will have handsome toilets, I--poor Aunt Medea--who have never
seen myself in anything but shabby black woollen dresses. Have you ever
thought of giving me the pleasure of possessing a handsome dress? Yes,
twice a year, perhaps, you have given me a black silk, recommending me
to take good care of it. But it was not for my sake that you went to
this expense. It was for your own sake; and in order that your poor
relation should do honor to your generosity. You dressed me in it, as
you sew gold lace upon the clothing of your lackeys, through vanity.
And I endured all this; I made myself insignificant and humble; buffeted
upon one cheek, I offered the other. I must live--I must have food. And
you, Blanche, how often, to make me subservient to your will, have
you said to me: ‘You will do thus-and-so, if you desire to remain at
Courtornieu?’ And I obeyed--I was forced to obey, since I knew not where
to go. Ah! you have abused me in every way; but now my turn has come!”

Blanche was so amazed that she could not articulate a syllable. At last,
in a scarcely audible voice, she faltered:

“I do not understand you, aunt; I do not understand you.”

The poor dependent shrugged her shoulders, as her niece had done a few
moments before.

“In that case,” said she, slowly, “I may as well tell you that since you
have, against my will, made me your accomplice, we must share everything
in common. I share the danger; I will share the pleasure. What if all
should be discovered? Do you ever think of that? Yes; and that is why
you are seeking diversion. Very well! I also desire diversion. I shall
go to Paris with you.”

By a terrible effort Blanche had succeeded in regaining her
self-possession, in some measure at least.

“And if I should say no?” she responded, coldly.

“But you will not say no.”

“And why, if you please?”

“Because----”

“Will you go to the authorities and denounce me?”

Aunt Medea shook her head.

“I am not such a fool,” she retorted. “I should only compromise myself.
No, I shall not do that; but I might, perhaps, tell your husband what
happened at the Borderie.”

Blanche shuddered. No threat was capable of moving her like that.

“You shall accompany us, aunt,” said she; “I promise it.”

Then she added, gently:

“But it is unnecessary to threaten me. You have been cruel, aunt, and at
the same time, unjust. If you have been unhappy in our house, you alone
are to blame. Why have you said nothing? I attributed your complaisance
to your affection for me. How was I to know that a woman as quiet
and modest as yourself longed for fine apparel. Confess that it was
impossible. Had I known--But rest easy, aunt; I will atone for my
neglect.”

And as Aunt Medea, having obtained all she desired, stammered an excuse:

“Nonsense!” Blanche exclaimed; “let us forget this foolish quarrel. You
forgive me, do you not?”

And the two ladies embraced each other with the greatest effusion, like
two friends united after a misunderstanding. But Aunt Medea was as far
from being deceived by this mock reconciliation as the clearsighted
Blanche.

“It will be best for me to keep on the _qui vive_,” thought the humble
relative. “God only knows with what intense joy my dear niece would send
me to join Marie-Anne.”

Perhaps a similar thought flitted through the mind of Mme. Blanche.

She felt as a convict might feel on seeing his most execrated enemy,
perhaps the man who had betrayed him, fastened to the other end of his
chain.

“I am bound now and forever to this dangerous and perfidious creature,”
 she thought. “I am no longer my own mistress; I belong to her. When she
commands, I must obey. I must be the slave of her every caprice--and she
has forty years of humiliation and servitude to avenge.”

The prospect of such a life made her tremble; and she racked her brain
to discover some way of freeing herself from her detested companion.

Would it be possible to inspire Aunt Medea with a desire to live
independently in her own house, served by her own servants?

Might she succeed in persuading this silly old woman, who still longed
for finery and ball-dresses, to marry? A handsome marriage-portion will
always attract a husband.

But, in either case, Blanche would require money--a large sum of money,
for whose use she would be accountable to no one.

This conviction made her resolve to take possession of about two hundred
and fifty thousand francs, in bank-notes and coin, belonging to her
father.

This sum represented the savings of the Marquis de Courtornieu during
the past three years. No one knew he had laid it aside, except his
daughter; and now that he had lost his reason, Blanche, who knew where
the hoard was concealed, could take it for her own use without the
slightest danger.

“With this,” she thought, “I can at any moment enrich Aunt Medea without
having recourse to Martial.”

After this little scene there was a constant interchange of delicate
attentions and touching devotion between the two ladies. It was “my
dearest little aunt,” and “my dearly beloved niece,” from morning until
night; and the gossips of the neighborhood, who had often commented upon
the haughty disdain which Mme. Blanche displayed in her treatment of her
relative, would have found abundant food for comment had they known that
Aunt Medea was protected from the possibility of cold by a mantle lined
with costly fur, exactly like the marquise’s own, and that she made
the journey, not in the large Berlin, with the servants, but in the
post-chaise with the Marquis and Marquise de Sairmeuse.

The change was so marked that even Martial remarked it, and as soon
as he found himself alone with his wife, he exclaimed, in a tone of
good-natured raillery:

“What is the meaning of all this devotion? We shall finish by encasing
this precious aunt in cotton, shall we not?”

Blanche trembled, and flushed a little.

“I love good Aunt Medea so much!” said she. “I never can forget all the
affection and devotion she lavished upon me when I was so unhappy.”

It was such a plausible explanation that Martial took no further notice
of the matter, for his mind just then was fully occupied.

The agent, whom he had sent to Paris in advance, to purchase, if
possible, the Hotel de Sairmeuse, had written him to make all possible
haste, as there was some difficulty about concluding the bargain.

“Plague take the fellow!” said the marquis, angrily, on receiving this
news. “He is quite stupid enough to let this opportunity, for which we
have been waiting ten years, slip through his fingers. I shall find no
pleasure in Paris if I cannot own our old residence.”

He was so impatient to reach Paris that, on the second day of their
journey, he declared if he were alone he would travel all night.

“Do so now,” said Blanche, graciously; “I do not feel fatigued in the
least, and a night of travel does not appall me.”

They did travel all night, and the next day, about nine o’clock, they
alighted at the Hotel Meurice.

Martial scarcely took time to eat his breakfast.

“I must go and see my agent at once,” he said, as he hurried off. “I
will soon be back.”

He reappeared in about two hours, pleased and radiant.

“My agent was a simpleton,” he exclaimed. “He was afraid to write me
that a man, upon whom the conclusion of the sale depends, demands a
bonus of fifty thousand francs. He shall have it in welcome.”

Then, in a tone of gallantry, which he always used in addressing his
wife, he said:

“It only remains for me to sign the paper; but I will not do so unless
the house suits you. If you are not too tired, I would like you to visit
it at once. Time presses, and we have many competitors.”

This visit was, of course, one of pure form; but Mme. Blanche would have
been hard to please if she had not been satisfied with this mansion,
one of the most magnificent in Paris, with an entrance on the Rue de
Grenelle, and large gardens shaded with superb trees, and extending to
the Rue de Varennes.

Unfortunately, this superb dwelling had not been occupied for several
years, and required many repairs.

“It will take at least six months to restore it,” said Martial; “perhaps
more. It is true that they might in three months, perhaps, render a
portion of it very comfortable.”

“It would be living in one’s own house, at least,” approved Blanche,
divining her husband’s wishes.

“Ah! then you agree with me! In that case, you may rest assured that I
will expedite matters as much as possible.”

In spite, or rather by reason of his immense fortune, the Marquis de
Sairmeuse knew that a person is never so well, nor so quickly served, as
when he serves himself, so he resolved to take the matter into his
own hands. He conferred with architects, interviewed contractors, and
hurried on the workmen.

As soon as he was up in the morning he started out without waiting for
breakfast, and seldom returned until dinner.

Although Blanche was compelled to pass most of her time within doors,
on account of the bad weather, she was not inclined to complain. Her
journey, the unaccustomed sights and sounds of Paris, the novelty of
life in a hotel, all combined to distract her thoughts from herself.
She forgot her fears; a sort of haze enveloped the terrible scene at the
Borderie; the clamors of conscience sank into faint whispers.

The past seemed fading away, and she was beginning to entertain hopes of
a new and better life, when one day a servant entered, and said:

“There is a man below who wishes to speak with Madame.”



CHAPTER LII

Half reclining upon a sofa, Mme. Blanche was listening to a new book
which Aunt Medea was reading aloud, and she did not even raise her head
as the servant delivered his message.

“A man?” she asked, carelessly; “what man?”

She was expecting no one; it must be one of the laborers employed by
Martial.

“I cannot inform Madame,” replied the servant. “He is quite a young man;
is dressed like a peasant, and is perhaps, seeking a place.”

“It is probably the marquis whom he desires to see.”

“Madame will excuse me, but he said particularly that he desired to
speak to her.”

“Ask his name and his business, then. Go on, aunt,” she added; “we have
been interrupted in the most interesting portion.”

But Aunt Medea had not time to finish the page when the servant
reappeared.

“The man says Madame will understand his business when she hears his
name.”

“And his name?”

“Chupin.”

It was as if a bomb-shell had exploded in the room.

Aunt Medea, with a shriek, dropped her book, and sank back, half
fainting, in her chair.

Blanche sprang up with a face as colorless as her white cashmere
_peignoir_, her eyes troubled, her lips trembling.

“Chupin!” she repeated, as if she hoped the servant would tell her she
had not understood him correctly; “Chupin!”

Then angrily:

“Tell this man that I will not see him, I will not see him, do you
hear?”

But before the servant had time to bow respectfully and retire, the
young marquise changed her mind.

“One moment,” said she; “on reflection I think I will see him. Bring him
up.”

The servant withdrew, and the two ladies looked at each other in silent
consternation.

“It must be one of Chupin’s sons,” faltered Blanche, at last.

“Undoubtedly; but what does he desire?”

“Money, probably.” Aunt Medea lifted her eyes to heaven.

“God grant that he knows nothing of your meetings with his father!
Blessed Jesus! what if he should know.”

“You are not going to despair in advance! We shall know all in a few
moments. Pray be calm. Turn your back to us; look out into the street;
do not let him see your face. But why is he so long in coming?”

Blanche was not deceived. It was Chupin’s eldest son; the one to whom
the dying poacher had confided his secret.

Since his arrival in Paris he had been running the streets from morning
until evening, inquiring everywhere and of everybody the address of the
Marquis de Sairmeuse. At last he discovered it; and he lost no time in
presenting himself at the Hotel Meurice.

He was now awaiting the result of his application at the entrance of the
hotel, where he stood whistling, with his hands in his pockets, when the
servant returned, saying:

“She consents to see you; follow me.”

Chupin obeyed; but the servant, greatly astonished, and on fire with
curiosity, loitered by the way in the hope of obtaining some explanation
from this country youth.

“I do not say it to flatter you, my boy,” he remarked, “but your name
produced a great effect upon madame.”

The prudent peasant carefully concealed the joy he felt on receiving
this information.

“How does it happen that she knows you?” pursued the servant. “Are you
both from the same place?”

“I am her foster-brother.”

The servant did not believe a word of this response; but they had
reached the apartment of the marquise, he opened the door and ushered
Chupin into the room.

The peasant had prepared a little story in advance, but he was so
dazzled by the magnificence around him that he stood motionless with
staring eyes and gaping mouth. His wonder was increased by a large
mirror opposite the door, in which he could survey himself from head
to foot, and by the beautiful flowers on the carpet, which he feared to
crush beneath his heavy shoes.

After a moment, Mme. Blanche decided to break the silence.

“What do you wish?” she demanded.

With many circumlocutions Chupin explained that he had been obliged to
leave Sairmeuse on account of the numerous enemies he had there, that
he had been unable to find his father’s hidden treasure, and that he was
consequently without resources.

“Enough!” interrupted Mme. Blanche. Then in a manner not in the least
friendly, she continued: “I do not understand why you should apply to
me. You and all the rest of your family have anything but an enviable
reputation in Sairmeuse; still, as you are from that part of the
country, I am willing to aid you a little on condition that you do not
apply to me again.”

Chupin listened to this homily with a half-cringing, half-impudent air;
when it was finished he lifted his head, and said, proudly:

“I do not ask for alms.”

“What do you ask then?”

“My dues.”

The heart of Mme. Blanche sank, and yet she had courage to cast a glance
of disdain upon the speaker, and said:

“Ah! do I owe you anything?”

“You owe me nothing personally, Madame; but you owe a heavy debt to my
deceased father. In whose service did he perish? Poor old man! he loved
you devotedly. His last words were of you. ‘A terrible thing has just
happened at the Borderie, my boy,’ said he. ‘The young marquise hated
Marie-Anne, and she has poisoned her. Had it not been for me she would
have been lost. I am about to die; let the whole blame rest upon me;
it will not hurt me, and it will save the young lady. And afterward she
will reward you; and as long as you keep the secret you will want for
nothing.’”

Great as was his impudence, he paused, amazed by the perfectly composed
face of the listener.

In the presence of such wonderful dissimulation he almost doubted the
truth of his father’s story.

The courage and heroism displayed by the marquise were really wonderful.
She felt if she yielded once, she would forever be at the mercy of this
wretch, as she was already at the mercy of Aunt Medea.

“In other words,” said she, calmly, “you accuse me of the murder of
Mademoiselle Lacheneur; and you threaten to denounce me if I do not
yield to your demands.”

Chupin nodded his head in acquiescence.

“Very well!” said the marquise; “since this is the case--go!”

It seemed, indeed, as if she would, by her audacity, win this dangerous
game upon which her future peace depended. Chupin, greatly abashed, was
standing there undecided what course to pursue when Aunt Medea, who was
listening by the window, turned in affright, crying:

“Blanche! your husband--Martial! He is coming!”

The game was lost. Blanche saw her husband entering, finding Chupin,
conversing with him, and discovering all!

Her brain whirled; she yielded.

She hastily thrust her purse in Chupin’s hand and dragged him through an
inner door and to the servants’ staircase.

“Take this,” she said, in a hoarse whisper. “I will see you again. And
not a word--not a word to my husband, remember!”

She had been wise to yield in time. When she re-entered the salon, she
found Martial there.

His head was bowed upon his breast; he held an open letter in his hand.

He looked up when his wife entered the room, and she saw a tear in his
eye.

“What has happened?” she faltered.

Martial did not remark her emotion.

“My father is dead, Blanche,” he replied.

“The Duc de Sairmeuse! My God! how did it happen?”

“He was thrown from his horse, in the forest, near the Sanguille rocks.”

“Ah! it was there where my poor father was nearly murdered.”

“Yes, it is the very place.”

There was a moment’s silence.

Martial’s affection for his father had not been very deep, and he
was well aware that his father had but little love for him. He was
astonished at the bitter grief he felt on hearing of his death.

“From this letter which was forwarded by a messenger from Sairmeuse,” he
continued, “I judge that everybody believes it to have been an accident;
but I--I----”

“Well?”

“I believe he was murdered.”

An exclamation of horror escaped Aunt Medea, and Blanche turned pale.

“Murdered!” she whispered.

“Yes, Blanche; and I could name the murderer. Oh! I am not deceived. The
murderer of my father is the same man who attempted to assassinate the
Marquis de Courtornieu----”

“Jean Lacheneur!”

Martial gravely bowed his head. It was his only reply.

“And you will not denounce him? You will not demand justice?”

Martial’s face grew more and more gloomy.

“What good would it do?” he replied. “I have no material proofs to give,
and justice demands incontestable evidence.”

Then, as if communing with his own thoughts, rather than addressing his
wife, he said, despondently:

“The Duc de Sairmeuse and the Marquis de Courtornieu have reaped
what they have sown. The blood of murdered innocence always calls for
vengeance. Sooner or later, the guilty must expiate their crimes.”

Blanche shuddered. Each word found an echo in her own soul. Had
he intended his words for her, he would not have expressed himself
differently.

“Martial,” said she, trying to arouse him from his gloomy revery,
“Martial.”

He did not seem to hear her, and, in the same tone, he continued:

“These Lacheneurs were happy and honored before our arrival at
Sairmeuse. Their conduct was above all praise; their probity amounted
to heroism. We might have made them our faithful and devoted friends. It
was our duty, as well as in our interests, to have done so. We did not
understand this; we humiliated, ruined, exasperated them. It was a fault
for which we must atone. Who knows but, in Jean Lacheneur’s place, I
should have done what he has done?”

He was silent for a moment; then, with one of those sudden inspirations
that sometimes enable one almost to read the future, he resumed:

“I know Jean Lacheneur. I alone can fathom his hatred, and I know that
he lives only in the hope of vengeance. It is true that we are very high
and he is very low, but that matters little. We have everything to fear.
Our millions form a rampart around us, but he will know how to open a
breach. And no precautions will save us. At the very moment when we feel
ourselves secure, he will be ready to strike. What he will attempt,
I know not; but his will be a terrible revenge. Remember my words,
Blanche, if ruin ever threatens our house, it will be Jean Lacheneur’s
work.”

Aunt Medea and her niece were too horror-stricken to articulate a
word, and for five minutes no sound broke the stillness save Martial’s
monotonous tread, as he paced up and down the room.

At last he paused before his wife.

“I have just ordered post-horses. You will excuse me for leaving you
here alone. I must go to Sairmeuse at once. I shall not be absent more
than a week.”

He departed from Paris a few hours later, and Blanche was left a prey to
the most intolerable anxiety. She suffered more now than during the days
that immediately followed her crime. It was not against phantoms she was
obliged to protect herself now; Chupin existed, and his voice, even if
it were not as terrible as the voice of conscience, might make itself
heard at any moment.

If she had known where to find him, she would have gone to him, and
endeavored, by the payment of a large sum of money, to persuade him to
leave France.

But Chupin had left the hotel without giving her his address.

The gloomy apprehension expressed by Martial increased the fears of the
young marquise. The mere sound of the name Lacheneur made her shrink
with terror. She could not rid herself of the idea that Jean Lacheneur
suspected her guilt, and that he was watching her.

Her wish to find Marie-Anne’s infant was stronger than ever.

It seemed to her that the child might be a protection to her some day.
But where could she find an agent in whom she could confide?

At last she remembered that she had heard her father speak of a
detective by the name of Chelteux, an exceedingly shrewd fellow, capable
of anything, even honesty if he were well paid.

The man was really a miserable wretch, one of Fouche’s vilest
instruments, who had served and betrayed all parties, and who, at
last, had been convicted of perjury, but had somehow managed to escape
punishment.

After his dismissal from the police-force, Chelteux founded a bureau of
private information.

After several inquiries, Mme. Blanche discovered that he lived in the
Place Dauphine; and she determined to take advantage of her husband’s
absence to pay the detective a visit.

One morning she donned her simplest dress, and, accompanied by Aunt
Medea, repaired to the house of Chelteux.

He was then, about thirty-four years of age, a man of medium height, of
inoffensive mien, and who affected an unvarying good-humor.

He invited his clients into a nicely furnished drawing-room, and Mme.
Blanche at once began telling him that she was married, and living in
the Rue Saint-Denis, that one of her sisters, who had lately died,
had been guilty of an indiscretion, and that she was ready to make any
sacrifice to find this sister’s child, etc., etc. A long story, which
she had prepared in advance, and which sounded very plausible.

Chelteux did not believe a word of it, however; for, as soon as it was
ended, he tapped her familiarly on the shoulder, and said:

“In short, my dear, we have had our little escapades before our
marriage.”

She shrank back as if from some venomous reptile.

To be treated thus! she--a Courtornieu--Duchesse de Sairmeuse!

“I think you are laboring under a wrong impression,” she said,
haughtily.

He made haste to apologize; but while listening to further details given
him by the young lady, he thought:

“What an eye! what a voice!--they are not suited to a denizen of the
Saint-Denis!”

His suspicions were confirmed by the reward of twenty thousand francs,
which Mme. Blanche imprudently promised him in case of success, and by
the five hundred francs which she paid in advance.

“And where shall I have the honor of addressing my communications to
you, Madame?” he inquired.

“Nowhere,” replied the young lady. “I shall be passing here from time to
time, and I will call.”

When they left the house, Chelteux followed them.

“For once,” he thought, “I believe that fortune smiles upon me.”

To discover the name and rank of his new clients was but child’s play to
Fouche’s former pupil.

His task was all the easier since they had no suspicion whatever of his
designs. Mme. Blanche, who had heard his powers of discernment so highly
praised, was confident of success.

All the way back to the hotel she was congratulating herself upon the
step she had taken.

“In less than a month,” she said to Aunt Medea, “we shall have the
child; and it will be a protection to us.”

But the following week she realized the extent of her imprudence. On
visiting Chelteux again, she was received with such marks of respect
that she saw at once she was known.

She made an attempt to deceive him, but the detective checked her.

“First of all,” he said, with a good-humored smile, “I ascertain the
identity of the persons who honor me with their confidence. It is a
proof of my ability, which I give, gratis. But Madame need have no
fears. I am discreet by nature and by profession. Many ladies of the
highest ranks are in the position of Madame la Duchesse!”

So Chelteux still believed that the Duchesse de Sairmeuse was searching
for her own child.

She did not try to convince him to the contrary. It was better that he
should believe this than suspect the truth.

The condition of Mme. Blanche was now truly pitiable. She found herself
entangled in a net, and each movement far from freeing her, tightened
the meshes around her.

Three persons knew the secret that threatened her life and honor. Under
these circumstances, how could she hope to keep that secret inviolate?
She was, moreover, at the mercy of three unscrupulous masters; and
before a word, or a gesture, or a look from them, her haughty spirit was
compelled to bow in meek subservience.

And her time was no longer at her own disposal. Martial had returned;
and they had taken up their abode at the Hotel de Sairmeuse.

The young duchess was now compelled to live under the scrutiny of fifty
servants--of fifty enemies, more or less, interested in watching her, in
criticising her every act, and in discovering her inmost thoughts.

Aunt Medea, it is true, was of great assistance to her. Blanche
purchased a dress for her, whenever she purchased one for herself, took
her about with her on all occasions, and the humble relative expressed
her satisfaction in the most enthusiastic terms, and declared her
willingness to do anything for her benefactress.

Nor did Chelteux give Mme. Blanche much more annoyance. Every three
months he presented a memorandum of the expenses of investigations,
which usually amounted to about ten thousand francs; and so long as she
paid him it was plain that he would be silent.

He had given her to understand, however, that he should expect an
annuity of twenty-four thousand francs; and once, when Mme. Blanche
remarked that he must abandon the search, if nothing had been discovered
at the end of two years:

“Never,” he replied: “I shall continue the search as long as I live.”
 But Chupin, unfortunately, remained; and he was a constant terror.

She had been compelled to give him twenty thousand francs, to begin
with.

He declared that his younger brother had come to Paris in pursuit of
him, accusing him of having stolen their father’s hoard, and demanding
his share with his dagger in his hand.

There had been a battle, and it was with a head bound up in a
blood-stained linen, that Chupin made his appearance before Mme.
Blanche.

“Give me the sum that the old man buried, and I will allow my brother to
think that I had stolen it. It is not very pleasant to be regarded as a
thief, when one is an honest man, but I will bear it for your sake. If
you refuse, I shall be compelled to tell him where I have obtained my
money and how.”

If he possessed all the vices, depravity, and coldblooded perversity of
his father, this wretch had inherited neither his intelligence nor his
_finesse_.

Instead of taking the precautions which his interest required, he seemed
to find a brutal pleasure in compromising the duchess.

He was a constant visitor at the Hotel de Sairmeuse. He came and went
at all hours, morning, noon, and night, without troubling himself in the
least about Martial.

And the servants were amazed to see their haughty mistress
unhesitatingly leave everything at the call of this suspicious-looking
character, who smelled _so_ strongly of tobacco and vile brandy.

One evening, while a grand entertainment was in progress at the Hotel de
Sairmeuse, he made his appearance, half drunk, and imperiously ordered
the servants to go and tell Mme. Blanche that he was there, and that he
was waiting for her.

She hastened to him in her magnificent evening-dress, her face white
with rage and shame beneath her tiara of diamonds. And when, in her
exasperation, she refused to give the wretch what he demanded:

“That is to say, I am to starve while you are revelling here!” he
exclaimed. “I am not such a fool. Give me money, and instantly, or I
will tell all I know here and now!”

What could she do? She was obliged to yield, as she had always done
before.

And yet he grew more and more insatiable every day. Money remained in
his pockets no longer than water remains in a sieve. But he did not
think of elevating his vices to the proportions of the fortune which he
squandered. He did not even provide himself with decent clothing; from
his appearance one would have supposed him a beggar, and his companions
were the vilest and most degraded of beings.

One night he was arrested in a low den, and the police, surprised at
seeing so much gold in the possession of such a beggarly looking wretch,
accused him of being a thief. He mentioned the name of the Duchesse de
Sairmeuse.

An inspector of the police presented himself at the Hotel de Sairmeuse
the following morning. Martial, fortunately, was in Vienna at the time.

And Mme. Blanche was forced to undergo the terrible humiliation of
confessing that she had given a large sum of money to this man, whose
family she had known, and who, she added, had once rendered her an
important service.

Sometimes her tormentor changed his tactics.

For example, he declared that he disliked to come to the Hotel de
Sairmeuse, that the servants treated him as if he were a mendicant, that
after this he would write.

And in a day or two there would come a letter bidding her bring such a
sum, to such a place, at such an hour.

And the proud duchess was always punctual at the rendezvous.

There was constantly some new invention, as if he found an intense
delight in proving his power and in abusing it.

He had met, Heaven knows where! a certain Aspasie Clapard, to whom he
took a violent fancy, and although she was much older than himself, he
wished to marry her. Mme. Blanche paid for the wedding-feast.

Again he announced his desire of establishing himself in business,
having resolved, he said, to live by his own exertions. He purchased the
stock of a wine merchant, which the duchess paid for, and which he drank
in no time.

His wife gave birth to a child, and Mme. de Sairmeuse must pay for the
baptism as she had paid for the wedding, only too happy that Chupin
did not require her to stand as godmother to little Polyte. He had
entertained this idea at first.

On two occasions Mme. Blanche accompanied her husband to Vienna and to
London, whither he went charged with important diplomatic missions. She
remained three years in foreign lands.

Each week during all that time she received one letter, at least, from
Chupin.

Ah! many a time she envied the lot of her victim! What was Marie-Anne’s
death compared with the life she led?

Her sufferings were measured by years, Marie-Anne’s by minutes; and she
said to herself, again and again, that the torture of poison could not
be as intolerable as her agony.



CHAPTER LIII

How was it that Martial had failed to discover or to suspect this state
of affairs?

A moment’s reflection will explain this fact which is so extraordinary
in appearance, so natural in reality.

The head of a family, whether he dwells in an attic or in a palace, is
always the last to know what is going on in his home. What everybody
else knows he does not even suspect. The master often sleeps while his
house is on fire. Some terrible catastrophe--an explosion--is necessary
to arouse him from his fancied security.

The life that Martial led was likely to prevent him from arriving at the
truth. He was a stranger to his wife. His manner toward her was perfect,
full of deference and chivalrous courtesy; but they had nothing in
common except a name and certain interests.

Each lived their own life. They met only at dinner, or at the
entertainments which they gave and which were considered the most
brilliant in Paris society.

The duchess had her own apartments, her servants, her carriages, her
horses, her own table.

At twenty-five, Martial, the last descendant of the great house of
Sairmeuse--a man upon whom destiny had apparently lavished every
blessing--the possessor of youth, unbounded wealth, and a brilliant
intellect, succumbed beneath the burden of an incurable despondency and
_ennui_.

The death of Marie-Anne had destroyed all his hopes of happiness; and
realizing the emptiness of his life, he did his best to fill the void
with bustle and excitement. He threw himself headlong into politics,
striving to find in power and in satisfied ambition some relief from his
despondency.

It is only just to say that Mme. Blanche had remained superior to
circumstances; and that she had played the role of a happy, contented
woman with consummate skill.

Her frightful sufferings and anxiety never marred the haughty serenity
of her face. She soon won a place as one of the queens of Parisian
society; and plunged into dissipation with a sort of frenzy. Was she
endeavoring to divert her mind? Did she hope to overpower thought by
excessive fatigue?

To Aunt Medea alone did Blanche reveal her secret heart.

“I am like a culprit who has been bound to the scaffold, and then
abandoned by the executioner, who says, as he departs: ‘Live until the
axe falls of its own accord.’”

And the axe might fall at any moment. A word, a trifle, an unlucky
chance--she dared not say “a decree of Providence,” and Martial would
know all.

Such, in all its unspeakable horror, was the position of the beautiful
and envied Duchesse de Sairmeuse. “She must be perfectly happy,” said
the world; but she felt herself sliding down the precipice to the awful
depths below.

Like a shipwrecked mariner clinging to a floating spar, she scanned
the horizon with a despairing eye, and saw only angry and threatening
clouds.

Time, perhaps, might bring her some relief.

Once it happened that six weeks went by, and she heard nothing from
Chupin. A month and a half! What had become of him? To Mme. Blanche this
silence was as ominous as the calm that precedes the storm.

A line in a newspaper solved the mystery.

Chupin was in prison.

The wretch, after drinking more heavily than usual one evening, had
quarrelled with his brother, and had killed him by a blow upon the head
with a piece of iron.

The blood of the betrayed Lacheneur was visited upon the heads of his
murderer’s children.

Tried by the Court of Assizes, Chupin was condemned to twenty years of
hard labor, and sent to Brest.

But this sentence afforded the duchess no relief. The culprit had
written to her from his Paris prison; he wrote to her from Brest.

But he did not send his letters through the post. He confided them to
comrades, whose terms of imprisonment had expired, and who came to the
Hotel de Sairmeuse demanding an interview with the duchess.

And she received them. They told all the miseries they had endured “out
there;” and usually ended by requesting some slight assistance.

One morning, a man whose desperate appearance and manner frightened her,
brought the duchess this laconic epistle:


“I am tired of starving here; I wish to make my escape. Come to Brest;
you can visit the prison, and we will decide upon some plan. If you
refuse to do this, I shall apply to the duke, who will obtain my pardon
in exchange of what I will tell him.”


Mme. Blanche was dumb with horror. It was impossible, she thought, to
sink lower than this.

“Well!” demanded the man, harshly. “What reply shall I make to my
comrade?”

“I will go--tell him that I will go!” she said, driven to desperation.

She made the journey, visited the prison, but did not find Chupin.

The previous week there had been a revolt in the prison, the troops had
fired upon the prisoners, and Chupin had been killed instantly.

Still the duchess dared not rejoice.

She feared that her tormentor had told his wife the secret of his power.

“I shall soon know,” she thought.

The widow promptly made her appearance; but her manner was humble and
supplicating.

She had often heard her dear, dead husband say that madame was his
benefactress, and now she came to beg a little aid to enable her to open
a small drinking saloon.

Her son Polyte--ah! such a good son! just eighteen years old, and such
a help to his poor mother--had discovered a little house in a good
situation for the business, and if they only had three or four hundred
francs----

Mme. Blanche gave her five hundred francs.

“Either her humility is a mask,” she thought, “or her husband has told
her nothing.”

Five days later Polyte Chupin presented himself.

They needed three hundred francs more before they could commence
business, and he came on behalf of his mother to entreat the kind lady
to advance them.

Determined to discover exactly where she stood, the duchess shortly
refused, and the young man departed without a word.

Evidently the mother and son were ignorant of the facts. Chupin’s secret
had died with him.

This happened early in January. Toward the last of February, Aunt Medea
contracted inflammation of the lungs on leaving a fancy ball, which she
attended in an absurd costume, in spite of all the attempts which her
niece made to dissuade her.

Her passion for dress killed her. Her illness lasted only three days;
but her sufferings, physical and mental, were terrible.

Constrained by her fear of death to examine her own conscience, she
saw plainly that by profiting by the crime of her niece she had been
as culpable as if she had aided her in committing it. She had been very
devout in former years, and now her superstitious fears were reawakened
and intensified. Her faith returned, accompanied by a _cortege_ of
terrors.

“I am lost!” she cried; “I am lost!”

She tossed to and fro upon her bed; she writhed and shrieked as if she
already saw hell opening to engulf her.

She called upon the Holy Virgin and upon all the saints to protect her.
She entreated God to grant her time for repentance and for expiation.
She begged to see a priest, swearing she would make a full confession.

Paler than the dying woman, but implacable, Blanche watched over her,
aided by that one of her personal attendants in whom she had most
confidence.

“If this lasts long, I shall be ruined,” she thought. “I shall be
obliged to call for assistance, and she will betray me.”

It did not last long.

The patient’s delirium was succeeded by such utter prostration that it
seemed each moment would be her last.

But toward midnight she appeared to revive a little, and in a voice of
intense feeling, she said:

“You have had no pity, Blanche. You have deprived me of all hope in
the life to come. God will punish you. You, too, shall die like a dog;
alone, without a word of Christian counsel or encouragement. I curse
you!”

And she died just as the clock was striking two.

The time when Blanche would have given almost anything to know that Aunt
Medea was beneath the sod, had long since passed.

Now, the death of the poor old woman affected her deeply.

She had lost an accomplice who had often consoled her, and she had
gained nothing, since one of her maids was now acquainted with the
secret of the crime at the Borderie.

Everyone who was intimately acquainted with the Duchesse de Sairmeuse,
noticed her dejection, and was astonished by it.

“Is it not strange,” remarked her friends, “that the duchess--such a
very superior woman--should grieve so much for that absurd relative of
hers?”

But the dejection of Mme. Blanche was due in great measure to the
sinister prophecies of the accomplice to whom she had denied the last
consolations of religion.

And as her mind reviewed the past she shuddered, as the peasants at
Sairmeuse had done, when she thought of the fatality which had pursued
the shedders of innocent blood.

What misfortune had attended them all--from the sons of Chupin, the
miserable traitor, up to her father, the Marquis de Courtornieu, whose
mind had not been illumined by the least gleam of reason for ten long
years before his death.

“My turn will come!” she thought.

The Baron and the Baroness d’Escorval, and old Corporal Bavois had
departed this life within a month of each other, the previous year,
mourned by all.

So that of all the people of diverse condition who had been connected
with the troubles at Montaignac, Blanche knew only four who were still
alive.

Maurice d’Escorval, who had entered the magistracy, and was now a judge
in the tribunal of the Seine; Abbe Midon, who had come to Paris with
Maurice, and Martial and herself.

There was another person, the bare recollection of whom made her
tremble, and whose name she dared not utter.

Jean Lacheneur, Marie-Anne’s brother.

An inward voice, more powerful than reason, told her that this
implacable enemy was still alive, watching for his hour of vengeance.

More troubled by her presentiments now, than she had been by Chupin’s
persecutions in days gone by, Mme. de Sairmeuse decided to apply to
Chelteux in order to ascertain, if possible, what she had to expect.

Fouche’s former agent had not wavered in his devotion to the duchess.
Every three months he presented his bill, which was paid without
discussion; and to ease his conscience, he sent one of his men to prowl
around Sairmeuse for a while, at least once a year.

Animated by the hope of a magnificent reward, the spy promised his
client, and--what was more to the purpose--promised himself, that he
would discover this dreaded enemy.

He started in quest of him, and had already begun to collect proofs of
Jean’s existence, when his investigations were abruptly terminated.

One morning the body of a man literally hacked in pieces was found in an
old well. It was the body of Chelteux.

“A fitting close to the career of such a wretch,” said the _Journal des
Debats_, in noting the event.

When she read this news, Mme. Blanche felt as a culprit would feel on
reading his death-warrant.

“The end is near,” she murmured. “Lacheneur is coming!”

The duchess was not mistaken.

Jean had told the truth when he declared that he was not disposing of
his sister’s estate for his own benefit. In his opinion, Marie-Anne’s
fortune must be consecrated to one sacred purpose; he would not divert
the slightest portion of it to his individual needs.

He was absolutely penniless when the manager of a travelling theatrical
company engaged him for a consideration of forty-five francs per month.

From that day he lived the precarious life of a strolling player. He was
poorly paid, and often reduced to abject poverty by lack of engagements,
or by the impecuniosity of managers.

His hatred had lost none of its virulence; but to wreak the desired
vengeance upon his enemy, he must have time and money at his disposal.

But how could he accumulate money when he was often too poor to appease
his hunger?

Still he did not renounce his hopes. His was a rancor which was only
intensified by years. He was biding his time while he watched from the
depths of his misery the brilliant fortunes of the house of Sairmeuse.

He had waited sixteen years, when one of his friends procured him an
engagement in Russia.

The engagement was nothing; but the poor comedian was afterward
fortunate enough to obtain an interest in a theatrical enterprise, from
which he realized a fortune of one hundred thousand francs in less than
six years.

“Now,” said he, “I can give up this life. I am rich enough, now, to
begin the warfare.”

And six weeks later he arrived in his native village.

Before carrying any of his atrocious designs into execution, he went
to Sairmeuse to visit Marie-Anne’s grave, in order to obtain there an
increase of animosity, as well as the relentless _sang-froid_ of a stern
avenger of crime.

That was his only motive in going, but, on the very evening of his
arrival, he learned through a garrulous old peasant woman that ever
since his departure--that is to say, for a period of twenty years--two
parties had been making persistent inquiries for a child which had been
placed somewhere in the neighborhood.

Jean knew that it was Marie-Anne’s child they were seeking. Why they had
not succeeded in finding it, he knew equally well.

But why were there two persons seeking the child? One was Maurice
d’Escorval, of course, but who was the other?

Instead of remaining at Sairmeuse a week, Jean Lacheneur tarried there a
month; and by the expiration of that month he had traced these inquiries
concerning the child to the agent of Chelteux. Through him, he reached
Fouche’s former spy; and, finally, succeeded in discovering that the
search had been instituted by no less a person than the Duchesse de
Sairmeuse.

This discovery bewildered him. How could Mme. Blanche have known that
Marie-Anne had given birth to a child; and knowing it, what possible
interest could she have had in finding it?

These two questions tormented Jean’s mind continually; but he could
discover no satisfactory answer.

“Chupin’s son could tell me, perhaps,” he thought. “I must pretend to be
reconciled to the sons of the wretch who betrayed my father.”

But the traitor’s children had been dead for several years, and after a
long search, Jean found only the Widow Chupin and her son, Polyte.

They were keeping a drinking-saloon not far from the
Chateau-des-Rentiers; and their establishment, known as the Poivriere,
bore anything but an enviable reputation.

Lacheneur questioned the widow and her son in vain; they could give him
no information whatever on the subject. He told them his name, but even
this did not awaken the slightest recollection in their minds.

Jean was about to take his departure when Mother Chupin, probably in the
hope of extracting a few pennies, began to deplore her present misery,
which was, she declared, all the harder to bear since she had wanted for
nothing during the life of her poor husband, who had always obtained
as much money as he wanted from a lady of high degree--the Duchesse de
Sairmeuse, in short.

Lacheneur uttered such a terrible oath that the old woman and her son
started back in affright.

He saw at once the close connection between the researches of Mme.
Blanche and her generosity to Chupin.

“It was she who poisoned Marie-Anne,” he said to himself. “It was
through my sister that she became aware of the existence of the
child. She loaded Chupin with favors because he knew the crime she had
committed--that crime in which his father had been only an accomplice.”

He remembered Martial’s oath at the bedside of the murdered girl, and
his heart overflowed with savage exultation. He saw his two enemies, the
last of the Sairmeuse and the last of the Courtornieu take in their own
hands his work of vengeance.

But this was mere conjecture; he desired to be assured of the
correctness of his suppositions.

He drew from his pocket a handful of gold, and, throwing it upon the
table, he said:

“I am very rich; if you will obey me and keep my secret, your fortune is
made.”

A shrill cry of delight from mother and son outweighed any protestations
of obedience.

The Widow Chupin knew how to write, and Lacheneur dictated this letter:


“Madame la Duchesse--I shall expect you at my establishment to-morrow
between twelve and four o’clock. It is on business connected with the
Borderie. If at five o’clock I have not seen you, I shall carry to the
post a letter for the duke.”


“And if she comes what am I to say to her?” asked the astonished widow.

“Nothing; you will merely ask her for money.”

“If she comes, it is as I have guessed,” he reflected.

She came.

Hidden in the loft of the Poivriere, Jean, through an opening in the
floor, saw the duchess give a banknote to Mother Chupin.

“Now, she is in my power!” he thought exultantly. “Through what sloughs
of degradation will I drag her before I deliver her up to her husband’s
vengeance!”



CHAPTER LIV

A few lines of the article consecrated to Martial de Sairmeuse in the
“General Biography of the Men of the Century,” give the history of his
life after his marriage.


“Martial de Sairmeuse,” it says there, “brought to the service of his
party a brilliant intellect and admirable endowments. Called to the
front at the moment when political strife was raging with the utmost
violence, he had courage to assume the sole responsibility of the most
extreme measures.

“Compelled by almost universal opprobrium to retire from office, he left
behind him animosities which will be extinguished only with life.”


But what this article does not state is this: if Martial was wrong--and
that depends entirely upon the point of view from which his conduct
is regarded--he was doubly wrong, since he was not possessed of those
ardent convictions verging upon fanaticism which make men fools, heroes,
and martyrs.

He was not even ambitious.

Those associated with him, witnessing his passionate struggle and his
unceasing activity, thought him actuated by an insatiable thirst for
power.

He cared little or nothing for it. He considered its burdens heavy; its
compensations small. His pride was too lofty to feel any satisfaction in
the applause that delights the vain, and flattery disgusted him.
Often, in his princely drawing-rooms, during some brilliant fete, his
acquaintances noticed a shade of gloom steal over his features, and
seeing him thus thoughtful and preoccupied, they respectfully refrained
from disturbing him.

“His mind is occupied with momentous questions,” they thought. “Who can
tell what important decisions may result from this revery?”

They were mistaken.

At the very moment when his brilliant success made his rivals pale with
envy--when it would seem that he had nothing left to wish for in this
world, Martial was saying to himself:

“What an empty life! What weariness and vexation of spirit! To live for
others--what a mockery!”

He looked at his wife, radiant in her beauty, worshipped like a queen,
and he sighed.

He thought of her who was dead--Marie-Anne--the only woman whom he had
ever loved.

She was never absent from his mind. After all these years he saw her
yet, cold, rigid, lifeless, in that luxurious room at the Borderie;
and time, far from effacing the image of the fair girl who had won his
youthful heart, made it still more radiant and endowed his lost idol
with almost superhuman grace of person and of character.

If fate had but given him Marie-Anne for his wife! He said this to
himself again and again, picturing the exquisite happiness which a life
with her would have afforded him.

They would have remained at Sairmeuse. They would have had lovely
children playing around them! He would not be condemned to this
continual warfare--to this hollow, unsatisfying, restless life.

The truly happy are not those who parade their satisfaction and
good fortune before the eyes of the multitude. The truly happy hide
themselves from the curious gaze, and they are right; happiness is
almost a crime.

So thought Martial; and he, the great statesman, often said to himself,
in a sort of rage:

“To love, and to be loved--that is everything! All else is vanity.”

He had really tried to love his wife; he had done his best to rekindle
the admiration with which she had inspired him at their first meeting.
He had not succeeded.

Between them there seemed to be a wall of ice which nothing could melt,
and which was constantly increasing in height and thickness.

“Why is it?” he wondered, again and again. “It is incomprehensible.
There are days when I could swear that she loved me. Her character,
formerly so irritable, is entirely changed; she is gentleness itself.”

But he could not conquer his aversion; it was stronger than his own
will.

These unavailing regrets, and the disappointments and sorrow that
preyed upon him, undoubtedly aggravated the bitterness and severity of
Martial’s policy.

But he, at least, knew how to fall nobly.

He passed, without even a change of countenance, from almost omnipotence
to a position so compromising that his very life was endangered.

On seeing his ante-chambers, formerly thronged with flatterers and
office-seekers, empty and deserted, he laughed, and his laugh was
unaffected.

“The ship is sinking,” said he; “the rats have deserted it.”

He did not even pale when the noisy crowd came to hoot and curse and
hurl stones at his windows; and when Otto, his faithful _valet de
chambre_, entreated him to assume a disguise and make his escape through
the gardens, he responded:

“By no means! I am simply odious; I do not wish to become ridiculous!”

They could not even dissuade him from going to a window and looking down
upon the rabble in the street below.

A singular idea had just occurred to him.

“If Jean Lacheneur is still alive,” he thought, “how much he would enjoy
this! And if he is alive, he is undoubtedly there in the foremost rank,
urging on the crowd.”

And he wished to see.

But Jean Lacheneur was in Russia at that epoch. The excitement subsided;
the Hotel de Sairmeuse was not seriously threatened. Still Martial
realized that it would be better for him to go away for a while, and
allow people to forget him.

He did not ask the duchess to accompany him.

“The fault has been mine entirely,” he said to her, “and to make you
suffer for it by condemning you to exile would be unjust. Remain here; I
think it will be much better for you to remain here.”

She did not offer to go with him. It would have been a pleasure to her,
but she dared not leave Paris. She knew that she must remain in order
to insure the silence of her persecutors. Both times she had left Paris
before, all came near being discovered, and yet she had Aunt Medea,
then, to take her place.

Martial went away, accompanied only by his devoted servant, Otto.
In intelligence, this man was decidedly superior to his position; he
possessed an independent fortune, and he had a hundred reasons--one, by
the way, was a very pretty one--for desiring to remain in Paris; but his
master was in trouble, and he did not hesitate.

For four years the Duc de Sairmeuse wandered over Europe, ever
accompanied by his _ennui_ and his dejection, and chafing beneath the
burden of a life no longer animated by interest or sustained by hope.

He remained awhile in London, then he went to Vienna, afterward to
Venice. One day he was seized by an irresistible desire to see Paris
again, and he returned.

It was not a very prudent step, perhaps. His bitterest enemies--personal
enemies, whom he had mortally offended and persecuted--were in power;
but he did not hesitate. Besides, how could they injure him, since he
had no favors to ask, no cravings of ambition to satisfy?

The exile which had weighed so heavily upon him, the sorrow, the
disappointments and loneliness he had endured had softened his nature
and inclined his heart to tenderness; and he returned firmly resolved to
overcome his aversion to his wife, and seek a reconciliation.

“Old age is approaching,” he thought. “If I have not a beloved wife at
my fireside, I may at least have a friend.”

His manner toward her, on his return, astonished Mme. Blanche. She
almost believed she saw again the Martial of the little blue salon at
Courtornieu; but the realization of her cherished dream was now only
another torture added to all the others.

Martial was striving to carry his plan into execution, when the
following laconic epistle came to him one day through the post:


“Monsieur le Duc--I, if I were in your place, would watch my wife.”


It was only an anonymous letter, but Martial’s blood mounted to his
forehead.

“Can it be that she has a lover?” he thought.

Then reflecting on his own conduct toward his wife since their marriage,
he said to himself:

“And if she has, have I any right to complain? Did I not tacitly give
her back her liberty?”

He was greatly troubled, and yet he would not have degraded himself
so much as to play the spy, had it not been for one of those trifling
circumstances which so often decide a man’s destiny.

He was returning from a ride on horseback one morning about eleven
o’clock, and he was not thirty paces from the Hotel de Sairmeuse when
he saw a lady hurriedly emerge from the house. She was very plainly
dressed--entirely in black--but her whole appearance was strikingly that
of the duchess.

“It is certainly my wife; but why is she dressed in such a fashion?” he
thought.

Had he been on foot he would certainly have entered the house; as it
was, he slowly followed Mme. Blanche, who was going up the Rue Grenelle.
She walked very quickly, and without turning her head, and kept her face
persistently shrouded in a very thick veil.

When she reached the Rue Taranne, she threw herself into one of the
_fiacres_ at the carriage-stand.

The coachman came to the door to speak to her; then nimbly sprang upon
the box, and gave his bony horses one of those cuts of the whip that
announce a princely _pourboire_.

The carriage had already turned the corner of the Rue du Dragon, and
Martial, ashamed and irresolute, had not moved from the place where he
had stopped his horse, just around the corner of the Rue Saint Pares.

Not daring to admit his suspicions, he tried to deceive himself.

“Nonsense!” he thought, giving the reins to his horse, “what do I risk
in advancing? The carriage is a long way off by this time, and I shall
not overtake it.”

He did overtake it, however, on reaching the intersection of the
Croix-Rouge, where there was, as usual, a crowd of vehicles.

It was the same _fiacre_; Martial recognized it by its green body, and
its wheels striped with white.

Emerging from the crowd of carriages, the driver whipped up his horses,
and it was at a gallop that they flew up the Rue du Vieux Columbier--the
narrowest street that borders the Place Saint Sulpice--and gained the
outer boulevards.

Martial’s thoughts were busy as he trotted along about a hundred yards
behind the vehicle.

“She is in a terrible hurry,” he said to himself. “This, however, is
scarcely the quarter for a lover’s rendezvous.”

The carriage had passed the Place d’Italie. It entered the Rue du
Chateau-des-Rentiers and soon paused before a tract of unoccupied
ground.

The door was at once opened, and the Duchesse de Sairmeuse hastily
alighted.

Without stopping to look to the right or to the left, she hurried across
the open space.

A man, by no means prepossessing in appearance, with a long beard, and
with a pipe in his mouth, and clad in a workman’s blouse, was seated
upon a large block of stone not far off.

“Will you hold my horse a moment?” inquired Martial.

“Certainly,” answered the man.

Had Martial been less preoccupied, his suspicions might have been
aroused by the malicious smile that curved the man’s lips; and had he
examined his features closely, he would perhaps have recognized him.

For it was Jean Lacheneur.

Since addressing that anonymous letter to the Duc de Sairmeuse, he had
made the duchess multiply her visits to the Widow Chupin; and each time
he had watched for her coming.

“So, if her husband decides to follow her I shall know it,” he thought.

It was indispensable for the success of his plans that Mme. Blanche
should be watched by her husband.

For Jean Lacheneur had decided upon his course. From a thousand schemes
for revenge he had chosen the most frightful and ignoble that a brain
maddened and enfevered by hatred could possibly conceive.

He longed to see the haughty Duchesse de Sairmeuse subjected to the
vilest ignominy, Martial in the hands of the lowest of the low. He
pictured a bloody struggle in this miserable den; the sudden arrival
of the police, summoned by himself, who would arrest all the parties
indiscriminately. He gloated over the thought of a trial in which the
crime committed at the Borderie would be brought to light; he saw the
duke and the duchess in prison, and the great names of Sairmeuse and of
Courtornieu shrouded in eternal disgrace.

And he believed that nothing was wanting to insure the success of his
plans. He had at his disposal two miserable wretches who were capable
of any crime; and an unfortunate youth named Gustave, made his willing
slave by poverty and cowardice, was intended to play the part of
Marie-Anne’s son.

These three accomplices had no suspicion of his real intentions. As for
the Widow Chupin and her son, if they suspected some infamous plot, the
name of the duchess was all they really knew in regard to it. Moreover,
Jean held Polyte and his mother completely under his control by the
wealth which he had promised them if they served him docilely.

And if Martial followed his wife into the Poivriere, Jean had so
arranged matters that the duke would at first suppose that she had been
led there by charity.

“But he will not go in,” thought Lacheneur, whose heart throbbed wildly
with sinister joy as he held Martial’s horse. “Monsieur le Duc is too
fine for that.”

And Martial did not go in. Though he was horrified when he saw his wife
enter that vile den, as if she were at home there, he said to himself
that he should learn nothing by following her.

He, therefore, contented himself by making a thorough examination of
the outside of the house; then, remounting his horse, he departed on a
gallop. He was completely mystified; he did not know what to think, what
to imagine, what to believe.

But he was fully resolved to fathom this mystery and as soon as he
returned home he sent Otto out in search of information. He could
confide everything to this devoted servant; he had no secrets from him.

About four o’clock his faithful _valet de chambre_ returned, an
expression of profound consternation visible upon his countenance.

“What is it?” asked Martial, divining some great misfortune.

“Ah, sir, the mistress of that wretched den is the widow of Chupin’s
son----”

Martial’s face became as white as his linen.

He knew life too well not to understand that since the duchess had been
compelled to submit to the power of these people, they must be masters
of some secret which she was willing to make any sacrifice to preserve.
But what secret?

The years which had silvered Martial’s hair, had not cooled the ardor of
his blood. He was, as he had always been, a man of impulses.

He rushed to his wife’s apartments.

“Madame has just gone down to receive the Countess de Mussidan and the
Marquise d’Arlange,” said the maid.

“Very well; I will wait for her here. Retire.”

And Martial entered the chamber of Mme. Blanche.

The room was in disorder, for the duchess, after returning from the
Poivriere, was still engaged in her toilet when the visitors were
announced.

The wardrobe-doors were open, the chairs were encumbered with wearing
apparel, the articles which Mme. Blanche used daily--her watch, her
purse, and several bunches of keys--were lying upon the dressing-table
and mantel.

Martial did not sit down. His self-possession was returning.

“No folly,” he thought, “if I question her, I shall learn nothing. I
must be silent and watchful.”

He was about to retire, when, on glancing about the room, his eyes fell
upon a large casket, inlaid with silver, which had belonged to his wife
ever since she was a young girl, and which accompanied her everywhere.

“That, doubtless, holds the solution of the mystery,” he said to
himself.

It was one of those moments when a man obeys the dictates of passion
without pausing to reflect. He saw the keys upon the mantel; he seized
them, and endeavored to find one that would fit the lock of the casket.
The fourth key opened it. It was full of papers.

With feverish haste, Martial examined the contents. He had thrown
aside several unimportant letters, when he came to a bill that read as
follows:

“Search for the child of Madame de Sairmeuse. Expenses for the third
quarter of the year 18--.”

Martial’s brain reeled.

A child! His wife had a child!

He read on: “For services of two agents at Sairmeuse, ----. For expenses
attending my own journey, ----. Divers gratuities, ----. Etc., etc.” The
total amounted to six thousand francs. The bill was signed “Chelteux.”

With a sort of cold rage, Martial continued his examination of the
contents of the casket, and found a note written in a miserable hand,
that said: “Two thousand francs this evening, or I will tell the duke
the history of the affair at the Borderie.” Then several more bills from
Chelteux; then a letter from Aunt Medea in which she spoke of prison
and of remorse. And finally, at the bottom of the casket, he found the
marriage-certificate of Marie-Anne Lacheneur and Maurice d’Escorval,
drawn up by the Cure of Vigano and signed by the old physician and
Corporal Bavois.

The truth was as clear as daylight.

Stunned, frozen with horror, Martial scarcely had strength to return the
letters to the casket and restore it to its place.

Then he tottered back to his own room, clinging to the walls for
support.

“It was she who murdered Marie-Anne,” he murmured.

He was confounded, terror-stricken by the perfidy and baseness of
this woman who was his wife--by her criminal audacity, by her cool
calculation and assurance, by her marvellous powers of dissimulation.

He swore he would discover all, either through the duchess or through
the Widow Chupin; and he ordered Otto to procure a costume for him such
as was generally worn by the _habitues_ of the Poivriere. He did not
know how soon he might have use for it.

This happened early in February, and from that moment Mme. Blanche did
not take a single step without being watched. Not a letter reached her
that her husband had not previously read.

And she had not the slightest suspicion of the constant espionage to
which she was subjected.

Martial did not leave his room; he pretended to be ill. To meet his
wife and be silent, was beyond his powers. He remembered the oath of
vengeance which he had pronounced over Marie-Anne’s lifeless form too
well.

But there were no new revelations, and for this reason: Polyte Chupin
had been arrested under charge of theft, and this accident caused a
delay in the execution of Lacheneur’s plans. But, at last, he judged
that all would be in readiness on the 20th of February, Shrove Sunday.

The evening before the Widow Chupin, in conformance with his
instructions, wrote to the duchess that she must come to the Poivriere
Sunday evening at eleven o’clock.

On that same evening Jean was to meet his accomplices at a ball at the
Rainbow--a public-house bearing a very unenviable reputation--and give
them their last instructions.

These accomplices were to open the scene; he was to appear only in the
_denouement_.

“All is well arranged; the mechanism will work of its own accord,” he
said to himself.

But the “mechanism,” as he styled it, failed to work.

Mme. Blanche, on receiving the Widow Chupin’s summons, revolted for a
moment. The lateness of the hour, the isolation of the spot designated,
frightened her.

But she was obliged to submit, and on the appointed evening she
furtively left the house, accompanied by Camille, the same servant who
had witnessed Aunt Medea’s last agony.

The duchess and her maid were attired like women of the very lowest
order, and felt no fear of being seen or recognized.

And yet a man was watching them, and he quickly followed them. It was
Martial.

Knowing of this rendezvous even before his wife, he had disguised
himself in the costume Otto had procured for him, which was that of a
laborer about the quays; and, as he was a man who did perfectly
whatever he attempted to do, he had succeeded in rendering himself
unrecognizable. His hair and beard were rough and matted; his hands were
soiled and grimed with dirt; he was really the abject wretch whose rags
he wore.

Otto had begged to be allowed to accompany him; but the duke refused,
saying that the revolver which he would take with him would be
sufficient protection. He knew Otto well enough, however, to be certain
he would disobey him.

Ten o’clock was sounding when Mme. Blanche and Camille left the house,
and it did not take them five minutes to reach the Rue Taranne.

There was one _fiacre_ on the stand--one only.

They entered it and it drove away.

This circumstance drew from Martial an oath worthy of his costume. Then
he reflected that, since he knew where to find his wife, a slight delay
in finding a carriage did not matter.

He soon obtained one; and the coachman, thanks to a _pourboire_ of ten
francs, drove to the Rue du Chateau-des-Rentiers as fast as his horses
could go.

But the duke had scarcely set foot on the ground before he heard
the rumbling of another carriage which stopped abruptly at a little
distance.

“Otto is evidently following me,” he thought.

And he started across the open space in the direction of the Poivriere.

Gloom and silence prevailed on every side, and were made still more
oppressive by a chill fog that heralded an approaching thaw. Martial
stumbled and slipped at almost every step upon the rough, snow-covered
ground.

It was not long before he could distinguish a dark mass in the midst
of the fog. It was the Poivriere. The light within filtered through the
heart-shaped openings in the blinds, looking at a distance like lurid
eyes gleaming in the darkness.

Could it really be possible that the Duchesse de Sairmeuse was there!

Martial cautiously approached the window, and clinging to the hinges of
one of the shutters, he lifted himself up so he could peer through the
opening.

Yes, his wife was indeed there in that vile den.

She and Camille were seated at a table before a large punch-bowl, and
in company with two ragged, leering scoundrels, and a soldier, quite
youthful in appearance.

In the centre of the room stood the Widow Chupin, with a small glass
in her hand, talking volubly and punctuating her sentences by copious
draughts of brandy.

The impression produced upon Martial was so terrible that his hold
relaxed and he dropped to the ground.

A ray of pity penetrated his soul, for he vaguely realized the frightful
suffering which had been the chastisement of the murderess.

But he desired another glance at the interior of the hovel, and he again
lifted himself up to the opening and looked in.

The old woman had disappeared; the young soldier had risen from the
table and was talking and gesticulating earnestly. Mme. Blanche and
Camille were listening to him with the closest attention.

The two men who were sitting face to face, with their elbows upon the
table, were looking at each other; and Martial saw them exchange a
significant glance.

He was not wrong. The scoundrels were plotting “a rich haul.”

Mme. Blanche, who had dressed herself with such care, that to render her
disguise perfect she had encased her feet in large, coarse shoes that
were almost killing her--Mme. Blanche had forgotten to remove her superb
diamond ear-rings.

She had forgotten them, but Lacheneur’s accomplices had noticed them,
and were now regarding them with eyes that glittered more brilliantly
than the diamonds themselves.

While awaiting Lacheneur’s coming, these wretches, as had been agreed
upon, were playing the part which he had imposed upon them. For this,
and their assistance afterward, they were to receive a certain sum of
money.

But they were thinking that this sum was not, perhaps, a quarter part of
the value of these jewels, and they exchanged glances that said:

“Ah! if we could only get them and make our escape before Lacheneur
comes!”

The temptation was too strong to be resisted.

One of them rose suddenly, and, seizing the duchess by the back of the
neck, he forced her head down upon the table.

The diamonds would have been torn from the ears of Mme. Blanche had it
not been for Camille, who bravely came to the aid of her mistress.

Martial could endure no more. He sprang to the door of the hovel, opened
it, and entered, bolting it behind him.

“Martial!”

“Monsieur le Duc!”

These cries escaping the lips of Mme. Blanche and Camille in the same
breath, changed the momentary stupor of their assailants into fury; and
they both precipitated themselves upon Martial, determined to kill him.

With a spring to one side, Martial avoided them. He had his revolver in
his hand; he fired twice and the wretches fell. But he was not yet safe,
for the young soldier threw himself upon him, and attempted to disarm
him.

Through all the furious struggle, Martial did not cease crying, in a
panting voice:

“Fly! Blanche, fly! Otto is not far off. The name--save the honor of the
name!”

The two women obeyed, making their escape through the back door, which
opened upon the garden; and they had scarcely done so, before a violent
knocking was heard at the front door.

The police were coming! This increased Martial’s frenzy; and with one
supreme effort to free himself from his assailant, he gave him such
a violent push that his adversary fell, striking his head against the
corner of the table, after which he lay like one dead.

But the Widow Chupin, who had come downstairs on hearing the uproar, was
shrieking upon the stairs. At the door someone was crying: “Open in the
name of the law!”

Martial might have fled; but if he fled, the duchess might be captured,
for he would certainly be pursued. He saw the peril at a glance, and his
decision was made.

He shook the Widow Chupin violently by the arm, and said, in an
imperious voice:

“If you know how to hold your tongue you shall have one hundred thousand
francs.”

Then, drawing a table before the door opening into the adjoining room,
he intrenched himself behind it as behind a rampart, and awaited the
approach of the enemy.

The next moment the door was forced open, and a squad of police, under
the command of Inspector Gevrol, entered the room.

“Surrender!” cried the inspector.

Martial did not move; his pistol was turned upon the intruder.

“If I can parley with them, and hold them in check only two minutes, all
may yet be saved,” he thought.

He obtained the wished-for delay; then he threw his weapon to the
ground, and was about to bound through the back-door, when a policeman,
who had gone round to the rear of the house, seized him about the body,
and threw him to the floor.

From this side he expected only assistance, so he cried:

“Lost! It is the Prussians who are coming!”

In the twinkling of an eye he was bound; and two hours later he was an
inmate of the station-house at the Place d’Italie.

He had played his part so perfectly, that he had deceived even Gevrol.
The other participants in the broil were dead, and he could rely upon
the Widow Chupin. But he knew that the trap had been set for him by Jean
Lacheneur; and he read a whole volume of suspicion in the eyes of the
young officer who had cut off his retreat, and who was called Lecoq by
his companions.



CHAPTER LV

The Duc de Sairmeuse was one of those men who remain superior to all
fortuitous circumstances, good or bad. He was a man of vast experience,
and great natural shrewdness. His mind was quick to act, and fertile in
resources. But when he found himself immured in the damp and loathsome
station-house, after the terrible scenes at the Poivriere, he
relinquished all hope.

Martial knew that Justice does not trust to appearances, and that when
she finds herself confronted by a mystery, she does not rest until she
has fathomed it.

Martial knew, only too well, that if his identity was established, the
authorities would endeavor to discover the reason of his presence at
the Poivriere. That this reason would soon be discovered, he could not
doubt, and, in that case, the crime at the Borderie, and the guilt of
the duchess, would undoubtedly be made public.

This meant the Court of Assizes, prison, a frightful scandal, dishonor,
eternal disgrace!

And the power he had wielded in former days was a positive disadvantage
to him now. His place was now filled by his political adversaries. Among
them were two personal enemies upon whom he had inflicted those terrible
wounds of vanity which are never healed. What an opportunity for revenge
this would afford them!

At the thought of this ineffaceable stain upon the great name of
Sairmeuse, which was his pride and his glory, reason almost forsook him.

“My God, inspire me,” he murmured. “How shall I save the honor of the
name?”

He saw but one chance of salvation--death. They now believed him one of
the miserable wretches that haunt the suburbs of Paris; if he were dead
they would not trouble themselves about his identity.

“It is the only way!” he thought.

He was endeavoring to find some means of accomplishing his plan of
self-destruction, when he heard a bustle and confusion outside. In a few
moments the door was opened and a man was thrust into the same cell--a
man who staggered a few steps, fell heavily to the floor, and began to
snore loudly. It was only a drunken man.

But a gleam of hope illumined Martial’s heart, for in the drunken man he
recognized Otto--disguised, almost unrecognizable.

It was a bold ruse and no time must be lost in profiting by it. Martial
stretched himself upon a bench, as if to sleep, in such a way that his
head was scarcely a yard from that of Otto.

“The duchess is out of danger,” murmured the faithful servant.

“For to-day, perhaps. But to-morrow, through me, all will be known.”

“Have you told them who you are?”

“No; all the policemen but one took me for a vagabond.”

“You must continue to personate this character.”

“What good will it do? Lacheneur will betray me.”

But Martial, though he little knew it, had no need to fear Lacheneur for
the present, at least. A few hours before, on his way from the Rainbow
to the Poivriere, Jean had been precipitated to the bottom of a stone
quarry, and had fractured his skull. The laborers, on returning to their
work early in the morning, found him lying there senseless; and at that
very moment they were carrying him to the hospital.

Although Otto was ignorant of this circumstance, he did not seem
discouraged.

“There will be some way of getting rid of Lacheneur,” said he, “if you
will only sustain your present character. An escape is an easy matter
when a man has millions at his command.”

“They will ask me who I am, whence I came, how I have lived.”

“You speak English and German; tell them that you have just returned
from foreign lands; that you were a foundling and that you have always
lived a roving life.”

“How can I prove this?”

Otto drew a little nearer his master, and said, impressively:

“We must agree upon our plans, for our success depends upon a perfect
understanding between us. I have a sweetheart in Paris--and no one knows
our relations. She is as sharp as steel. Her name is Milner, and she
keeps the Hotel de Mariembourg, on the Saint-Quentin. You can say that
you arrived here from Leipsic on Sunday; that you went to this hotel;
that you left your trunk there, and that this trunk is marked with the
name of May, foreign artist.”

“Capital!” said Martial, approvingly.

And then, with extraordinary quickness and precision, they agreed, point
by point, upon their plan of defence.

When all had been arranged, Otto pretended to awake from the heavy sleep
of intoxication; he clamored to be released, and the keeper finally
opened the door and set him at liberty.

Before leaving the station-house, however, he succeeded in throwing a
note to the Widow Chupin, who was imprisoned in the other compartment.

So, when Lecoq, after his skilful investigations at the Poivriere,
rushed to the Place d’Italie, panting with hope and ambition, he found
himself outwitted by these men, who were inferior to him in penetration,
but whose _finesse_ was superior to his own.

Martial’s plans being fully formed, he intended to carry them out with
absolute perfection of detail, and, after his removal to prison, the
Duc de Sairmeuse was preparing himself for the visit of the judge of
instruction, when Maurice d’Escorval entered.

They recognized each other. They were both terribly agitated, and the
examination was an examination only in name. After the departure of
Maurice, Martial attempted to destroy himself. He had no faith in the
generosity of his former enemy.

But when he found M. Segmuller occupying Maurice’s place the next
morning, Martial believed that he was saved.

Then began that struggle between the judge and Lecoq on one side, and
the accused on the other--a struggle from which neither party came out
conqueror.

Martial knew that Lecoq was the only person he had to fear, still he
bore him no ill-will. Faithful to his nature, which compelled him to
be just even to his enemies, he could not help admiring the astonishing
penetration and perseverance of this young policeman who, undismayed
by the obstacles and discouragements that surrounded him, struggled on,
unassisted, to reach the truth.

But Lecoq was always outwitted by Otto, the mysterious accomplice, who
seemed to know his every movement in advance.

At the morgue, at the Hotel de Mariembourg, with Toinon, the wife of
Polyte Chupin, as well as with Polyte Chupin himself, Lecoq was just a
little too late.

Lecoq detected the secret correspondence between the prisoner and his
accomplice. He was even ingenious enough to discover the key to it, but
this served no purpose. A man, who had seen a rival, or rather, a future
master, in Lecoq had betrayed him.

If his efforts to arrive at the truth through the jeweller and the
Marquis d’Arlange had failed, it was only because Mme. Blanche had not
purchased the diamond ear-rings she wore at the Poivriere at any shop,
but from one of her friends, the Baroness de Watchau.

And lastly, if no one at Paris had missed the Duc de Sairmeuse, it
was because--thanks to an understanding between the duchess, Otto,
and Camille--no other inmate of the Hotel de Sairmeuse suspected his
absence. All the servants supposed their master confined to his room by
illness. They prepared all sorts of gruels and broths for him, and his
breakfast and dinner were taken to his apartments every day.

So the weeks went by, and Martial was expecting to be summoned before
the Court of Assizes and condemned under the name of May, when he was
afforded an opportunity to escape.

Too shrewd not to discern the trap that had been set for him, he endured
some moments of horrible hesitation in the prison-van.

He decided to accept the risk, however, commending himself to his lucky
star.

And he decided wisely, for that same night he leaped his own
garden-wall, leaving, as a hostage, in the hands of Lecoq, an escaped
convict, Joseph Conturier by name, whom he had picked up in a low
drinking-saloon.

Warned by Mme. Milner, thanks to a blunder on the part of Lecoq, Otto
was awaiting his master.

In the twinkling of an eye Martial’s beard fell under the razor; he
plunged into the bath that was awaiting him, and his clothing was
burned.

And it was he who, during the search a few minutes later, had the
hardihood to call out:

“Otto, by all means allow these men to do their duty.”

But he did not breathe freely until the agents of police had departed.

“At last,” he exclaimed, “honor is saved! We have outwitted Lecoq!”

He had just left the bath, and enveloped himself in a _robe de chambre_,
when Otto handed him a letter from the duchess.

He hastily broke the seal and read:


“You are safe. You know all. I am dying. Farewell. I loved you.”


With two bounds he reached his wife’s apartments. The door was locked;
he burst it open. Too late!

Mme. Blanche was dead--poisoned, like Marie-Anne; but she had procured
a drug whose effect was instantaneous; and extended upon her couch, clad
in her wonted apparel, her hands folded upon her breast, she seemed only
asleep.

A tear glittered in Martial’s eye.

“Poor, unhappy woman!” he murmured; “may God forgive you as I forgive
you--you whose crime has been so frightfully expiated here below!”




EPILOGUE

THE FIRST SUCCESS

Safe, in his own princely mansion, and surrounded by an army of
retainers, the Duc de Sairmeuse triumphantly exclaimed:

“We have outwitted Lecoq.”

In this he was right.

But he thought himself forever beyond the reach of the wily, keen-witted
detective; and in this he was wrong.

Lecoq was not the man to sit down with folded hands and brood over the
humiliation of his defeat.

Before he went to Father Tabaret, he was beginning to recover from his
stupor and despondency; and when he left that experienced detective’s
presence, he had regained his courage, his command over his faculties,
and sufficient energy to move the world, if necessary.

“Well, my good man,” he remarked to Father Absinthe, who was trotting
along by his side, “you have heard what the great Monsieur Tabaret said,
did you not? So you see I was right.”

But his companion evinced no enthusiasm.

“Yes, you were right,” he responded, in woebegone tones.

“Do you think we are ruined by two or three mistakes? Nonsense! I will
soon turn our defeat of today into a glorious victory.”

“Ah! you might do so perhaps, if--they do not dismiss us from the
force.”

This doleful remark recalled Lecoq to a realizing sense of the present
situation.

They had allowed a prisoner to slip through their fingers. That was
vexatious, it is true; but they had captured one of the most notorious
of criminals--Joseph Conturier. Surely there was some comfort in that.

But while Lecoq could have borne dismissal, he could not endure the
thought that he would not be allowed to follow up this affair of the
Poivriere.

What would his superior officers say when he told them that May and the
Duc de Sairmeuse were one and the same person?

They would, undoubtedly, shrug their shoulders and turn up their noses.

“Still, Monsieur Segmuller will believe me,” he thought. “But will
he dare to take any action in the matter without incontrovertible
evidence?”

This was very unlikely. Lecoq realized it all too well.

“Could we not make a descent upon the Hotel de Sairmeuse, and, on some
pretext or other, compel the duke to show himself, and identify him as
the prisoner May?”

He entertained this idea only for an instant, then abruptly dismissed
it.

“A stupid expedient!” he exclaimed. “Are two such men as the duke and
his accomplice likely to be caught napping? They are prepared for such a
visit, and we should only have our labor for our pains.”

He made these reflections _sotto voce_; and Father Absinthe’s curiosity
was aroused.

“Excuse me,” said he, “I did not quite understand you.”

“I say that we must find some tangible proof before asking permission to
proceed further.”

He paused with knitted brows.

In seeking a circumstance which would establish the complicity between
some member of the duke’s household and the witnesses who had been
called upon to give their testimony, Lecoq thought of Mme. Milner, the
owner of the Hotel de Mariembourg, and his first meeting with her.

He saw her again, standing upon a chair, her face on a level with a
cage, covered with a large piece of black silk, persistently repeating
three or four German words to a starling, who as persistently retorted:
“Camille! Where is Camille?”

“One thing is certain,” resumed Lecoq; “if Madame Milner--who is a
German and who speaks with the strongest possible German accent--had
raised this bird, it would either have spoken German or with the same
accent as its mistress. Therefore it cannot have been in her possession
long, and who gave it to her?”

Father Absinthe began to grow impatient.

“In sober earnest, what are you talking about?” he asked, petulantly.

“I say that if there is someone at the Hotel de Sairmeuse named Camille,
I have the proof I desire. Come, Papa Absinthe, let us hurry on.”

And without another word of explanation, he dragged his companion
rapidly along.

When they reached the Rue de Grenelle, Lecoq saw a messenger leaning
against the door of a wine-shop. Lecoq called him.

“Come, my boy,” said he; “I wish you to go to the Hotel de Sairmeuse and
ask for Camille. Tell her that her uncle is waiting her here.”

“But, sir----”

“What, you have not gone yet?”

The messenger departed; the two policemen entered the wine-shop, and
Father Absinthe had scarcely had time to swallow a glass of brandy when
the lad returned.

“Monsieur, I was unable to see Mademoiselle Camille. The house is closed
from top to bottom. The duchess died very suddenly this morning.”

“Ah! the wretch!” exclaimed the young policeman.

Then, controlling himself, he mentally added:

“He must have killed his wife on returning home, but his fate is sealed.
Now, I shall be allowed to continue my investigations.”

In less than twenty minutes they arrived at the Palais de Justice.

M. Segmuller did not seem to be immoderately surprised at Lecoq’s
revelations. Still he listened with evident doubt to the young
policeman’s ingenious deductions; it was the circumstance of the
starling that seemed to decide him.

“Perhaps you are right, my dear Lecoq,” he said, at last; “and to tell
the truth, I quite agree with you. But I can take no further action in
the matter until you can furnish proof so convincing in its nature that
the Duc de Sairmeuse will be unable to think of denying it.”

“Ah! sir, my superior officers will not allow me----”

“On the contrary,” interrupted the judge, “they will allow you the
fullest liberty after I have spoken to them.”

Such action on the part of M. Segmuller required not a little courage.
There had been so much laughter about M. Segmuller’s _grand seigneur_,
disguised as a clown, that many men would have sacrificed their
convictions to the fear of ridicule.

“And when will you speak to them?” inquired Lecoq, timidly.

“At once.”

The judge had already turned toward the door when the young policeman
stopped him.

“I have one more favor to ask, Monsieur,” he said, entreatingly. “You
are so good; you are the first person who gave me any encouragement--who
had faith in me.”

“Speak, my brave fellow.”

“Ah! Monsieur, will you not give me a message for Monsieur d’Escorval?
Any insignificant message--inform him of the prisoner’s escape. I will
be the bearer of the message, and then--Oh! fear nothing, Monsieur; I
will be prudent.”

“Very well!” replied the judge.

When he left the office of his chief, Lecoq was fully authorized to
proceed with his investigations, and in his pocket was a note for M.
d’Escorval from M. Segmuller. His joy was so intense that he did not
deign to notice the sneers which were bestowed upon him as he passed
through the corridors. On the threshold his enemy Gevrol, the so-called
general, was watching for him.

“Ah, ha!” he laughed, as Lecoq passed out, “here is one of those
simpletons who fish for whales and do not catch even a gudgeon.”

For an instant Lecoq was angry. He turned abruptly and looked Gevrol
full in the face.

“That is better than assisting prisoners to carry on a surreptitious
correspondence with people outside,” he retorted, in the tone of a man
who knows what he is saying.

In his surprise, Gevrol almost lost countenance, and his blush was
equivalent to a confession.

But Lecoq said no more. What did it matter to him now if Gevrol had
betrayed him! Was he not about to win a glorious revenge?

He spent the remainder of the day in preparing his plan of action,
and in thinking what he should say when he took M. Segmuller’s note to
Maurice d’Escorval.

The next morning about eleven o’clock he presented himself at the house
of M. d’Escorval.

“Monsieur is in his study with a young man,” replied the servant; “but,
as he gave me no orders to the contrary, you may go in.”

Lecoq entered.

The study was unoccupied. But from the adjoining room, separated
from the study only by a velvet _portiere_, came a sound of stifled
exclamations, and of sobs mingled with kisses.

Not knowing whether to remain or retire, the young policeman stood for a
moment undecided; then he observed an open letter lying upon the carpet.

Impelled to do it by an impulse stronger than his own will, Lecoq picked
up the letter. It read as follows:


“The bearer of this letter is Marie-Anne’s son, Maurice--your son. I
have given him all the proofs necessary to establish his identity.
It was to his education that I consecrated the heritage of my poor
Marie-Anne.

“Those to whose care I confided him have made a noble man of him. If I
restore him to you, it is only because the life I lead is not a fitting
life for him. Yesterday, the miserable woman who murdered my sister died
from poison administered by her own hand. Poor Marie-Anne! she would
have been far more terribly avenged had not an accident which happened
to me, saved the Duc and the Duchesse de Sairmeuse from the snare into
which I had drawn them.

“Jean Lacheneur.”


Lecoq stood as if petrified.

Now he understood the terrible drama which had been enacted in the Widow
Chupin’s cabin.

“I must go to Sairmeuse at once,” he said to himself; “there I can
discover all.”

He departed without seeing M. d’Escorval. He resisted the temptation to
take the letter with him.

It was exactly one month to a day after the death of Mme. Blanche.

Reclining upon a divan in his library the Duc de Sairmeuse was engaged
in reading, when Otto, his _valet de chambre_, came to inform him that a
messenger was below, charged with delivering into the duke’s own hands a
letter from M. Maurice d’Escorval.

With a bound, Martial was on his feet.

“Is it possible?” he exclaimed.

Then he added, quickly:

“Let the messenger enter.”

A large man, with a very florid complexion, and red hair and beard,
timidly handed the duke a letter, he broke the seal, and read:


“I saved you, Monsieur, by not recognizing the prisoner, May. In your
turn, aid me! By noon, day after to-morrow, I must have two hundred and
sixty thousand francs.

“I have sufficient confidence in your honor to apply to you.

“Maurice d’Escorval.”


For a moment Martial stood bewildered, then, springing to a table, he
began writing, without noticing that the messenger was looking over his
shoulder:


“Monsieur--Not day after to-morrow, but this evening. My fortune and my
life are at your disposal. It is but a slight return for the generosity
you showed in retiring, when, beneath the rags of May, you recognized
your former enemy, now your devoted friend,

“Martial de Sairmeuse.”


He folded this letter with a feverish hand, and giving it to the
messenger with a louis, he said:

“Here is the answer, make haste!”

But the messenger did not go.

He slipped the letter into his pocket, then with a hasty movement he
cast his red beard and wig upon the floor.

“Lecoq!” exclaimed Martial, paler than death.

“Lecoq, yes, Monsieur,” replied the young detective. “I was obliged to
take my revenge; my future depended upon it, and I ventured to imitate
Monsieur d’Escorval’s writing.”

And as Martial made no response:

“I must also say to Monsieur le Duc,” he continued, “that on
transmitting to the judge the confession written by the Duke’s own hand,
of his presence at the Poivriere, I can and shall, at the same time,
furnish proofs of his entire innocence.”

And to show that he was ignorant of nothing, he added:

“As madame is dead, there will be nothing said in regard to what took
place at the Borderie.”

A week later a verdict of not guilty was rendered by M. Segmuller in the
case of the Duc de Sairmeuse.

Appointed to the position he coveted, Lecoq had the good taste, or
perhaps the shrewdness, to wear his honors modestly.

But on the day of his promotion, he ordered a seal, upon which was
engraved the exultant rooster, which he had chosen as his armorial
design, and a motto to which he ever remained faithful: _Semper
Vigilan_.


THE CHAMPDOCE MYSTERY


by Emile Gaboriau



This novel is a sequel to Caught in the Net. [Etext #2451]




CHAPTER I.

A DUCAL MONOMANIAC.

The traveller who wishes to go from Poitiers to London by the shortest
route will find that the simplest way is to take a seat in the
stage-coach which runs to Saumur; and when you book your place, the
polite clerk tells you that you must take your seat punctually at six
o’clock. The next morning, therefore, the traveller has to rise from his
bed at a very early hour, and make a hurried and incomplete toilet, and
on arriving, flushed and panting, at the office, discover that there was
no occasion for such extreme haste.

In the hotel from whence the coach starts every one seems to be asleep,
and a waiter, whose eyes are scarcely open, wanders languidly about.
There is not the slightest good in losing your temper, or in pouring out
a string of violent remonstrances. In a small restaurant opposite a cup
of hot coffee can be procured, and it is there that the disappointed
travellers congregate, to await the hour when the coach really makes a
start.

At length, however, all is ready, the conductor utters a tremendous
execration, the coachman cracks his whip, the horses spring forward, the
wheels rattle, and the coach is off at last. Whilst the conductor smokes
his pipe tranquilly, the passengers gaze out of the windows and admire
the beautiful aspect of the surrounding country. On each side stretch
the woods and fields of Bevron. The covers are full of game, which has
increased enormously, as the owner of the property has never allowed a
shot to be fired since he had the misfortune, some twenty years ago, to
kill one of his dependents whilst out shooting. On the right hand side
some distance off rise the tower and battlements of the Chateau de
Mussidan. It is two years ago since the Dowager Countess of Chevanche
died, leaving all her fortune to her niece, Mademoiselle Sabine de
Mussidan. She was a kind-hearted woman, rough and ready in her manner,
but very popular amongst the peasantry. Farther off, on the top of some
rising ground, appears an imposing structure, of an ancient style of
architecture; this is the ancient residence of the Dukes of Champdoce.
The left wing is a picturesque mass of ruins; the roof has fallen
in, and the mullions of the windows are dotted with a thick growth of
clustering ivy. Rain, storm, and sunshine have all done their work, and
painted the mouldering walls with a hundred varied tints. In 1840 the
inheritor of one of the noblest names of France resided here with
his only son. The name of the present proprietor was Caesar Guillaume
Duepair de Champdoce. He was looked upon both by the gentry and
peasantry of the country side as a most eccentric individual. He could
be seen any day wandering about, dressed in the most shabby manner, and
wearing a coat that was frequently in urgent need of repair, a leathern
cap on his head, wooden shoes, and a stout oaken cudgel in his hand. In
winter he supplemented to these an ancient sheepskin coat. He was sixty
years of age, very powerfully built, and possessing enormous strength.
The expression upon his face showed that his will was as strong as
his thews and sinews. Beneath his shaggy eyebrows twinkled a pair of
light-gray eyes, which darkened when a fit of passion overtook him, and
this was no unusual occurrence.

During his military career in the army of the Conde, he had received
a sabre cut across his cheek, and the cicatrice imparted a strange and
unpleasant expression to his face. He was not a bad-hearted man, but
headstrong, violent, and tyrannical to a degree. The peasants saluted
him with a mixture of respect and dread as he walked to the chapel, to
which he was a regular attendant on Sundays, with his son. During the
Mass he made the responses in an audible voice, and at its conclusion
invariably put a five-franc piece into the plate. This, his subscription
to the newspaper, and the sum he paid for being shaved twice each week,
constituted the whole of his outlay upon himself. He kept an excellent
table, however; plump fowls, vegetables of all kinds, and the most
delicious fruit were never absent from it. Everything, however, that
appeared upon his well-plenished board was the produce of his fields,
gardens, or woods. The nobility and gentry of the neighborhood
frequently invited him to their hospitable tables, for they looked upon
him as the head and chief of the nobility of the county; but he always
refused their invitations, saying plainly, “No man who has the slightest
respect for himself will accept hospitalities which he is not in a
position to return.” It was not the grinding clutch of poverty that
drove the Duke to this exercise of severe economy, for his income from
his estates brought him in fifty thousand francs per annum; and it was
reported that his investments brought him in as much more. As a matter
of course, therefore, he was looked upon as a miser, and a victim to the
sordid vice of avarice.

His past life might, in some degree, offer an explanation of this
conduct. Born in 1780, the Duke de Champdoce had joined the band of
emigrants which swelled the ranks of Conde’s army. An implacable opposer
of the Revolution, he resided, during the glorious days of the Empire,
in London, where dire poverty compelled him to gain a livelihood as a
fencing master at the Restoration. He came back with the Bourbons to
his native land, and, by an almost miraculous chance, was put again in
possession of his ancestral domains. But in his opinion he was living
in a state of utter destitution as compared to the enormous revenues
enjoyed by the dead-and-gone members of the Champdoce family; and what
pained him more was to see rise up by the side of the old aristocracy a
new race which had attached itself to commerce and entered into business
transactions. As he gazed upon the new order of things, the man whose
pride of birth and position almost amounted to insanity, conceived the
project to which he determined to devote the remainder of his life. He
imagined that he had discovered a means by which he could restore the
ancient house of Champdoce to all its former splendor and position. “I
can,” said he, “by living like a peasant and resorting to no unnecessary
expense, treble my capital in twenty years; and if my son and my
grandson will only follow my example, the race of Champdoce will again
recover the proud position that it formerly held.” Faithful to this idea,
he wedded, in 1820, although his heart was entirely untouched, a young
girl of noble birth but utterly devoid of beauty, though possessed of
a magnificent dowry. Their union was an extremely unhappy one, and many
persons did not hesitate to accuse the Duke of treating with harshness
and severity a young girl, who, having brought her husband five hundred
thousand francs, could not understand why she should be refused a new
dress when she urgently needed it. After twelve months of inconceivable
unhappiness, she gave birth to a son who was baptized Louis Norbert, and
six months afterwards she sank into an untimely grave.

The Duke did not seem to regret his loss very deeply. The boy appeared
to be of a strong and robust constitution, and his mother’s dowry would
go to swell the revenues of the Champdoce family. He made his recent
loss, too, the pretext for further retrenchments and economies.

Norbert was brought up exactly as a farmer’s son would have been. Every
morning he started off to work, carrying his day’s provisions in a
basket slung upon his back. As he grew older, he was taught to sow and
reap, to estimate the value of a standing crop at a glance, and, last
but not least, to drive a hard bargain. For a long time the Duke debated
the expediency of permitting his son to be taught to read or write; and
if he did so at last, it was owing to some severe remarks by the parish
priest upon the day on which Norbert took the sacrament for the first
time.

All went on well and smoothly until the day when Norbert, on his
sixteenth birthday, accompanied his father to Poitiers for the first
time.

At sixteen years of age, Louis Norbert de Champdoce looked fully twenty,
and was as handsome a youth as could be seen for miles round. The sun
had given a bronzed tint to his features which was exceedingly becoming.
He had black hair, with a slight curl running through it, and large
melancholy blue eyes, which he inherited from his mother. Poor girl! it
was the sole beauty that she had possessed. He was utterly uncultured,
and had been ruled with such a rod of iron by his father that he had
never been a league from the Chateau. His ideas were barred by the
little town of Bevron, with its sixty houses, its town hall, its small
chapel, and principal river; and to him it seemed a spot full of noise
and confusion. In the whole course of his life he had never spoken
to three persons who did not belong to the district. Bred up in this
secluded manner, it was almost impossible for him to understand that
any one could lead a different existence to that of his own. His only
pleasure was in procuring an abundant harvest, and his sole idea of
excitement was High Mass on Sunday.

For more than a year the village girls had cast sly glances at him, but
he was far too simple and innocent to notice this. When Mass was over,
he generally walked over the farm with his father to inspect the work
of the past week, or to set snares for the birds. His father at last
determined to give him a wider experience, and one day said that he was
to accompany him to Poitiers.

At a very early hour in the morning they started in one of the low
country carts of the district, and under the seat were small sacks,
containing over forty thousand francs in silver money. Norbert had
long wished to visit Poitiers, but had never done so, though it was
but fifteen miles off. Poitiers is a quaint old town, with dilapidated
pavements and tall, gloomy houses, the architecture of which dates from
the tenth century; but Norbert thought that it must be one of the most
magnificent cities in the world. It was market day when they drove in,
and he was absolutely stupefied with surprise and excitement. He had
never believed there could be so many people in one place, and hardly
noticed that the cart had pulled up opposite a lawyer’s office. His
father shook him roughly by the shoulder.

“Come, Norbert, lad, we are there,” said he.

The young man jumped to the ground, and assisted mechanically to remove
the sacks. The servile manner of the lawyer did not strike him, nor did
he listen to the conversation between him and his father. Finally, the
business being concluded, they took their departure, and, driving to the
Market Place, put up the horse and cart at an old-fashioned, dingy inn,
where they took their breakfast in the public room at a table where
the wagoners were having a violent quarrel over their meal. The Duke,
however, had other business to transact than the investment of his
money, for he wanted to find the whereabouts of a miller who was
somewhat in his debt. Norbert waited for him in front of the inn, and
could not help feeling rather uncomfortable at finding himself alone.
All at once some one came up and touched him lightly on the shoulder. He
turned round sharply, and found himself face to face with a young man,
who, seeing his look of surprise, said,--

“What! have you entirely forgotten your old friend Montlouis?”

Montlouis was the son of one of the Duke’s farmers, and he and Norbert
had often played together in past years. They had driven their cows
to the meadows together, and had spent long days together fishing or
searching for birds’ nests. The dress now worn by Montlouis had at
first prevented Norbert from recognizing him, for he was attired in
the uniform of the college at which his father had placed him, being
desirous of making something more than a mere farmer of his son.

“What are you doing here?” asked Norbert.

“I am waiting for my father.”

“So am I. Let us have a cup of coffee together.”

Montlouis led his playmate into a small wine shop near at hand. He
seemed a little disposed to presume upon the superior knowledge of the
world which he had recently acquired.

“If there was a billiard-table here,” said he, “we could pass away the
time with a game, though, to be sure, it runs into money.”

Norbert never had had more than a few pence in his pocket at one
time, and at this remark the color rose to his face, and he felt much
humiliated.

“My father,” added the young collegian, “gives me all I ask for. I am
certain of getting one, if not two prizes at the next examination; and
when I have taken my degree, the Count de Mussidan has promised to make
me his steward. What do you think that you will do?”

“I--I don’t know,” stammered Norbert.

“You will, I suppose, dig and toil in the fields, as your father has
done before you. You are the son of the noblest and the richest man for
miles round, and yet you are not so happy as I am.”

Upon the return of the Duke de Champdoce some little time after this
conversation, he did not detect any change in his son’s manner; but the
words spoken by Montlouis had fallen into Norbert’s brain like a subtle
poison, and a few careless sentences uttered by an inconsiderate lad had
annihilated the education of sixteen years, and a complete change had
taken place in Norbert’s mind, a change which was utterly unsuspected by
those around him, for his manner of bringing up had taught him to keep
his own counsel.

The fixed smile on his features entirely masked the angry feelings that
were working in his breast. He went through his daily tasks, which had
once been a pleasure to him, with utter disgust and loathing. His eyes
had been suddenly opened, and he now understood a host of things which
he had never before even endeavored to comprehend. He saw now that his
proper position was among the nobles, whom he never saw except when they
attended Mass at the little chapel in Bevron. The Count de Mussidan, so
haughty and imposing, with his snow-white hair; the aristocratic-looking
Marquis de Laurebourg, of whom the peasants stood in the greatest awe,
were always courteous and even cordial in their salutations, while the
noble dames smiled graciously upon him. Proud and haughty as they were,
they evidently looked upon his father and himself as their equals, in
spite of the coarse garments that they wore. The realization of these
facts effected a great change in Norbert. He was the equal of all these
people, and yet how great a gulf separated him from them. While he and
his father tramped to Mass in heavy shoes, the others drove up in
their carriages with powdered footmen to open the doors. Why was this
extraordinary difference? He knew enough of the value of crops and land
to know that his father was as wealthy as any of these gentlemen. The
laborers on the farm said that his father was a miser, and the villagers
asserted that he got up at night and gazed with rapture upon the
treasure that was hidden away from men’s eyes.

“Norbert is an unhappy lad,” they would say. “He who ought to be able to
command all the pleasures of life is worse off than our own children.”

He also recollected that one day, as his father was talking to the
Marquis de Laurebourg, an old lady, who was doubtless the Marchioness,
had said, “Poor boy! he was so early deprived of a mother’s care!” What
did that mean unless it was a reflection upon the arbitrary behavior of
his father? Norbert saw that these people always had their children with
them, and the sight of this filled him with jealousy, and brought tears
of anguish to his eyes. Sometimes, as he trudged wearily behind his yoke
of oxen, goad in hand, he would see some of these young scions of the
aristocracy canter by on horseback, and the friendly wave of the hand
with which they greeted him almost appeared to his jaundiced mind a
premeditated insult. What could they find to do in Paris, to which they
all took wing at the first breath of winter? This was a question which
he found himself utterly unable to solve. To drink to intoxication
offered no charms to him, and yet this was the only pleasure which the
villagers seemed to enjoy. Those young men must have some higher class
of entertainment, but in what could it consist? Norbert could hardly
read a line without spelling every word; but these new thoughts running
through his mind caused him to study, so as to improve his education.
His father had often told him that he did not like lads who where always
poring over books; and so Norbert did not discontinue his studies, but
simply avoided bringing them under his father’s notice. He knew that
there was a large collection of books in one of the upstairs rooms of
the Chateau. He managed to force the lock of the door, and he found some
thousands of volumes, of which at least two hundred were novels, which
had been the solace of his mother’s unhappy life. With all the eagerness
of a man who is at the point of starvation and finds an unexpected
store of provisions, Norbert seized upon them. At first he had great
difficulty in dividing fact from fiction.

He arrived at two conclusions from perusing this heterogeneous mass of
literature--one was, that he was most unhappy; and the other was, that
he hated his father with a cold and determined loathing. Had he dared,
he would have shown this feeling openly, but the Duke de Champdoce
inspired him with an unconquerable feeling of terror. This state of
affairs continued for some months, and at the end of that time the Duke
felt that he ought to make his son acquainted with his projects. One
Sunday, after supper, he commenced this task. Norbert had never seen
his father so animated as he was at this moment, when all his ancestral
pride blazed in his eyes. He explained at length the acts and deeds of
those heroes who had been the ornament of their house, and enumerated
the influential marriages which had been made by them in the days when
their very name was a power in the land. And what remained of all their
power and rank, save their Parisian domicile, their old Chateau, and
some two hundred thousand francs of income?

Norbert could hardly credit what he heard; he had never believed that
his father possessed such enormous wealth. “Why, it is inconceivable!”
 he muttered. And yet, as he looked round, he saw that the surroundings
were those of a peasant’s cottage. How could he endure so many
discomforts and wounds to his pride? In his anger he absolutely started
to his feet with the intention of reproaching his father, but his
courage failed him, and he fell back into a chair, quivering with
emotion.

The Duke de Champdoce was pacing up and down the room.

“Do you think it so little?” asked he angrily.

Norbert knew that not one of the neighboring nobility who had the
reputation of being wealthy possessed half this annual income, and it
was with a feeling of bitter anger in his heart that he listened to the
broken words which fell from his father’s lips. All at once the Duke
halted in front of his son’s chair.

“What fortune I have now,” said he in a hoarse voice, “is little or
nothing in times like these, when the tradesman contrives to make an
almost unlimited income, and, setting up as a gentleman, imitates, not
our virtues, but our vices; while the nobles, not understanding the
present hour, are in poverty and want. Without money, nothing can be
done. To hold his own against these mushroom fortunes, a Champdoce
should possess millions. Neither you nor I, my son, will see our coffers
overflowing with millions, but our descendants will reap the benefit
of our toil. Our ancestors gained their name and glory by their
determination; let us show that we are their worthy offspring.”

As he approached the subject which had occupied his mind entirely for
years, the old noble’s voice quivered and shook.

“I have done my duty,” said he, calming himself by a mighty effort, “and
it is now your turn to do yours. You shall marry some wealthy heiress,
and you shall bring up your son as I have reared and nurtured you. You
will be able to leave him fifteen millions; and if he will only follow
in our footsteps, he will be able to bequeath to his heir a fortune that
a monarch might envy. And this shall and will come to pass, because it
is my fixed determination.”

The strange outburst of confidence petrified Norbert.

“The task is heavy and painful,” continued the Duke, “but it is one that
several scores of illustrious houses have accomplished. He who wishes
to revive the fallen fortunes of some mighty house must live only in the
future, and have no thought but for the prosperity of his descendants.
More than once I have faltered and hesitated, but I have conquered
my weakness, and now only live to make the line of Champdoce the most
wealthy in France. You have seen me haggle for an hour over a wretched
louis, but it was for the reason that at a future day one of our
descendants might fling it to a beggar from the window of his
magnificent equipage. Next year I will take you to Paris and show
you our house there. You will see in it the most wonderful tapestry,
pictures by the best masters, for I have ornamented and embellished
it as a lover adorns a house for a beloved mistress, and that house,
Norbert, is the home that your grandchildren will dwell in.”

The Duke uttered these words in a tone of jubilant triumph.

“I have spoken to you thus,” resumed he, after a short pause, “because
you are now of an age to listen to the truth, and because I wished you
to understand the rules by which you are to regulate your life. You have
now arrived at years of discretion, and must do of your own free will
what you have up to this time done at my bidding. This is all that I
have to say. To-morrow you will take twenty-five sacks of wheat to the
miller at Bevron.”

Like all tyrannical despots, the Duke never contemplated for a moment
the possibility of any one disobeying his commands; yet at this very
moment Norbert was registering a solemn mental oath that he would never
carry out his father’s wishes. His anger, which his fears had so long
restrained, now burst all bounds, and it was in the broad chestnut tree
avenue, behind the Chateau, far from any listening ear, that he gave way
to his despair. So long as he had only looked upon his father as a
mere miser, he had permitted himself to indulge in hope; but now he
understood him better, and saw that life-long plans, such as the Duke
had framed, were not to be easily overruled.

“My father is mad,” said he; “yes; decidedly mad.”

He had made up his mind that for the present he would yield to his
despotism, but afterwards, in the future, what was he to do?

It is an easy thing to find persons to give you bad advice, and the
very next day Norbert found one at Bevron in the shape of a certain man
called Daumon, a bitter enemy of the Duke.



CHAPTER II.

A DANGEROUS ACQUAINTANCE.

Daumon was not a native of this part of the country, and no one knew
from whence he came. He said that he had been an attorney’s clerk, and
had certainly resided for a long time in Paris. He was a little man
of fifty years of age, clean shaved, and with a sharp and cunning
expression of countenance. His long nose, sharp, restless eyes, and thin
lips, attracted attention at first sight. His whole aspect aroused a
feeling of distrust. He had come to Bevron, some fifteen years before,
with all his provisions in a cotton handkerchief slung over his
shoulder. He was willing to make money in any way, and he prospered
and rose. He owned fields, vineyards, and a cottage, which is at the
juncture of the highway to Poitiers and the cross road that leads
to Bevron. His aim and object were to be seen everywhere, to know
everybody, and to have a finger in every pie in the neighborhood around.
If any of the farmers or the laborers wanted small advances, they went
to him, and he granted them loans at exorbitant rates of interest. He
gave most disputants counsel, and had every point of law at his
fingers’ ends. He could teach people how to sail as close to the wind as
possible, and yet to be beyond the reach of the law. He affected to be
only too anxious to ameliorate the lot of the peasant class, and yet he
was drawing heavy sums from them by way of interest. He endeavored by
every means in his power to rouse their feelings of animosity against
both the priesthood and the gentry. His artful way of talking, and
the long black coat which he wore, had given him the nickname of the
“Counsellor” in the district. The reason why he disliked the Duke was
because the latter had more than once shown himself hostile to him,
and had taken him before the court of justice, from which Daumon only
escaped by means of bribery of suborned witnesses. He vowed that he
would be revenged for this, and for five years had been watching his
opportunity, and this was the man whom Norbert met when he went to
deliver his corn to the miller. As he was coming back with his empty
wagon, Daumon asked for a lift back as far as the cross road that led to
his cottage.

“I trust, sir,” said he with the most servile courtesy, “that you will
excuse the liberty I take, but I am so utterly crippled with rheumatism
that I can hardly walk, Marquis.”

Daumon had read somewhere that the eldest son of a Duke was entitled
to be styled _Marquis_, and it was the first time that Norbert had been
thus addressed. Before this he would have laughed at the appellation,
but now his wounded vanity, and his exasperation at the unhappy
condition in which he found himself, tempted him to accept the title
without remonstrance.

“All right, I can give you a lift,” said he, and the Counsellor
clambered into the cart.

All the time that he was showering thanks upon Norbert for his courtesy
he was watching the young man’s face carefully.

“Evidently,” thought the Counsellor to himself, “something unusual has
taken place at the Chateau de Champdoce. Was not the opportunity for
revenge here?”

Long since he had decided that through the son he could strike the
father. But he must be cautious.

“You must have been up very early, Marquis,” said he.

The young man made no reply.

“The Duke,” resumed Daumon, “is most fortunate in having such a son as
you. I know more than one father who says to his children, ‘See what an
excellent example the young Marquis de Champdoce sets to you all. He
is not afraid of hard work, though he is noble by birth, and should not
soil his hands by labor.’”

A sudden lurch brought the Counsellor’s eloquence to a sudden close, but
he speedily resumed again.

“I was watching you as you hefted the sacks. Heavens! what muscles! what
a pair of shoulders!”

At any other moment Norbert would have gloried in such laudation, but
now he felt displeased and annoyed, and vented his anger by a sharp cut
at his team.

“When people say that you are as innocent as a girl,” continued Daumon,
“I always say that you are a sensible young fellow after all, and that
if you choose to lead a regular life, it is far better than wasting your
future fortune in wine, billiards, cards, or women.”

“I don’t know that I might not do something of the kind,” returned
Norbert.

“What did you say?” answered his wily companion.

“I said that if I were my own master, I would live as other young men.”

The lad paused abruptly, and Daumon’s eyes gleamed with joy.

“Aha,” murmured he to himself; “I have the game in my own hands. I will
teach his Grace to interfere with me.”

Then, in a voice which could reach Norbert’s ears, he continued,--

“Of course some parents are far too strict.”

An impatient gesture from Norbert showed him that he had wounded him
deeply.

“Yes, yes,” put in the wily Counsellor, “as the head grows bald, and the
blood begins to stagnate, they forget,--they forget the days when all
was so different. They forget the time when they were young, and when
they sowed their wild oats with so lavish a hand. When your father
was twenty-five, he was precious wild. Ask your father, if you do not
believe me.”

At this moment the wagon passed the cross road, and Norbert pulled up.

“I cannot thank you enough, Marquis,” said the Counsellor as he alighted
with difficulty; “but if you would condescend to come and taste my
brandy, I would esteem it a great honor.”

Norbert hesitated for an instant: his reasoning powers urged him to
decline the offer, but he refused to listen to them, and, fastening his
horses to a tree, he followed Daumon down the by-road. The cottage was
an excellent one, and extremely well furnished. A woman, who acted as
Daumon’s housekeeper, served the refreshments. The office--for he
called his room an office, just as if he was a professional man--was
a strange-looking place. On one side was a desk covered with account
books, and against the wall were sacks of seed. A number of books on
legal matters crowded the shelves, and from the ceiling hung a quantity
of dried herbs. The Counsellor welcomed the heir to the dukedom of
Champdoce with the greatest deference, seated him in his own capacious
leathern arm-chair, and pressed the brandy which he had refused upon
him.

“I got this brandy from a man down Arcachon way in return for a kindness
that I did him; for, without boasting, I may say that I have done
kindnesses for many people in my time.” He raised his glass to his lips
as he spoke. “It is good, is it not?” said he. “You can’t get stuff with
an aroma like that hereabouts.”

The extreme deference of the man, coupled with the excellence of the
spirit, opened Norbert’s heart in a very short space of time. Up to the
present the conduct of poor Norbert had been blameless, but now, without
knowing anything of the Counsellor’s character or reputation, he poured
out all the secret sorrows of his heart, while Daumon chuckled secretly,
preserving all the time the imperturbable face of a physician called in
to visit a patient.

“Dear me! dear me!” said he; “this is really too bad. Poor fellow! I
really pity you. Were it not for the deep respect that I have for the
Duke, your father, I should feel inclined to say that he was not quite
in his right senses.”

“Yes,” continued Norbert, the tears starting to his eyes, “this is
just how I am situated. My destiny has been marked out for me, and I am
helpless to alter it. I had better a thousand times be lying under the
cold greensward, than vegetate thus above ground.”

The peculiar smile on Daumon’s lips caused him to pause in his
complaint.

“Perhaps,” he went on, “you think that I am childish in talking thus?”

“Not at all, Marquis, you have suffered too deeply; but forgive me if
I say that you are foolish to despond so much over the future that lies
before you.”

“Future!” repeated Norbert angrily, “what is the use of speaking to me
of the future, when I may be kept in this horrible servitude for the
next thirty years? My father is still hale and hearty.”

“What of that? You will be of age soon, and then you will have full
right to claim your mother’s fortune.”

The extreme surprise displayed by Norbert at this intelligence convinced
the Counsellor that he was much more unsophisticated than he had
supposed him to be.

“A man,” continued he, “can, when he attains his majority, dispose of
his inheritance as he thinks fit, and your mother’s fortune will render
you independent of your father.”

“But I should never dare to claim it; how could I venture to do so?”

“You need not make the application personally; your solicitor would
manage all that for you; but, of course, you must wait until you are of
age.”

“But I cannot wait until then,” said Norbert; “I must at once free
myself from this tyranny.”

“Luckily there are ways.”

“Do you really think so, Daumon?”

“Yes, and I will show you what is done every day. Nothing is more common
in noble families. Would you like to be a soldier?”

“No, I do not care for that, and yet----”

“That is your last resource, Marquis. First, then, we could lay a plaint
before the court.”

“A plaint?”

“Certainly. Do you suppose that our laws do not provide for such a case
as a father exceeding the proper bounds of parental authority? Tell me,
has the Duke, your father, ever struck you?”

“Never once.”

“Well, that is almost a pity. We will say that your father’s property
is worth two millions, and yet you derive so slight a benefit from this
that you are known everywhere as the ‘Young Savage of Champdoce’!”

Norbert started to his feet.

“Who dares speak of me like that?” said he furiously. “Tell me his
name.”

This outburst of passion did not in the smallest degree discompose
Daumon.

“Your father has many enemies, Marquis,” he resumed, “for his manners
are overbearing and exacting; but you have many friends, and among
them all you will find none more devoted than myself, humble though my
position may be. Many ladies of high rank take a great interest in you.
Only a day or two ago some persons were speaking of you in the presence
of Mademoiselle de Laurebourg, and she blushed crimson at your name. Do
you know Mademoiselle Diana?”

Norbert colored.

“Ah, I understand,” replied Daumon. “And when you have broken the
fetters that now bind you, we shall see something one of these days. And
now--”

But at this moment Norbert’s eyes caught a glimpse of the old-fashioned
cuckoo clock that hung on the wall in one corner of the room. He started
to his feet.

“Why, it is dinner-time!” said he. “What upon earth will my father say?”

“What, does he keep you in such order as that?”

But, never heeding the sarcastic question of the Counsellor, Norbert had
regained his cart, and was driving off at full speed.



CHAPTER III.

A BOLD ADVENTURE.

Daumon had in no way exaggerated when he said that Norbert was spoken of
as the “Young Savage of Champdoce,” though no one used this appellation
in an insulting form. Public opinion had changed considerably regarding
the Duke of Champdoce. The first time that he had made his appearance,
wearing wooden shoes and a leathern jacket, every one had laughed, but
this did not affect him at all, and in the end people began to term his
dogged obstinacy indomitable perseverance. The gleam that shone from his
hoarded millions imparted a brilliant lustre to his shabby garments. Why
should they waste their pity upon a man who would eventually come into a
gigantic fortune, and have the means of gratifying all his desires?

Mothers, with daughters especially, took a great interest in the young
man, for to get a girl married to the “Young Savage of Champdoce” would
be a feat to be proud of; but unluckily his father watched him with all
the vigilance of a Spanish duenna. But there was a young girl who had
long since secretly formed a design of her own, and this bold-hearted
beauty was Diana de Laurebourg. It was with perfect justice that she
had received the name of the “Belle of Poitiers.” She was tall and very
fair, with a dazzling complexion and masses of lustrous hair; but
her eyes gleamed with a suppressed fire, which plainly showed the
constitution of her nature. She had been brought up in a convent, and
her parents, who had wished her to take the veil, had only been induced
to remove her owing to her obstinate refusal to pronounce the vows,
coupled with the earnest entreaties of the lady superior, who was kept
in a constant state of ferment owing to the mutinous conduct of her
pupil. Her father was wealthy, but all the property went over to her
brother, ten years older than herself; and so Diana was portionless,
with the exception of a paltry sum of forty thousand francs.

“My child!” said her father to her the first day of her return, “you
have come back to us once more, and now all you have to do is to
fascinate some gentleman who is your equal in position and who has
plenty of money. If you fail in that, back you go to the convent.”

“Time enough to talk about that some years hence,” answered the girl
with a smile; “at present I am quite contented with being at home with
you.”

M. de Laurebourg had commented with some severity upon the conduct of
the Duke de Champdoce towards his son, but he was perfectly willing to
sacrifice his daughter’s heart for a suitable marriage.

“I shall gain my end,” murmured the girl, “I am sure of it.”

She had heard a friend of her father’s speaking of Norbert and his
colossal expectations.

“Why should I not marry him?” she asked of her own heart; and, with the
utmost skill, she applied herself to the execution of her design; for
the idea of being a duchess, with an income of two hundred thousand
francs, was a most fascinating one. But how was she to meet Norbert? And
how bring over the money-raking Duke to her side? Before, however, she
could decide on any plan, she felt that she must see Norbert. He was
pointed out to her one day at Mass, and she was struck by his beauty and
by an ease of manner which even his shabby dress could not conceal. By
the quick perception which many women possess, she dived into Norbert’s
inmost soul; she felt that he had suffered, and her sympathy for him
brought with it the dawn of love, and by the time she had left the
chapel she had registered a solemn vow that she would one day be
Norbert’s wife. But she did not acquaint her parents with this
determination on her part, preferring to carry out her plans without
any aid or advice. Mademoiselle Diana was shrewd and practical, and not
likely to err from want of judgment. The frank and open expression of
her features concealed a mind of superior calibre, and one which well
knew how to weigh the advantages of social rank and position. She
affected a sudden sympathy with the poor, and visited them constantly,
and might be frequently met in the lanes carrying soup and other
comforts to them. Her father declared, with a laugh, that she ought
to have been a Sister of Charity, and did not notice the fact that all
Diana’s pensioners resided in the vicinity of Champdoce. But it was
in vain that she wandered about, continually changing the hour of her
visits. The “Savage of Champdoce” was not to be seen, nor was he even
a regular attendant at Mass. At last a mere trifle changed the whole
current of the young man’s existence; for, a week after the conversation
in which the Duke had laid bare his scheme to his son, he again referred
to it, after their dinner, which they had partaken of at the same table
with forty laborers, who had been hired to get in the harvest.

“You need not, my son,” began the old gentleman, “go back with the
laborers to-day.”

“But, sir--”

“Allow me to continue, if you please. My confidential conversation with
you the other night was merely a preliminary to my telling you that
for the future I did not expect you to toil as hard as you had hitherto
done, for I wish you to perform a duty less laborious, but more
responsible; you will for the future act as farm-bailiff.”

Norbert looked up suddenly into his father’s face.

“For I wish you to become accustomed to independent action, so that at
my death your sudden liberty may not intoxicate you.”

The Duke then rose from his seat, and took a highly finished gun from a
cupboard.

“I have been very much pleased with you for some time past,” said he,
“and this is a sign of my satisfaction. The gamekeeper has brought in a
thoroughly trained dog, which will also be yours. Shoot as much as you
like, and, as you cannot go about without money in your pocket, take
this, but be careful of it; for remember that extravagance on your part
will procrastinate the day upon which our descendants will resume their
proper station in the world.”

The Duke spoke for some time longer, but his son paid no heed to his
words, and was too much astonished to accept the six five-franc pieces
which his father tendered to him.

“I suppose,” said the Duke at last in angry accents, “that you will have
the grace to thank me.”

“You will find that I am not ungrateful,” stammered Norbert, aroused by
this reproach.

The Duke turned away impatiently.

“What has the boy got into his head now?” muttered he.

It was owing to the advice of the priest of Bevron that the Duke had
acted as he had done; but this indulgence came too late, for Norbert’s
detestation of his tyrant was too deeply buried in his heart to be
easily eradicated.

A gun was not such a wonderful present after all--a matter of a
few francs, perhaps. Had the Duke offered him the means of a better
education, it would be a different matter; but as it was, he would still
remain the “Young Savage of Champdoce.”

However, Norbert took advantage of the permission accorded to him, and
rambled daily over the estate with his gun and his dog Bruno, to which
he had become very much attached. His thoughts often wandered to Daumon;
but he had made inquiries, and had heard that the Counsellor was a most
dangerous man, who would stick at nothing; but for all that, he had
made up his mind to go back to him again for further advice, though his
better nature warned him of the precipice on the brink of which he was
standing.



CHAPTER IV.

A FINANCIAL TRANSACTION.

Daumon was expecting a visit from the young man, and had been waiting
for him with the cool complacency of a bird-catcher, who, having
arranged all his lines and snares, stands with folded arms until his
feathered victims fall into his net. The line that he had displayed
before the young man’s eyes was the sight of liberty. Daumon had
emissaries everywhere, and knew perfectly well what was going on at the
Chateau de Champdoce, and could have repeated the exact words made use
of by the Duke in his last conversation with his son, and was aware
of the leave of liberty that had been granted to Norbert, and was as
certain as possible that this small concession would only hasten the
rebellion of the young Marquis.

He often took his evening stroll in the direction of Champdoce, and,
pipe in mouth, would meditate over his schemes. Pausing on the brow of a
hill that overlooked the Chateau, he would shake his fist, and mutter,--

“He will come; ah, yes, he must come to me!”

And he was in the right, for, after a week spent in indecision, Norbert
knocked at the door of his father’s bitterest enemy. Daumon, concealed
behind the window curtain, had watched his approach, and it was with the
same air of deference that he had welcomed the Marquis, as he took care
to call him; but he affected to be so overcome by the honor of this
visit that he could only falter out,--

“Marquis, I am your most humble servant.”

And Norbert, who had expected a very warm greeting, was much
disconcerted. For a moment he thought of going away again, but his pride
would not permit him to do so, for he had said to himself that it would
be an act of a fool to go away this time without having accomplished
anything.

“I want to have a bit of advice from you, Counsellor,” said he; “for as
I have but little experience in a certain matter, I should like to avail
myself of your knowledge.”

“You do me too much honor, Marquis,” murmured the Counsellor with a low
bow.

“But surely,” said the young man, “you must feel that you are bound to
assist me after all you told me a day or two back. You mentioned two
means by which I could regain my freedom, and hinted that there was a
third one. I have come to you to-day to ask you what it was.”

Never did any man more successfully assume an air of astonishment than
did Daumon at this moment.

“What,” said he, “do you absolutely remember those idle words I made use
of then?”

“I do most decidedly.”

The villain’s heart of Daumon was filled with delight, but he replied,--

“Oh, Marquis! you must remember that we say many things that really have
no special meaning, for between act and intention there is a tremendous
difference. I often speak too freely, and that has more than once got me
into trouble.”

Norbert was no fool, in spite of his want of education, and the hot
blood of his ancestors coursed freely through his veins. He now struck
the butt-end of his gun heavily upon the floor.

“You treated me like a simpleton, then, it appears?” remarked he
angrily.

“My dear Marquis--”

“And imagined that you could trifle with me. You managed to learn my
real feelings for your own amusement; but, take care; this may cost you
more than you think.”

“Ah, Marquis, can you believe that I would act so basely?”

“What else can I think?”

Daumon paused for a moment, and then said,--

“You will be angry when you hear what I have to say, but I cannot help
speaking the truth.”

“I shall not be angry, and you can speak freely.”

“I am but a very poor and humble man. What have I to gain by securing
any note, and by encouraging you to brave your father’s anger? Just
think what must happen if I opposed the all-powerful Duke de Champdoce;
why, I might find myself in prison in next to no time.”

“And for what reason, if you please?” asked Norbert.

“Have you never studied law in the slightest degree, Marquis? Dear me,
how neglectful some parents are! You are not of age, and there is a
certain article, 354 in the code, that could be so worked that a poor
humble creature like me could be locked up for perhaps five years. The
law deals very hardly when any one has dealings with a minor, the more
especially when the father is a man of untold wealth. If the Duke should
ever discover----”

“But how could he ever do so?”

Daumon made no reply, and his silence so plainly showed Norbert that the
Counsellor did not trust him, that he repeated the question in an angry
voice.

“Your blind subservience to your father is too well known.”

“You believe that I should confess everything to him?”

“You yourself told me that when his eyes were fixed on yours you could
not avoid yielding to his will.”

Norbert’s anger gradually died away, as he replied in accents of intense
bitterness,--

“I may be a savage, but I am not likely to become a traitor. If I once
promised to keep a secret, no measures or tortures would tear it from
me. I may fear my father, but I am a Champdoce, and fear no other mortal
man. Do you understand me?”

“But, Marquis--”

“No other mortal man,” interrupted Norbert sternly, “will ever know from
me that we have ever exchanged words together.”

An expression passed over the features of the Counsellor which cast a
ray of hope upon the young man’s heart.

“Upon my word,” said he, “any one would judge from my hesitation that
I had some wrong motive in acting as I am doing, but I never give bad
advice, and any one will tell you the same about me, and this is the
breviary by which I regulate all my actions.”

As he spoke, he took a book from his desk, and waved it aloft.

Norbert looked puzzled and angry.

“What do you mean?” asked he.

“Nothing, Marquis, nothing; have patience; your majority is not far off,
and you have only a few years to wait. Remember that your father is an
old man; let him carry out his plan for a few years longer, and----”

Norbert struck his fist savagely upon the table, crying out furiously.
“It was not worth my coming here if this was all that you had to say;”
 and, whistling to Bruno, the young man prepared to quit the room.

“Ah, Marquis! you are far too hasty,” said the Counsellor humbly.

Norbert paused. “Speak then,” answered he roughly.

In a low, impressive voice, Daumon went on.

“Remember, Marquis, that though I should like to see you have a better
understanding with your father, yet, at the same time, I should like
to work for the happiness of you both. I am like a judge in court, who
endeavors to bring about a compromise between the litigants. Can you
not, while affecting perfect submission, live in a manner more suited
to you? There are many young men of your age in a precisely similar
position.”

Norbert took a step forward and began to listen earnestly.

“You have more liberty now,” continued Daumon. “Pray, does your father
know how you employ your time?”

“He knows that I can do nothing but shoot.”

“Well, I know what I would do if I were your age.”

“And what would that be?”

“First of all, I would stay at home sufficiently often not to arouse
papa’s suspicions, and the rest of my leisure I would spend in Poitiers,
which is a very pleasant town. I could take nice rooms in which I could
be my own master. At Champdoce I could keep to my peasant’s clothes, but
in Poitiers I would be dressed by the best tailor. I should pick up
a few boon companions amongst the jolly students, and have plenty of
friends, ladies as well as gentlemen. I would dance, sing, and drink,
and would dip into every kind of life, so that----”

He paused for a second and then said, “There ought to be a fast horse or
so in your father’s stables, eh? Well then, if there are, why not take
one for your own riding? Then at night, when you are supposed to be
snug between the sheets, creep down to the stable, clap a bridle on
the horse, and, hey, presto! you are in Poitiers. Put on the clothes
suitable to the handsome young noble you are, and have a joyous carouse
with your many companions; and if you do, next day, not choose to go
back until the morning, the servants will only tell your father that you
are out shooting.”

Norbert was a thoroughly strong, honest youth, and the idea of meanness
and duplicity were most repugnant to his feelings in general; and yet he
listened eagerly to this proposition, for oppression had utterly changed
his nature. The career of dissipation and pleasure proposed so adroitly
by Daumon dazzled his imagination and his eyes began to sparkle.

“Well,” asked the Counsellor invidiously, “and, pray, what is there to
prevent you doing all this?”

“Want of funds,” returned Norbert, with a deep sigh; “I should want a
great deal, and I have hardly any; if I were to ask my father for any,
he would refuse me, and wonder----”

“Have you no friends who would find you such a sum as you would require
until you came of age?”

“None at all;” and, overwhelmed with the sense of his utter
helplessness, Norbert sank back upon a chair.

After a brief period of reflection, Daumon spoke with apparent
reluctance,--

“No, Marquis, I cannot see you so miserably unhappy without doing my
best to help you. A man is a fool who puts out his hand to interfere
between father and son, but I will find money to lend you what you
want.”

“Will you do so, Counsellor?”

“Unluckily I cannot, I am only a poor fellow, but some of the
neighboring farmers intrust me with their savings for investment. Why
should I not use them to make you comfortable and happy?”

Norbert was almost choked with emotion. “Can this be done?” asked he
eagerly.

“Yes, Marquis; but you understand that you will have to pay very heavy
interest on account of the risk incurred in lending money to a minor.
For the law does not recognize such transactions, and I myself do not
like them. If I were in your place, I would not borrow money on these
terms, but wait until some friend could help me.”

“I have no friends,” again answered the young man.

Daumon shrugged his shoulders with the air of a man who says: “Well, I
suppose I must give in, but at any rate I have done my duty.” Then
he began aloud, “I am perfectly aware, Marquis, that, considering the
wealth that must one day be yours, this transaction is a most paltry
one.”

He then went on to enumerate the conditions of the loan, and at each
clause he would stop and say, “Do you understand this?”

Norbert understood him so well that at the end of the conversation,
in exchange for the thousand francs, he handed to the Counsellor the
promissory notes for four thousand francs each, which were made payable
to two farmers, who were entirely in Daumon’s clutches. The young
man, in addition, pledged his solemn word of honor that he would never
disclose that the Counsellor had anything to do with the transaction.

“Remember, Marquis, prudence must be strictly observed. Come here to me
only after the night has set in.”

This was the last piece of advice that Daumon gave his client; and
when he was again left alone, he perused with feelings of intense
gratification, the two notes that Norbert had signed. They were entirely
correct and binding, and drawn up in proper legal form. He had made up
his mind to let the young man have all his savings, amounting to some
forty thousand francs, and not to press for payment until the young man
come into his fortune.

All this, however, hinged upon Norbert’s silence and discretion, for, at
the first inkling of the matter, the Duke would scatter all the edifice
to the winds; but of this happening Daumon had no fear.

As Norbert walked along, followed by his dog, he could not resist
putting his hands into his pockets and fingering the tempting, crisp
banknotes which lurked there, and making sure that it was a reality and
not a dream. That night seemed interminable; and the next morning, with
his gun on his shoulder and his dog at his heels, he walked briskly
along the road to Poitiers. He had determined to follow Daumon’s
advice,--to have suitable rooms, and to make the acquaintance of some of
the students. On his arrival at Poitiers, which he had only once before
visited, Norbert felt like a half-fledged bird who knows not how to use
its wings. He wandered about the streets, not knowing how to commence
what he wanted. Finally, after a sojourn in the town of a very brief
duration, he went to the inn where he had breakfasted with his father
on his former visit, and, after an unsatisfactory meal, returned to
Champdoce, as wretched as he had been joyful and hopeful at his early
start in the morning. But later on he went to Daumon, who put him
in communication with a friend who, for a commission, took the
unsophisticated lad about, hired some furnished rooms, and finally
introduced him to the best ladies in the town, while Norbert ordered
clothes to the tune of five hundred francs. He now thought himself on
the high road to the full gratification of his desires; but, alas! the
reality, compared with what his imagination had pictured, appeared rank
and chilling. His timidity and shyness arrested all his progress; he
required an intimate friend, and where could he hit upon one?

One evening he entered the Café Castille. He found a large number of
students collected there, and was a little disgusted at their turbulent
gayety, and, hastily withdrawing, he spent the rest of the weary
evening in his own rooms with Bruno, who, for his part, would have much
preferred the open country. He had really only enjoyed the four evenings
on which he had visited the Martre; but these limited hours of happiness
did not make up for the web of falsehood in which he had enmeshed
himself, or the daily dread of detection in which he lived.

The Duke had noticed his son’s absence, but his suspicions were very
wide of the truth. One morning he laughed at Norbert on the continued
non-success of his shooting.

“Do your best to-day, my boy,” said he, “and try and bring home some
game, for we shall have a guest to dinner.”

“To dinner, here?”

“Yes,” answered the Duke suppressing a smile. “Yes, actually here; M.
Puymandour is coming, and the dining-room must be opened and put into
proper order.”

“I will try and kill some game,” answered Norbert to himself as he
started on his errand.

This, however, was more easily resolved on than executed. At last he
caught sight of an impudent rabbit near a hedge; he raised his gun and
fired. A shriek of anguish followed the report, and Bruno dashed into
the hedge, barking furiously.



CHAPTER V.

A BAD START.

Diana de Laurebourg was a strange compound; under an appearance of the
most artless simplicity she concealed an iron will, and had hidden from
every one of her family, and even from her most intimate friends, her
firm resolve to become the Duchess of Champdoce. All her rambles in the
neighborhood had turned out of no avail; and as the weather was now very
uncertain, it seemed as if her long strolls in the country roads and
fields would soon come to an end. “The day must eventually come,”
 murmured she, “when this invisible prince must make his appearance.” And
at last the long-expected day arrived.

It was in the middle of the month of November, and the weather was
exceedingly soft and balmy for the time of year. The sky was blue,
the few remaining leaves rustled on the trees, and an occasional bird
whistled in the hedgerows. Diana de Laurebourg was walking slowly along
the path leading to Mussidan, when all at once she heard a rustling of
branches. She turned round sharply, and all the blood in her body seemed
to rush suddenly to her heart, for through an opening in the hedge she
caught sight of the man who for the past two months had occupied all
her waking thoughts. Norbert was waiting for something with all the
eagerness of a sportsman, his finger on the trigger of his gun.

Here was the opportunity for which she had waited so long, and with such
ill-concealed impatience; and yet she could derive no advantage from it,
for what would happen? Simply this: Norbert would bow to her, and she
would reply with a slight inclination of her head, and perhaps two
months might pass away before she met him again. Just as she was about
to take some bold and decisive step she saw Norbert raise his gun and
point it in her direction. She endeavored to call out to him, but her
voice failed her, and in another moment the report rang out, and she
felt a sharp pang, like the touch of a red-hot iron upon her ankle. With
a wild shriek she threw up her arms and fell upon the pathway. She did
not lose her senses, for she heard a cry in response to her own, and the
crashing of something forcing its way through the hedge. Then she felt
a hot breath upon her face, and then something cold and wet touched her
cheek. She opened her eyes languidly, and saw Bruno licking her face and
hands.

At the same moment Norbert dashed through the hedge and stood before
her. At once she realized the advantage of her position and closed her
eyes once more. Norbert, as he hung over the seemingly unconscious form
of this fair young creature, felt that his senses were deserting him,
for he greatly feared that he had killed Mademoiselle de Laurebourg. His
first impulse was to fly precipitately, and his second to give what
aid he could to his victim. He knelt down by her, and, to his infinite
relief, found that life was not extinct. He raised her beautiful head.

“Speak to me, mademoiselle, I entreat you,” cried he.

All this time Diana was returning thanks to kind Providence for the
fulfillment of her wishes. After a time she made a slight move, and
Norbert uttered an exclamation of joy. Then, opening her beautiful eyes,
she gazed upon the young man with the air of a person just awaking from
a dream.

“It is I,” faltered the distracted young man. “Norbert de Champdoce. But
forgive me, and tell me if you are in pain?”

Pity came over the wounded girl. She gently drew herself away from the
arm that encircled her, and said softly,--

“It is I who ought to apologize for my foolish weakness; for I am really
more frightened than hurt.”

Norbert felt that heaven had opened before his very eyes. “Let me go for
help,” exclaimed he.

“No, no; it was a mere scratch.” And, raising her skirt, she displayed a
foot that might have turned a steadier head than Norbert’s. “See,” said
she, “it is there that I am in pain.”

And she pointed to a spot of blood upon the delicate white stocking. At
the sight of this the young man’s terror increased, and he started to
his feet.

“Let me run to the Chateau,” said he, “and in less than an hour--”

“Do nothing of the kind,” interrupted the girl; “it is a mere nothing.
Look, I can move my foot with ease.”

“But let me entreat you--”

“Hush! we shall soon see what it is that has happened.” And she
inspected what she laughingly termed his terrible wound.

It was, as she had supposed, a mere nothing. One pellet had grazed the
skin, another had lodged in the flesh, but it was quite on the surface.

“A surgeon must see to this,” said Norbert.

“No, no.” And with the point of a penknife she pulled out the little
leaden shot. The young man remained still, holding his breath, as a
child does when he is putting the topmost story on a house of cards. He
had never heard so soft a voice, never gazed on so perfectly lovely a
face. In the meantime Diana had torn up her handkerchief and bandaged
the wound. “Now that is over,” exclaimed she, with a light laugh, as she
extended her slender fingers to Norbert, so that he might assist her to
rise.

As soon as she was on her feet, she took a few steps with the prettiest
limp imaginable.

“Are you in pain?” said he anxiously.

“No, I am not indeed; and by this evening I shall have forgotten all
about it. But confess, Marquis,” she added, with a coquettish laugh,
“that this is a droll way of making an acquaintance.”

Norbert started at the word Marquis, for no one but Daumon had ever
addressed him thus.

“She does not despise me,” thought he.

“This little incident will be a lesson to me,” continued she. “Mamma
always has told me to keep to the highroad; but I preferred the by-paths
because of the lovely scenery.”

Norbert, for the first time in his life, realized that the view was a
beautiful one.

“I am this way nearly every day,” pursued Diana, “though I am very
wicked to disobey my mother. I go to see poor La Berven. She is dying of
consumption, poor thing, and I take her a little soup and wine every now
and then.”

She spoke like a real Sister of Mercy, and, in Norbert’s opinion, wings
only were lacking to transform her into a perfect angel.

“The poor woman has three children, and their father does nothing for
them, for he drinks what he earns,” the young girl went on.

Berven was one of the identical men to whom Norbert had given his
promissory note for four thousand francs, for he was one of the two
men who had intrusted Daumon with their savings for investment; but
the young man was not in a condition to notice this. Diana had meantime
slung her basket on her arm.

“Before I leave you to-day,” said she, “I should so much like to ask a
favor of you.”

“A favor of me, mademoiselle?”

“Yes; oblige me by saying nothing of what has occurred to-day to any
one; for should it come to my parents’ ears, they would undoubtedly
deprive me of the little liberty that they now grant me.”

“Mademoiselle,” answered Norbert, “be sure that I will never mention the
terrible accident that my awkwardness has caused.”

“Thank you, Marquis,” answered the girl, with a half-mocking courtesy.
“Another time let me advise you, before you shoot, to look that no one
is behind a hedge.”

With these words she tripped away, without her tiny feet showing any
signs of lameness. She had read Norbert’s heart like the pages of a
book, and felt that there was every chance of her winning the game. “I
am sure of it now,” said she; “I shall be the Duchess of Champdoce.” How
grateful she felt for that untimely shot! And she felt sure that Norbert
had understood what she meant when she had said that she went along that
path. She felt certain that the young man had not lost one word. She
believed that the only opposition would come from his father. As she
looked round for a moment, she saw Norbert standing fixed and motionless
as the trees around him.

After Diana had departed, the unhappy lad felt as if she had taken
half his life with her. Was it all a dream? He knelt down, and, after
a slight search, discovered the little pellet, the cause of all the
mischief; and, taking it up carefully, returned home. To his extreme
surprise, he found the main gateway wide open, and from a window he
heard his father’s voice calling out in kindly accents,--

“Come up quickly, my boy, for our guest has arrived.”



CHAPTER VI.

THE COUNT DE PUYMANDOUR.

Since the death of the Duchess of Champdoce the greater portion of the
Chateau had been closed, but the reception rooms were always ready to be
used at a very short notice.

The dining-room was a really magnificent apartment. There were massive
buffets of carved oak, black with age, ornamented with brass mountings.
The shelves groaned beneath their load of goblets and salvers of the
brightest silver, engraved with the haughty armorial bearings of the
house of Champdoce.

Standing near one of the windows, Norbert saw a man, stout, robust, bald
and red-faced, wearing a mustache and slight beard. His clothes were
evidently made by a first-rate tailor, but his appearance was utterly
commonplace.

“This is my son,” said the Duke, “the Marquis de Champdoce. Marquis, let
me introduce you to the Count de Puymandour.”

This was the first time that his father had ever addressed Norbert by
his title, and he was greatly surprised. The great clock in the outer
hall, which had not been going for fifteen years, now struck, and
instantly a butler appeared, bearing a massive silver soup tureen, which
he placed on the table, announcing solemnly that his Grace was served,
and the little party at once seated themselves. A dinner in such a vast
chamber would have been rather dull had it not been enlivened by the
amusing tales and witty anecdotes of the Count de Puymandour, which he
narrated in a jovial but rather vulgar manner, seasoned with bursts of
laughter. He ate with an excellent appetite, and praised the quality of
the wine, which the Duke himself had chosen from the cellar, which he
had filled with an immense stock for the benefit of his descendants.
The Duke, who was generally so silent and morose, smiled buoyantly, and
appeared to enjoy the pleasantries of his guest. Was this only the duty
of the host, or did his geniality conceal some hidden scheme? Norbert
was utterly unable to settle this question, for though not gifted with
much penetration, he had studied his father’s every look as a slave
studies his master, and knew exactly what annoyed and what pleased him.

The Count de Puymandour lived in a magnificent house, with his daughter
Marie, about three miles from Champdoce, and he was exceedingly fond of
entertaining; but the gentry, who did not for a moment decline to accept
his grand dinners, did not hesitate to say that Puymandour was a thief
and a rogue. Had he been convicted of larceny, he could not have been
spoken of with more disdainful contempt. But he was very wealthy,
and possessed at least five millions of francs. Of course this was an
excellent reason for hating him, but the fact was, that Puymandour was
a very worthy man, and had made his money by speculation in wool on the
Spanish frontier. For a long period he had lived happy and respected
in his native town of Orthez, when all at once he was tempted by the
thought of titular rank, and from that time his life was one long
misery. He took the name of one of his estates, he bought his title in
Italy, and ordered his coat-of-arms from a heraldic agent in Paris, and
now his ambition was to be treated as a real nobleman. The mere fact of
dining with the eccentric Duke de Champdoce, who never invited any one
to his table, was to him, as it were, a real patent of nobility.

At ten o’clock he rose and declared he must leave, and the Duke escorted
him the length of the avenue to the great gates opening on the main
road, and Norbert, who walked a few paces in the rear, caught now and
then a few words of their conversation.

“Yes,” remarked Puymandour, “I will give a million down.”

Then came a few words from the Duke, of which Norbert could only catch
the words, “thousands and millions.”

He paid, however, but little attention, for his mind was many miles
away. Since the unlooked-for meeting with that fair young face, he had
thought of nothing else, and he mechanically shook hands with, and bade
his guest “Good-night” when his father did.

When the Duke was sure that M. de Puymandour could not hear his voice,
he took his son by the arm, and the bitterness of feeling which he had
so long repressed burst forth in words.

“This,” said he, “is a specimen of the mushroom aristocracy that has
sprung up, and not a bad sample either; for though he is puffed up by
ridiculous vanity, the man is shrewd and intelligent enough, and his
descendants, who will have the advantages of a better education than
their progenitors, will form a new class, with more wealth and as much
influence as the old one.”

For more than an hour the Duke de Champdoce enlarged on his favorite
topic; but he might as well have been alone, for his son paid no
attention to what he said, for his mind was still dwelling upon his
adventures of the morning. Again that sweet, soft laugh, and that
modulated voice rang in his ears. How foolish he must have seemed to
her! and what a ridiculous figure he must have cut in her eyes! He had
by no means omitted to engrave on the tablet of his memory the fact that
Diana passed daily down the little path on her errand of bounty, and
that there he had the chance of again seeing her. He fancied that he
had so much to say to her; but as he found that his bashfulness would
deprive him of the power of utterance, he determined to commit his
sentiments to paper. That night he composed and destroyed some fifty
letters. He did not dare to say openly, “I love you,” and yet that was
exactly what he wanted to express, and he strove, but in vain, to
find words which would veil its abruptness and yet disclose the whole
strength of his feelings. At last, however, one of his efforts satisfied
him. Rising early, he snatched up his gun, and whistling to Bruno, made
his way to the spot where he had the day before seen Diana stretched
upon the ground. But he waited in vain, and hour after hour passed away,
as he paced up and down in an agony of suspense. Diana did not come. The
young lady had considered her plans thoroughly and kept away. The next
day he might have been again disappointed but for a lucky circumstance.
Norbert was seated on the turf, awaiting with fond expectation the young
girl’s approach and as Diana passed the opening to the pathway Bruno
scented her, and rushed forward with a joyous bark. She had then no
option but to walk up to the spot where Norbert was seated. Both the
young people were for the moment equally embarrassed, and Norbert stood
silent, holding in his hand the letter which had caused him so much
labor to indite.

“I have ventured to wait for you here, mademoiselle,” said he in a voice
which trembled with suppressed emotion, “because I was full of anxiety
to know how you have been. How did you contrive to return home with your
wounded foot?”

He paused, awaiting a word of encouragement, but the girl made no reply,
and he continued,--

“I was tempted to call and make inquiries at your father’s house, but
you had forbidden me to speak of the accident, and I did not dare to
disobey you.”

“I thank you sincerely,” faltered Diana.

“Yesterday,” the young man went on, “I passed the whole day here. Are
you angry with me for my stupidity? I had thought that perhaps you had
noticed my anxiety, and might have deigned to----”

He stopped short, terrified at his own audacity.

“Yesterday,” returned Diana with the most ingenuous air in the world,
and not appearing to perceive the young man’s embarrassment, “I was
detained at home by my mother.”

“Yes,” replied he, “for the past two days your form, lying senseless and
bleeding on the ground, has ever been before my eyes, for I felt as if I
were a murderer. I shall always see your pale, white face, and how,
when I raised up your head it rested on my arm for a moment, and all the
rapture--”

“You must not talk like that, Marquis,” interrupted Diana, but she spoke
in such a low tone that Norbert did not hear her and went on,--

“When I saw you yesterday my feelings so overpowered me that I could not
put them into words; but as soon as you had left me, it appeared as if
all grew dark around me, and throwing myself on my knees, I searched
for the tiny leaden pellet that might have caused your death. I at last
found it, and no treasure upon earth will ever be more prized by me.”

To avoid showing the gleam of joy that flashed from her eyes, Diana was
compelled to turn her head on one side.

“Forgive me, mademoiselle,” said Norbert, in despair, as he noticed this
movement; “forgive me if I have offended you. Could you but know how
dreary my past life has been, you would pardon me. It seemed to me,
the very moment that I saw you, I had found a woman who would feel some
slight interest in me, and that for her sweet compassion I would devote
my whole life to her. But now I see how mad and foolish I have been, and
I am plunged into the depths ‘of despair.’”

She accompanied these words with a glance sufficiently tender to restore
all Norbert’s courage.

“Ah, mademoiselle,” said he; “do not trifle with me, for that would be
too cruel.”

She let her head droop on her bosom, and, falling upon his knees, he
poured a stream of impassioned kisses upon her hands. Diana felt herself
swept away by this stream of passion; she gasped, and her fingers
trembled, as she found that she was trapped in the same snare that she
had set for another. Her reason warned her that she must bring this
dangerous interview to a conclusion.

“I am forgetting all about my poor pensioners,” said she.

“Ah, if I might but accompany you!”

“And so you may, but you must walk fast.”

It is quite true that great events spring from very trivial sources; and
had Diana gone to visit La Besson, Norbert might have heard something
concerning Daumon that would have put him on his guard; but,
unfortunately, to-day Diana was bound on a visit to an old woman in
another part of the parish.

Norbert looked on whilst this fair young creature busied herself in her
work of charity, and then he silently placed two louis from the money
he had borrowed, on the table, and left the cottage. Diana followed
him, and, laying her finger upon her lips with the significant word
“to-morrow,” turned down the path that led to her father’s house.
Norbert could hardly believe his senses when he found himself again
alone. Yes, this lovely girl had almost confessed her affection for
him, and he was ready to pour out his life blood for her. He tore up the
letter which had cost him so much trouble to compose, for he felt
that he could make no use of it. He had now no anxieties regarding the
future, and he thanked Providence for having caused him to meet Diana
de Laurebourg. It never entered his brain that this apparently frank and
open-hearted girl had materially furthered the acts of Providence. At
supper that night he was so gay, and in such excellent spirits, that
even his father’s attention was at last attracted.

“I would lay a wager, my boy,” remarked the Duke, “that you have had a
good day’s sport.”

“You would win your wager,” answered the young man boldly.

His father did not pursue the subject; but as Norbert felt that he must
give some color to his assertion, he stopped the next day, and purchased
some quails and a hare. He waited fully half an hour for Diana; and when
she did appear, her pale face and the dark marks under her eyes showed
that anxiety had caused her to pass a sleepless night.

No sooner had she parted from Norbert than she saw the risk that she was
running by her imprudent conduct. She was endangering her whole future
and her reputation,--all indeed that is most precious to a young girl.
For an instant the thought of confiding all to her parents entered her
brain; but she rejected the idea almost as soon as she had conceived it,
for she felt that her father would believe that the parsimonious Duke
de Champdoce would never consent to such a marriage, and that her entire
liberty would be taken from her, and that she might even be sent back to
the convent.

“I cannot stop now,” she murmured, “and must be content to run all risks
to effect an object in which I am now doubly interested.”

Diana and Norbert had a long conversation together on this day in a spot
which had become so dear to them both, and it was only the approach of a
peasant that recalled the girl to the sense of her rash imprudence, and
she insisted on going on her ostensible errand of charity. Norbert, as
before, escorted her, and even went so far as to offer his arm, upon
which she pressed when the road was steep or uneven.

These meetings took place daily, and after a few short minutes spent in
conversation, the young lovers would set off on a ramble. More than once
they were met by the villagers, and a little scandal began to arise.
This was very imprudent on Diana’s side; but it had been a part of her
plan to permit her actions to be talked of by the tongue of scandal.
Unfortunately the end of November was approaching, and the weather
growing extremely cold. One morning, as Norbert arose from his couch, he
found that a sharp icy blast was swaying the bare branches of the trees,
and that the rain was descending in torrents. On such a day as this
he knew that it was vain to expect Diana, and, with his heart full of
sadness, he took up a book and sat himself down by the huge fire that
blazed in the great hall.

Mademoiselle de Laurebourg had, however, gone out, but it was in a
carriage, and she had driven to a cottage to see a poor woman who had
broken her leg, and who had nothing but the scanty earnings of her
daughter Francoise upon which to exist. As soon as Diana entered the
cottage she saw that something had gone wrong.

“What is the matter?” asked she.

The poor creature, with garrulous volubility, exhibited a summons which
she had just received, and said that she owed three hundred francs, and
that as she could no longer pay the interest, she had been summoned,
and that her little property would be seized, and so a finishing stroke
would be put to her troubles.

“It is the Counsellor,” said she, “that rogue Daumon, who has done all
this.”

The poor woman went on to say that when she went to her creditor to
implore a little delay, he had scoffingly told her to send her pretty
daughter to him to plead her cause.

Mademoiselle de Laurebourg was disgusted at this narrative, and her eyes
gleamed with anger.

“I will see this wicked man,” said she, “and will come back to you at
once.”

She drove straight to the Counsellor’s house. Daumon was engaged in
writing when the housekeeper ushered Diana into the office. He rose to
his feet, and, taking off his velvet skull cap, made a profound bow,
advancing at the same time a chair for his visitor’s accommodation.

Though Diana knew nothing of this man, she was not so unsophisticated as
Norbert, and was not imposed upon by the air of servile obsequiousness
that he assumed. With a gesture of contempt, she declined the proffered
seat, and this act made Daumon her bitter enemy.

“I have come,” said she in the cold, disdainful words in which young
girls of high birth address their inferiors,--“I have come to you from
Widow Rouleau.”

“Ah! you know the poor creature then?”

“Yes, and I take a great interest in her.”

“You are a very kind young lady,” answered the Counsellor with a
sinister smile.

“The poor woman is in the most terrible distress both of mind and body.
She is confined to her bed with a fractured limb, and without any means
of support.”

“Yes, I heard of her accident.”

“And yet you sent her a summons, and are ready to seize all she
possesses in the world.”

Daumon put on an air of sympathy.

“Poor thing!” said he. “How true it is that misfortunes never come
singly!”

Diana was disgusted at the man’s cool effrontery.

“It seems to me,” answered she, “that her last trouble is of your
making.”

“Is it possible?”

“Why, who is it but you who are the persecutor of this poor lone
creature?”

“I!” answered he in extreme astonishment; “do you really think that
it is I? Ah! mademoiselle, why do you listen to the cruel tongues of
scandal-mongers? To make a long story short, this poor woman bought
barley, corn, potatoes, and three sheep from a man in the neighborhood,
who gave her credit to the extent of I daresay three hundred francs.
Well, in time, the man asked--most naturally--for his money, and failing
to get it, came to me. I urged him to wait, but he would not listen to
me, and vowed that if I did not do as he wished he would go to some one
else. What was I to do? He had the law on his side too. Ah!” continued
he, as though speaking to himself, “if I could only see a way of getting
this poor creature out of her trouble! But that cannot be done without
money.”

He opened a drawer and pulled out about fifty francs.

“This is all my worldly wealth,” said he sadly. “But how foolish I am!
For, of course, when poor Widow Rouleau has a wealthy young lady to take
an interest in her, she must have no further fear.”

“I will speak to my father on the matter,” answered Diana in a voice
which showed that she had but little hope of interesting him in the
widow’s misfortunes.

Daumon’s face fell.

“You will go to the Marquis de Laurebourg?” asked he. “Now, if you
would take my advice, I should say, go to some intimate friend,--to the
Marquis de Champdoce, for instance. I know,” he went on, “that the Duke
does not make his son a very handsome allowance; but the young gentleman
will find no difficulty in raising whatever he may desire--as it will
not be long before he is of age--without counting his marriage, which
will put an enormous sum at his disposal even before that.”

Diana fell in an instant into the trap the wily Daumon had laid for her.

“A marriage!” exclaimed she.

“I know very little about it; only I know that if the young man wishes
to marry without his father’s consent, he will have to wait at least
five years.”

“Five years?”

“Yes; the law requires that a young man who marries against his father’s
desire should be twenty-five years of age.”

This last stroke was so totally unexpected, that the girl lost her head.

“Impossible!” cried she. “Are you not making a mistake?”

The Counsellor gave a quiet smile of triumph.

“I am not mistaken,” said he, and calmly pointed out in the code the
provision to which he had alluded. As Diana read the passage to which
his finger pointed, he watched her as a cat watches a mouse.

“After all, what does it matter to me?” remarked Diana, making an effort
to recover herself. “I will speak about this poor woman’s case to my
father;” and, with her limbs bending under her, she left the room.

As Daumon returned from accompanying her to the door, the Counsellor
rubbed his hands.

“Things are getting decidedly warm,” muttered he.

He felt that he must gain some further information, and this he could
not get from Norbert. It would be also as well, he thought, to tell the
sheriff to stay proceedings relative to the Widow Rouleau. By this means
he might secure another interview with Mademoiselle de Laurebourg, and
perhaps win the poor girl’s confidence.

As Diana rode home, she abandoned herself to the grief which the
intelligence that she had just heard had caused her, for the foresight
of the framers of the law had rendered all her deeply laid plans of no
avail.

“The Duke of Champdoce,” murmured she to herself, “will never consent to
his son’s marriage with so scantily a dowered woman as I am; but as
soon as Norbert is of age he can marry me, in spite of all his father’s
opposition; but, oh! ‘tis a dreary time to wait.”

For a moment she dared to think of the possible death of the old man;
but she shuddered as she remembered how strong and healthy he was,
and felt that the frail edifice of her hope had been crushed into ten
thousand atoms. For all this, however, she did not lose courage. She was
not one of those women who, at the first check, beat a retreat. She had
not yet decided upon a fresh point of departure, but she had fully made
up her mind that she would gain the victory. The first thing was to see
Norbert with as little delay as possible. Just then the carriage pulled
up at the widow’s cottage, which she entered hastily.

“I have seen Daumon,” said she. “Do not be alarmed; all matters will be
arranged shortly.”

Then, without listening to the thanks and blessings which the poor woman
showered upon her, she said,--

“Give me a piece of paper to write on,” and, standing near the casement,
she wrote in pencil on a soiled scrap of paper the following words:--

“Diana would, perhaps, have been at the usual meeting place to-day, in
spite of the weather, had she not been compelled to visit a poor woman
in a contrary direction. Upon the same business, she will have to call
to-morrow at the house of a man called Daumon.”

She folded the note and said,--

“This letter must be taken at once to M. Norbert de Champdoce. Who will
carry it?”

Francoise had made a smock frock for one of the farm servants at
Champdoce, and the delivery of it formed a good excuse for going up to
the Chateau, and she willingly undertook the errand.

The next day, in the midst of a heavy shower of rain, Norbert made his
appearance at Daumon’s office, saying, as a pretext for his visit, that
he had exhausted his stock of money, and required a fresh supply. He too
was feeling very unhappy, for he feared that this father might entertain
matrimonial designs for him which would be utterly opposed to his
passion for Mademoiselle de Laurebourg.

Had not the inexorable old man once said, “You will marry a woman of
wealth?” But in the event of this matter being brought up, Norbert swore
that he would no longer be obedient, but would resist to the last; and
he calculated on receiving assistance from Daumon. He was on the point
of referring to this matter, when a carriage drew up at the door of the
cottage, and Mademoiselle de Laurebourg descended from it. Daumon at
once saw how matters stood, and wasted no time in addressing Diana.

“The sheriff will stop proceedings,” said he. “I can show you his letter
to that effect.”

He turned away, and searched as diligently for the letter as if it had
existed anywhere except in his own imagination.

“Dear me,” said he at length. “I cannot find it. I must have left it in
the other room. I have so much to do, that really there are times when
I forget everything. I must find it, however. Excuse me, I will be back
immediately.”

His sudden departure from the room had been a mere matter of
calculation; for, guessing that an assignation had been planned,
he thought that he might know what took place at it by a little
eavesdropping. He therefore applied first his ear and then his eye to
the keyhole, and by these means acquired all the information he desired.

A moment of privacy with the object of his affections seemed to Norbert
an inestimable boon. When Diana had first entered, he was horrified at
the terrible alteration that had taken place in the expression of her
face. He seized her hand, which she made no effort to withdraw, and
gazed fixedly into her eyes.

“Tell me,” murmured he in accents of love and tenderness, “what it is
that has gone wrong.”

Diana sighed, then a tear coursed slowly down her cheek. Norbert was in
the deepest despair at these signs of grief.

“Great heavens!” cried he. “Will you not trust me? Am not I your truest
and most devoted friend?”

At first she refused to answer him, but at length she yielded to
his entreaties, and confessed that the evening before her father had
informed her that a young man had sought her hand in marriage, and one
who was a perfectly eligible suitor.

Norbert listened to this avowal, trembling from head to foot, with a
sudden access of jealousy.

“And did you make no objections?” asked he.

“How could I?” retorted she. “What can a girl do in opposition to the
will of all her family, when she has to choose between the alternative
that she loathes, or a life-long seclusion in a convent?”

Daumon shook with laughter, as he kept his ear closely to the keyhole.

“Good business,” muttered he. “Not so bad. Here’s a little girl from a
convent. She has a clever brain and a glib tongue, and under my tuition
would be a perfect wonder. If this country booby does not make an open
declaration at once, I wonder what her next move will be?”

“And you hesitated,” said Norbert reproachfully. “Remember you may
escape from the walls of the convent, but not from the bonds of an
ill-assorted marriage.”

Diana, who looked more beautiful than ever in her despair, wrung her
hands.

“What reason can I give to my father for declining this offer?” said
she. “Every one knows that I am almost portionless, and that I am
sacrificed to my brother, immolated upon the altar erected before the
cruel idol of family pride; and how dare I refuse a suitable offer when
one is made for my hand?”

“Have you forgotten me?” cried Norbert. “Have you no love for me?

“Ah, my poor friend, you are no more free than I am.”

“Then you look on me as a mere weak boy?” asked he, biting his lips.

“Your father is very powerful,” answered she in tones of the deepest
resignation; “his determination is inflexible, and his will inexorable.
You are completely in his power.”

“What do I care for my father?” cried the young man fiercely. “Am not
I a Champdoce too? Woe be to any one, father or stranger, who comes
between me and the woman I love devotedly; for I do love you, Diana, and
no mortal man shall take you from me.”

He clasped Diana to his breast, and pressed a loving kiss upon her lips.

“Aha,” muttered Daumon, who had lost nothing from his post of espial,
“this is worth fifty thousand francs at least to me.”

For a moment Diana remained clasped in her lover’s embrace, and then,
with a faint cry, released herself from him. She then felt that she
loved him, and his kiss and caresses sent a thrill like liquid fire
through her veins. She was half pleased and half terrified. She feared
him, but she feared herself more.

“What, Diana! Would you refuse me?” asked he, after a moment’s pause.
“Do you refuse me, when I implore you to be my wife, and to share my
name with me? Will you not be the Duchess of Champdoce?”

Diana only replied with a glance; but if her eyes spoke plainly, that
look said “Yes.”

“Why, then,” returned Norbert, “should we alarm ourselves with empty
phantoms? Do you not trust me? My father may certainly oppose my plans,
but before long I shall escape from his tyrannical sway, for I shall be
of age.”

“Ah, Norbert,” returned she sadly, “you are feeding upon vain hopes.
You must be twenty-five years of age before you can marry and give the
shelter of your name to the woman whom you have chosen for your wife.”

This was exactly the explanation for which Daumon had been waiting.

“Good again, my young lady,” cried he. “And so this is why she came
here. There is some credit in giving a lesson to so apt a pupil.”

“It is impossible,” cried Norbert, violently agitated; “such an
iniquitous thing cannot be.”

“You are mistaken,” answered Diana calmly. “Unfortunately I am telling
you exactly how matters stand. The law clearly fixes the age
at twenty-five. During all this time will you remember that a
broken-hearted girl--”

“Why talk to me of law? When I am of age, I shall have plenty of money,”
 broke in Norbert; “and do you think that I will tamely submit to my
father’s oppression? No, I will wrest his consent from him.”

During this conversation the Counsellor was carefully removing the dust
from the knees of his trousers.

“I will pop in suddenly,” thought he, “and catch a word or two which
will do away with the necessity of all lengthy explanations.”

He suited the action to the word, and appeared suddenly before the
lovers. He was not at all disconcerted at the effect his entrance
produced upon them, and remarked placidly, “I could not find the
sheriff’s letter, but I assure you that Widow Rouleau’s matter shall be
speedily and satisfactorily arranged.”

Diana and Norbert exchanged glances of annoyance at finding their secret
at the mercy of such a man. This evident distrust appeared to wound
Daumon deeply.

“You have a perfect right,” remarked he dejectedly, “to say, ‘Mind your
own business;’ but the fact is, that I hate all kinds of injustice so
much that I always take the side of the weakest, and so, when I come in
and find you deploring your troubles, I say to myself, ‘Doubtless here
are two young people made for each other.’”

“You forget yourself,” broke in Diana haughtily.

“I beg your pardon,” stammered Daumon. “I am but a poor peasant, and
sometimes I speak out too plainly. I meant no harm, and I only hope that
you will forgive me.”

Daumon looked at Diana; and as she made no reply, he went on: “‘Well,’
says I to myself, ‘here are two young folks that have fallen in
love, and have every right to do so, and yet they are kept apart by
unreasonable and cruel-minded parents. They are young and know nothing
of the law, and without help they would most certainly get into a
muddle. Now, suppose I take their matter in hand, knowing the law
thoroughly as I do, and being up to its weak as well as its strong
points.’”

He spoke on in this strain for some minutes, and did not notice that
they had withdrawn a little apart, and were whispering to each other.

“Why should we not trust him?” asked Norbert. “He has plenty of
experience.”

“He would betray us; he would do anything for money.”

“That is all the better for us then; for if we promise him a handsome
sum, he will not say a word of what has passed to-day.”

“Do as you think best, Norbert.”

Having thus gained Diana’s assent, the young man turned to Daumon. “I
put every faith in you, and so does Mademoiselle de Laurebourg. You know
our exact situation. What do you advise?”

“Wait and hope,” answered the Counsellor. “The slightest step taken
before you are of age will be fatal to your prospects, but the day you
are twenty-one I will undertake to show you several methods of bringing
the Duke on his knees.”

Nothing could make this speech more explicit; but he was so cheerful and
confident, that when Diana left the office, she felt a fountain of fresh
hope well up in her heart.

This was nearly their last interview that year, for the winter came on
rapidly and with increased severity, so that it was impossible for the
lovers to meet out of doors, and the fear of spying eyes prevented them
from taking advantage of Daumon’s hospitality. Each day, however, the
widow’s daughter, Francoise, carried a letter to Laurebourg, and brought
back a reply to Champdoce. The inhabitants of the various country houses
had fled to more genial climates, and only the Marquis de Laurebourg,
who was an inveterate sportsman, still lingered; but at the first heavy
fall of snow he too determined to take refuge in the magnificent house
that he owned in the town of Poitiers. Norbert had foreseen this, and
had taken his measures accordingly. Two or three times in the week he
mounted his horse and rode to the town. After changing his dress, he
made haste to a certain garden wall in which there was a small door.
At an agreed hour this door would gently open, and as Norbert slipped
through he would find Diana ready to welcome him, looking more
bewitching than ever. This great passion, which now enthralled his whole
life, and the certainty that his love was returned, had done away with
a great deal of his bashfulness and timidity. He had resumed his
acquaintanceship with Montlouis, and had often been with him to the Café
Castille. Montlouis was only for a short time at Poitiers, for as soon
as spring began he was to join the young Count de Mussidan, who had
promised to find some employment for him. The approaching departure was
not at all to Montlouis’ taste, as he was madly in love with a young
girl who resided in the town. He told all to Norbert; and as confidence
begets confidence, he more than once accompanied the young Marquis to
the door in the garden wall of the Count de Laurebourg’s town house.

April came at last. The gentry returned to their country houses, and in
time the happy day arrived when Diana de Laurebourg was to return to her
father’s country mansion. The lovers had now every opportunity to meet,
and would exhort each other to have patience, and a week after Diana’s
return they spent a long day together in the woods. After this delicious
day, Norbert, happy and light-hearted, returned to his father’s house.

“Marquis,” said the Duke, plunging at once into the topic nearest his
heart, “I have found a wife for you, and in two months you will marry
her.”



CHAPTER VII.

AN UNLUCKY BLOW.

The falling of a thunderbolt at his feet would have startled Norbert
less than these words did. The Duke took, or affected to take, no notice
of his son’s extreme agitation, and in a careless manner he continued,--

“I suppose, my son, that it is hardly necessary for me to tell you
the young lady’s name. Mademoiselle Marie de Puymandour cannot fail
to please you. She is excessively pretty, tall, dark, and with a fine
figure. You saw her at Mass one day. What do you think of her?”

“Think!” stammered Norbert. “Really I----”

“Pshaw,” replied the old gentleman; “I thought that you had begun to use
your eyes. And look here, Marquis, you must adopt a different style of
dress. You can go over with me to Poitiers to-morrow, and one of the
tailors there will make you some clothes suitable to your rank, for I
don’t suppose that you wish to alarm your future wife by the uncouthness
of your appearance.”

“But, father--”

“Wait a moment, if you please. I shall have a suite of apartments
reserved for you and your bride, and you can pass your honeymoon here.
Take care you do not prolong it for too lengthened a period; and when it
is all over, we can break the young woman into all our ways.”

“But,” interrupted Norbert hastily, “suppose I do not fancy this young
lady?”

“Well, what then?”

“Suppose I should beg you to save me from a marriage which will render
me most unhappy?”

The Duke shrugged his shoulders. “Why this is mere childishness,” said
he. “The marriage is a most suitable one, and it is my desire that it
should take place.”

“But, father,” again commenced Norbert.

“What! Are you opposing my will?” asked his father angrily. “Pray, do
you hesitate?”

“No,” answered his son coldly, “I do not hesitate.”

“Very good, then. A man of no position can consult the dictates of his
heart when he takes a wife, but with a nobleman of rank and station it
is certainly a different matter, for with the latter, marriage should
be looked upon as a mere business transaction. I have made excellent
arrangements. Let me repeat to you the conditions. The Count will give
two-thirds of his fortune, which is estimated at five millions--just
think of that!--and when we get that, we shall be able to screw and
save with better heart. Think of the restoration of our house, and the
colossal fortune that our descendants will one day inherit, and realize
all the beauties of a life of self-denial.”

While the Duke was uttering this string of incoherent sentences, he was
pacing up and down the room, and now he halted immediately in front of
his son. “You understand,” said he; “to-morrow you will go to Poitiers,
and on Sunday we will dine at the house of your future father-in-law.”

In this fearful crisis Norbert did not know what to say or how to act.

“Father,” he once more commenced, “I have no wish to go to Poitiers
to-morrow.”

“What are you saying? What in heaven’s name do you mean?”

“I mean that as I shall never love Mademoiselle de Puymandour, she will
never be my wife.”

The Duke had never foreseen the chance of rebellion on the part of his
son, and he could not bring his mind to receive such an unlooked-for
event.

“You are mad,” said he at last, “and do not know what you are saying.”

“I know very well.”

“Think of what you are doing.”

“I have reflected.”

The Duke was making a violent effort to compose his ordinarily violent
temper.

“Do you imagine,” answered he disdainfully, “that I shall be satisfied
with an answer of this kind? I hope that you will submit to my wishes,
for I think that, as the head of the family, I have conceived a splendid
plan for its future aggrandizement; and do you think that, for the mere
whim of a boy, I will be turned aside from my fixed determination?”

“No, father,” answered Norbert, “it is no boyish whim that makes me
oppose your wishes. Tell me, have I not ever been a dutiful son to you?
Have I ever refused to do what I was ordered? No; I have obeyed you
implicitly. I am the son of the wealthiest man in Poitiers, and I have
lived like a laborer’s child. Whatever your mandates were, I have never
complained or murmured at them.”

“Well, and now I order you to marry Mademoiselle de Puymandour.”

“Anything but that; I do not love her, and I shall never do so. Do
you wish my whole life to be blighted? I entreat you to spare me this
sacrifice!”

“My orders are given, and you must comply with them.”

“No,” answered Norbert quietly, “I will not comply with them.”

A purple flush passed across the Duke’s face, then it faded away,
leaving every feature of a livid whiteness.

“Great heavens!” said he in a voice before which Norbert, at one time,
would have quailed. “Whence comes the audacity that makes you venture to
dispute my orders?”

“From the feeling that I am acting rightly.”

“How long is it that it has been right for children to disobey their
parents’ commands?”

“Ever since parents began to issue unjust commands.”

This speech put the finishing stroke to the Duke’s rage. He made a step
across the room, towards his son, raising the stick that he usually
carried high in the air. For a moment he stood thus, and then, casting
it aside, he exclaimed,--

“No, I cannot strike a Champdoce.”

Perhaps it was Norbert’s intrepid attitude that restrained the Duke’s
frenzy, for he had not moved a muscle, but stood still, with his arms
folded, and his head thrown haughtily back.

“No, this is an act of disobedience that I will not put up with,”
 exclaimed the old man in a voice of thunder, and, springing upon his
son, he grasped him by the collar and dragged him up to a room on the
second floor, and thrust him violently through the doorway.

“You have twenty-four hours in which to reflect whether you will be
willing to accept the wife that I have chosen for you,” said he.

“I have already decided on that point,” answered Norbert quietly.

The Duke made no reply, but slammed the door, which was of massive oak,
and secured by a lock of enormous proportions.

Norbert gazed round; the only other exit from the room was by means of a
window some forty feet from the ground. The young man, however, imagined
that some one would surely come to make up his bed for the night; that
would give him two sheets; these he could knot together and thus secure
a means of escape. He might not be able to see Diana at once, but he
could easily send her a message by Daumon, warning her of what had taken
place. Having arranged his plans, he threw himself into an armchair
with a more easy mind than he had experienced for many months past. The
decisive step had been taken, and the relations between his father and
himself clearly defined, and thus he naturally considered great progress
had been made, and the task before him seemed as nothing to what he had
already performed.

“My father,” thought he, “must be half mad with passion.”

And Norbert was not wrong in his opinion. When the Duke, as usual, took
his place at the table, at which the farm laborers ate their meals, not
one of them had the courage to make a single observation. Every one knew
what a serious altercation had taken place between father and son, and
each one was devoured by the pangs of ungratified curiosity.

As soon as the meal was concluded, the Duke called an old and
trustworthy servant, who had been in his employment for over thirty
years.

“Jean,” said he, “your young master is locked in the yellow room. Here
is the key. Take him something to eat.”

“Very good, your Grace.”

“Wait a little. You will spend the night in his room and keep a strict
watch upon him. He may design to make his escape. If he attempts it,
restrain him, if necessary, by physical force. Should he prove too
strong for you, call to me; I shall be near, and will come to your aid.”

This unexpected precaution upon the Duke’s part upset all Norbert’s
plans of escape. He endeavored to persuade Jean to allow him to go out
for a couple of hours, giving his word of honor that he would return
at the expiration of that time. Prayers and menaces, however, had no
effect. Had the young man gazed from the window, he would have seen
his father striding moodily up and down the courtyard, with the thought
gnawing at his heart that perhaps after all these many years of waiting
his plans might yet be frustrated.

“There is a woman at the bottom of all this,” said he to himself. “It
is only woman’s wiles that in this brief space of time would effect so
complete a change in a young man’s disposition. Besides, he would not
have so obstinately declined to listen to the proposal I made him had
not his affections been engaged elsewhere. Who can she be? and by what
means shall I find her out?”

It would be absurd to question Norbert, and the Duke was excessively
unwilling to institute any regular inquiry into the matter. He passed
the whole night in gloomy indecision, but towards morning an inspiration
came to him which he looked upon as a special interposition of
Providence.

“Bruno,” he exclaimed with a mighty oath. “The dog will show me the
place that his master frequents and perhaps lead me to the very woman
who had bewitched him.”

The brilliant idea soothed him a great deal, and at one o’clock he took
his seat as usual at the head of the table, and ordered food to be taken
up to Norbert, but that none of the measures for his safe custody were
to be relaxed.

When he thought the moment was a favorable one, he whistled to Bruno,
and, though the dog rarely followed him, yet in the absence of his
master, he condescended to accompany the Duke down the avenue to the
front gates. Three roads branched off from here, but the dog did not
hesitate for a moment, and took the one to the left, like an animal who
knew his destination perfectly well. Bruno went ahead for nearly half
an hour, until he reached the exact spot where Diana had met with her
accident. He made a cast round, but finding nothing, sat down, clearly
saying,--

“Let us wait.”

“This, then,” muttered the Duke, “is the place where the lovers have
been in the habit of meeting each other.”

The place was a very lonely one, and, standing on the rising ground,
commanded a view of the country for a long way round.

The Duke noticed this, and took up a position where the trunk of a
giant oak almost concealed him from observation. He was delighted at his
sagacity, and was almost in a good humor; for now that he had reflected,
the danger did not seem by any means so great, for to whom could Norbert
have lost his heart? To some little peasant girl, perhaps, who, thinking
that the lad was an easy dupe, had tried to induce him to marry her.
As these thoughts passed through the Duke’s brain, Bruno gave a joyous
bark.

“Here she is,’ muttered he, as he emerged from his hiding place, and at
that moment Diana de Laurebourg made her appearance; but as soon as she
saw the Duke she uttered a faint cry of alarm. She was inclined to turn
and fly, but her strength failed her, and, extending her hands, she
grasped the boughs of a slender birch tree that grew close by, to
prevent herself from falling. The Duke was quite as much astonished as
the young lady. He had expected to see a peasant girl, and here was
the daughter of the Marquis de Laurebourg. But anger soon succeeded to
surprise; for though he might have had nothing to fear from the peasant,
the daughter of the Marquis de Laurebourg was an utterly different
antagonist. He could not rely upon aid from her family, as, for all he
knew, they might be aiding and abetting her.

“Well, my child,” began he, “you do not seem very glad to see me.”

“Your Grace.”

“Yes, when you come out to meet the son, it is annoying to meet the
father; but do not blame poor Norbert, for I assure you he is not in
fault.”

Though Mademoiselle de Laurebourg had been startled at first, she
was possessed of too strong a will to give in, and soon recovered her
self-possession.

She never thought to screen herself by a denial of her reasons for being
on the spot, for such a course she would have looked on as an act of
treacherous cowardice.

“You are quite right,” answered she. “I came here to meet your son, and
therefore you will pardon me if I take my leave of you.”

With a deep courtesy she was about to move away, when the Duke laid a
restraining grip upon her arm.

“Permit me, my child,” said he, endeavoring to put on a kind and
paternal tone,--“let me say a few words to you. Do you know why Norbert
did not come to meet you?”

“He has doubtless some very good reason.”

“My son is locked up in a room, and my servants have my orders to
prevent his making his escape by force, if necessary.”

“Poor fellow! He deserves the deepest commiseration.”

The Duke was much surprised at this piece of impertinence, as he
considered it.

“I will tell you,” returned he in tones of rising anger, “how it comes
that I treat my son, the heir to my rank and fortune, in this manner.”

He looked savagely angry as he spoke, but Diana answered negligently,
“Pray go on; you quite interest me.”

“Well then, listen to me. I have chosen a wife for Norbert; she is as
young as you are--beautiful, clever, and wealthy.”

“And of noble birth, of course.”

The sarcasm conveyed in this reply roused the Duke to fury.

“Fifteen hundred thousand francs as a marriage portion will outweigh a
coat of arms, even though it should be a tower argent on a field azure.”
 The Duke paused as he made this allusion to the Laurebourg arms, and
then continued, “In addition to this, she has great expectations; and
yet my son is mad enough to refuse the hand of this wealthy heiress.”

“If you think that this marriage will cause your son’s happiness, you
are quite right in acting as you have done.”

“Happiness! What has that to do with the matter, as long as it adds to
the aggrandizement of our house and name? I have made up my mind that
Norbert shall marry this girl; I have sworn it, and I never break my
oath. I told him this myself.”

Diana suffered acutely, but her pride supported her, whilst her
confidence in Norbert was so great that she had the boldness to inquire,
“And what did he say to that?”

“Norbert will become a dutiful son once more when he is removed from the
malignant influence which has been so injurious to him,” returned the
Duke fiercely.

“Indeed.”

“He will obey me, when I show him that though he may not value his name
and position, there are others who do so; and that many a woman would
fight a brave battle for the honor of being the Duchess of Champdoce.
Young lady, my son is a mere boy; but I have known the world, and when I
prove to the poor fool that it was only grasping ambition which assumed
the garb of love, he will renounce his folly and resume his
allegiance to me. I will tell him what I think of the poverty-stricken
adventuresses of high birth, whose only weapons are their youth and
beauty, and with which they think that they can win a wealthy husband in
the battle of life.”

“Continue, sir,” broke in Diana haughtily. “Insult a defenceless girl
with her poverty! It is a noble act, and one worthy of a high-born
gentleman like yourself!”

“I believed,” said the Duke, “that I was addressing the woman whose
advice had led my son to break into open rebellion against my authority.
Am I right or wrong? You can prove me to be mistaken by urging upon
Norbert the necessity for submission.”

She made no reply, but bent her head upon her bosom.

“You see,” continued the Duke, “that I am correct, and that if you
continue to act as you have done, I shall be justified in retaliating in
any manner that I may deem fit. You have now been warned. Carry on this
intrigue at your peril.”

He placed such an insulting emphasis upon the word “intrigue” that
Diana’s anger rose to boiling point. At that instant, for the sake of
vengeance, she would have risked her honor, her ambition, her very life
itself.

Forgetting all prudence, she cast aside her mask of affected
indifference, and, with her eyes flashing angry gleams of fire, and her
cheeks burning, she said,--

“Listen to me. I, too, have sworn an oath, and it is that Norbert
shall be my husband; and I tell you that he shall be so! Shut him up in
prison, subject him to every indignity at the hands of your menials, but
you will never break his spirit, or make him go back from his plighted
word. If I bid him, he will resist your will even unto the bitter end.
He and I will never yield. Believe me when I tell you, that before you
attack a young girl’s honor, you had better pause; for one day she will
be a member of your family. Farewell.”

Before the Duke could recover his senses, Diana was far down the path
on her way homewards; and then he burst into a wild storm of menaces,
oaths, and insults. He fancied that he was alone, but he was mistaken;
for the whole of that strange scene had a hidden witness, and that
witness was Daumon. He had heard of the treatment of the young Marquis
from one of his servants at the Chateau, and his first thought had been
to acquaint Diana with it. Unfortunately he saw no means of doing this.
He dared not go to Laurebourg, and he would have died sooner than put
pen to paper. He was in a position of the deepest embarrassment when the
idea struck him of going to the lovers’ trysting place. The little cry
that Diana had uttered upon perceiving the Duke had put him upon his
guard. Bruno had found him out; but, as he knew him, merely fawned upon
him. He was delighted at the fury of the Duke, whom he hated with
cold and steady malignity; but the courage of Diana filled him with
admiration. Her sublime audacity won his warmest praises, and he longed
for her as an ally to aid him in his scheme of revenge. He knew that the
girl would find herself in a terribly embarrassing position, and thus
she would be sure to call upon him for advice before returning home.

“Now,” thought he, “if I wish to profit by her anger, I ought to strike
while the iron is hot; and to do so, I should be at home to meet her.”

Without a moment’s delay, he dashed through the woods, striving to
get home without the young girl’s perceiving him. His movements in the
underwood caught the Duke’s eye.

“Who is there?” exclaimed he, moving towards the spot from whence the
rustling came. There was no reply. Surely he had not been mistaken.
Calling to Bruno, he strove to put him on the scent, but the dog showed
no signs of eagerness. He sniffed about for a time, and seemed to linger
near one special spot. The Duke moved towards it, and distinctly saw the
impression of two knees upon the grass.

“Some one has been eavesdropping,” muttered he, much enraged at his
discovery. “Who can it be? Has Norbert escaped from his prison?”

As he returned through the courtyard, he called one of the grooms to
him.

“Where is my son?” asked he.

“Upstairs, your Grace,” was the answer.

The Duke breathed more freely. Norbert was still in security, and
therefore could not have been the person who had been listening.

“But,” added the lad, “the young master is half frantic.”

“What do you mean?”

“Well, he declared that he would not remain in his room an instant
longer; so old Jean called for help. He is awfully strong, and it took
six of us to hold him. He said that if we would let him go, he would
return in two hours, and that his honor and life were involved.”

The Duke listened with a sarcastic smile. He cared nothing about the
frantic struggles of his son, for his heart had grown cold and hard from
the presence of the fixed idea which had actuated his conduct for so
many years, and it was with the solemn face of a man who was fulfilling
a sacred duty that he ascended to the room in which his son was
imprisoned. Jean threw open the door, and the Duke paused for a moment
on the threshold. The furniture had been overturned, some of it broken,
and there were evident signs of a furious struggle having taken place.

A powerful laborer stood near the window, and Norbert was lying on the
bed, with his face turned to the wall.

“Leave us,” said the Duke, and the man withdrew at once.

“Get up, Norbert,” he added; “I wish to speak to you.”

His son obeyed him. Any one but the Duke would have been alarmed by the
expression of the young man’s face.

“What is the meaning of all this?” asked the old nobleman in his most
severe voice. “Are not my orders sufficient to insure obedience? I hear
that absolute force has had to be used towards you during my absence.
Tell me, my son, what plans you have devised during these hours of
solitude, and what hopes you still venture to cherish.”

“I intend to be free, and I will be so.”

The Duke affected not to hear the reply, uttered as it was in a tone of
derision.

“It was very easy for me to discover, from your obstinacy, that some
woman had endeavored to entrap you, and by her insidious counsels
inducing you to disobey your best friend.”

He paused, but there was no reply.

“This woman--this dangerous woman--I have been in search of, and as you
can conceive, I easily found her. I went to the Forest of Bevron, and
there I need not tell you I found Mademoiselle de Laurebourg.”

“Did you speak to her?”

“I did so, certainly. I told her my opinion of those manoeuvring women
who fascinate the dupes they intend to take advantage of--”

“Father!”

“Can it be possible that you, simple boy even as you are, could have
been deceived by the pretended love of this wily young woman? It is not
you, Marquis, that she loves, but our name and fortune; but _I_ know if
_she_ does not that the law will imprison women who contrive to entrap
young men who are under age.”

Norbert turned deadly pale.

“Did you really say that to her?” asked he, in a low, hoarse voice,
utterly unlike his own. “You dare to insult the woman I love, when you
knew that I was far away and unable to protect her! Take care, or I
shall forget that you are my father.”

“He actually threatens me,” said the Duke, “my son threatens me;” and,
raising the heavy stick he held in his hand, he struck Norbert a violent
blow. By a fortunate movement the unhappy boy drew back, and so avoided
the full force of the stroke, but the end of the stick struck him across
the temple, inflicting a long though not a serious wound. In his blind
rage Norbert was about to throw himself upon his father, when his eyes
caught sight of the open door. Liberty and safety lay before him, and,
with a bound, he was on the stairs, and before the Duke could shout for
aid from the window, his son was tearing across the park with all the
appearance and gesture of a madman.



CHAPTER VIII.

THE LITTLE GLASS BOTTLE.

In order to avoid being seen by Mademoiselle de Laurebourg, Daumon had
to take a much longer route to regain his home than the one that Diana
had followed. This, however, he could not help. As soon as he arrived
at his home he ran hastily upstairs and took from a cleverly concealed
hiding-place in the wainscoting of his bedroom a small bottle of dark
green glass, which he hastily slipped into his pocket. When he had
once more descended to his office, he again took it out and examined it
carefully to see that it had in no way been tampered with; then, with
a hard, cruel smile, he placed it upon his desk among his ledgers and
account books. Diana de Laurebourg might pay him a visit as soon as
she liked, for he was quite prepared for her, for he had slipped on his
dressing-gown and placed his velvet skull cap upon his head, as if he
had not quitted the house that day.

“Why on earth does she not come?” muttered he.

He began to be uneasy. He went to the window and glanced eagerly down
the road; then he drew out his watch and examined the face of it,
when all at once his ears detected a gentle tapping at the door of the
office.

“Come in,” said he.

The door opened, and Diana entered slowly, without uttering a word, and
took no notice of the servile obsequiousness of the Counsellor; indeed,
she hardly seemed to notice his presence, and with a deep sigh she threw
herself into a chair.

In his inmost heart Daumon was filled with the utmost delight; he now
understood why Diana had taken so long in reaching his house; it was
because her interview with the Duke had almost overcome her.

She soon, however, recovered her energy, and shook off the languor
that seemed to cling to her limbs, and turning towards her host, said
abruptly,--

“Counsellor, I have come to you for advice, which I sorely need. About
an hour ago--”

With a gesture of sympathy Daumon interrupted her,--

“Alas!” said he; “spare me the recital, I know all.”

“You know----”

“Yes, I know that M. Norbert is a prisoner at the Chateau. Yes,
mademoiselle, I know this, and I know, too, that you have just met the
Duke de Champdoce in the Forest of Bevron. I know, moreover, all that
you said to the old nobleman, for I have heard every word from a person
who has just left.”

In spite of her strong nerves, Diana was unable to restrain a movement
of dismay and terror.

“But who told you of this?” murmured she.

“A man who was out cutting wood. Ah! my dear young lady, the forest is
not a safe place to tell secrets in, for you never know whether watchful
eyes and listening ears are not concealed behind every tree. This
man, and I am afraid some of his companions, heard every word that was
spoken, and as soon as you left the Duke the man scampered off to tell
the story. I made him promise not to say a word, but he is a married man
and is sure to tell it to his wife. Then there are his companions; dear
me! it is most annoying.”

“Then all is lost, and I am ruined,” murmured she.

But her despair did not last long, for she was by no means the woman
to throw down her arms and sue for mercy. She grasped the arm of the
Counsellor.

“The end has not come yet, surely? Speak! What is to be done? You must
have some plan. I am ready for anything, now that I have nothing to
lose. No one shall ever say that that cowardly villain, the Duke de
Champdoce, insulted me with impunity. Tell me, will you help me?”

“In the name of heaven!” cried he, “do not speak so loud. You do not
know the adversary that you have to contend with.”

“Are you afraid of him?”

“Yes, I do fear him; and what is more, I fear him very much. He is a
determined man, and will gain his object at any cost or risk. Do you
know that he did his best to crush me because I summoned him to court on
behalf of one of my clients? So that now, when any one comes to me and
wishes to proceed against the Duke, I am glad to decline to take up the
matter.”

“And so,” returned the young girl in a tone of cold contempt, “after
leading us to this compromising position, you are ready to abandon us at
the most critical moment?”

“Can you think such a thing, mademoiselle?”

“You can act as you please, Counsellor; Norbert is still left to me; he
will protect me.”

Daumon shook his head with an air of deep sorrow.

“How can we be sure that at this very moment the Marquis has not given
in to all his father’s wishes?”

“No,” exclaimed the girl; “such a supposition is an insult to Norbert.
He would sooner die than give in. He may be timid, but he is not
a coward; the thoughts of me will give him the power to resist his
father’s tyranny.”

Daumon allowed himself to fall into his great armchair as though
overcome by the excitement of this interview.

“We can talk coolly enough here and with no one to threaten us; but the
Marquis, on the other hand, is exposed to all his father’s violence and
ill treatment, moral as well as physical, without any defence for aid
from a soul in the world, and in such times as these the strongest will
may give way.”

“Yes, I see it all; Norbert may give in, he may marry another woman, and
I shall be left alone, with my reputation gone, and the scorn and scoff
of all the neighborhood.”

“But, mademoiselle, you still have--”

“All I have left is life, and that life I would gladly give for
vengeance.”

There was something so terribly determined in the young girl’s voice
that again Daumon started, and this time his start was sincere and not
simulated.

“Yes, you are right,” said he, “and there are many besides myself who
have vowed to have revenge on the Duke, and their time will come, have
no fear. A quiet shot in the woods in the dusk of the evening would
settle many a long account. It has been tried, but the old man seems
to have the luck of the evil one; and if the gun did not miss fire, the
bullets flew wide of the mark. A judge might take a very serious view of
such a matter, and term a crime what was merely an act of justice. Who
can say whether the death of the Duke de Champdoce might not save him
from the commission of many acts of tyranny and oppression and render
many deserving persons happy?”

The face of Diana de Laurebourg turned deadly pale as she listened to
these specious arguments.

“As things go,” continued Daumon, “the Duke may go on living to a
hundred; he is wealthy and influential, and to a certain degree looked
up to. He will die peacefully in his bed, there will be a magnificent
funeral, and masses will be sung for the repose of his soul.”

While he spoke the Counsellor had taken the little bottle from beside
his account books and was turning it over and over between his fingers.

“Yes,” murmured he, thoughtfully; “the Duke is quite likely to outlive
us all, unless, indeed----”

He took the cork from the bottle, and poured a little of the contents
into the palm of his hand. A few grains of fine white powder, glittering
like crystal, appeared on the brown skin of the Counsellor.

“And yet,” he went on, in cold, sinister accents, “let him take but
a small pinch of this, and no one need fear his tyranny again in this
world. No one is much afraid of a man who lies some six feet under
ground, shut up in a strong oak coffin, with a finely carved gravestone
over his head.”

He stopped short, and fixed his keen eyes upon the agitated girl, who
stood in front of him. For at least two minutes the man and the girl
stood face to face, motionless, and without exchanging a word. Through
the dead, weird silence, the pulsations of their hearts were plainly
audible. It seemed as if before speaking again each wished to fathom the
depths of guilt that lay in the other’s heart. It was a compact entered
into by look and not by speech; and Daumon so well understood this, that
at length, when he did speak, his voice sank to a hoarse whisper, as
though he himself feared to listen to the utterance of his own thoughts.

“A man taking this feels no pain. It is like a heavy, stunning blow on
the forehead--in ten seconds all is over, no gasp, no cry, but the heart
ceases to beat forever; and, best of all, it leaves no trace behind it.
A little of this, such a little, in wine or coffee, would be enough. It
is tasteless, colorless, and scentless, its presence is impossible to be
detected.”

“But in the event of a _post-mortem_ examination?”

“By skilful analysts in Paris or the larger towns, there would be a
chance; but in a place like this, never! Never, in fact, anywhere,
unless there had been previous grounds for suspicion. Otherwise only
apoplectic symptoms would be observed; and even if it was traced there
comes the question, By whom was it administered?”

He stopped short, for a word rose to his lips which he did not dare
utter; he raised his hands to his mouth, coughed slightly, and went
on,--

“This substance is not sold by chemists; it is very rarely met with,
difficult to prepare, and terribly expensive. The smallest quantity
might be met with in the first-class laboratories for scientific
purposes, but it is most unlikely for any one in these parts to possess
any of this drug, or even to know of its existence.”

“And yet you----”

“That is quite another matter. Years ago, when I was far away from here,
it was in my power to render a great service to a distinguished chemist,
and he made me a present of this combination of his skill. It would be
impossible to trace this bottle; I have had it ten years, and the man
who gave it to me is dead. Ten years? No, I am wrong, it is now twelve.”

“And in all these years has not this substance lost any of its
destructive powers?”

“I tried it only a month ago. I threw a pinch of it into a basin of milk
and gave it to a powerful mastiff. He drank the milk and in ten seconds
fell stark and dead.”

“Horrible!” exclaimed Diana, covering her face with her hand, and
recoiling from the tempter.

A sinister smile quivered upon the thin lips of the Counsellor.

“Why do you say horrible?” asked he; “the dog had shown symptoms of
_rabies_, and had he bitten me, I might have expired in frightful
torture. Was it not fair self-defence? Sometimes, however, a man is more
dangerous than a dog. A man blights the whole of my life; I strike him
down openly, and the law convicts me and puts me to death; but I do not
contemplate doing so, for I would suppress such a man secretly.”

Diana placed her hands on the man’s mouth and stopped a further
exposition of his ideas.

“Listen to me,” said she. But at this moment a heavy step was heard
outside. “It is Norbert,” gasped she.

“Impossible! It is more likely his father.”

“It is Norbert,” cried Mademoiselle de Laurebourg, and snatching the
little bottle from the Counsellor’s hands, she thrust it into her bosom.
The door flew open, and Norbert appeared on the threshold. Diana and the
Counsellor both uttered a shriek of terror. His livid countenance seemed
to indicate that he had passed through some terrible scene; his gait
was unsteady, his clothes torn and disordered, and his face stained with
blood, which had flowed from a cut over his temple. Daumon imagined that
some outrage had taken place.

“You have been wounded, Marquis?” said he.

“Yes, my father struck me.”

“Can it be possible?”

“Yes, he struck me.”

Mademoiselle Diana had feared this, and she trembled with the terror of
her vague conjectures as she made a step towards her lover.

“Permit me to examine your wound,” said she.

She placed both her hands at the side of his head and stood on tip-toe,
the better to inspect the cut. As she did so, she shuddered; an inch
lower, and the consequences might have been fatal.

“Quick,” she said, “give me some rags and water.”

Norbert gently disengaged himself. “It is a mere nothing,” said he, “and
can be looked after later on. Fortunately I did not receive the whole
weight of the blow, which would otherwise have brought me senseless to
the ground, and perhaps I should have been slain by my father’s hand.”

“By the Duke? and for what reason did he strike you?”

“Diana, he had grossly insulted you, and he dared to tell me of it. Had
he forgotten that the blood of the race of Champdoce ran in my veins as
well as in his?”

Mademoiselle de Laurebourg burst into a passion of tears.

“I,” sobbed she, “I have brought all this upon you.”

“You? Why, it is to you that he owes his life. He dared to strike me as
if I had been a lackey, but the thoughts of you stayed my hand. I turned
and fled, and never again will I enter that accursed house. I renounce
the Duke de Champdoce, he is no longer my father, and I will never look
upon his face again. Would that I could forget that such a man existed;
but, no, I would rather that I remembered him for the sake of revenge.”

Again the heart of Daumon overflowed with joy. All his deeply malignant
spirit thrilled pleasantly as he heard these words.

“Marquis,” said he, “perhaps you will now believe with me that in all
misfortunes there is an element of luck, for your father has committed
an act of imprudence which will yet cost him dear. It is very strange
that so astute a man as the Duke de Champdoce should have allowed his
passion to carry him away.”

“What do you mean?”

“Simply that you can be freed from the tyranny of your father whenever
you like now. We now have all that is necessary for lodging a formal
plaint in court. We have sequestration of the person, threats and bodily
violence by the aid of third parties, and words and blows which have
endangered life; our case is entirely complete. A surgeon will examine
your wound, and give a written deposition. We can produce plenty of
evidence, and the wound on the head will tell its own story. As a
commencement we will petition that we may not be ordered back to our
father’s custody, and it will further be set forth that our reason for
this is that a father has assaulted a son with undue and unnecessary
violence. We shall be sure to gain the day, and--”

“Enough,” broke in Norbert; “will the decision give me the right to
marry whom I please without my father’s consent?”

Daumon hesitated. Under the circumstances, it seemed to him very likely
that the court would grant Norbert the liberty he desired; he, however,
thought it advisable not to say so, and answered boldly, “No, Marquis,
it will not do so.”

“Well, then, the Champdoce family have never exposed their differences
to the public, nor will I begin to do so,” said Norbert decisively.

The Counsellor seemed surprised at this determination.

“If, Marquis,” he began, “I might venture to advise you--”

“No advice is necessary, my mind is entirely made up, but I need some
help, and in twenty-four hours I require a large sum of money--twenty
thousand francs.”

“You can have them, Marquis, but I warn you that you will have to pay
heavily for the accommodation.”

“That I care nothing for.”

Mademoiselle de Laurebourg was about to speak, but with a gesture of his
hand Norbert arrested her.

“Do you not comprehend me, Diana?” said he; “we must fly, and that at
once. We can find some safe retreat where we can live happily, where no
one will harm us.”

“But this is mere madness!” cried Diana.

“You will be pursued,” remarked the Counsellor; “and most likely
overtaken.”

“Can you not trust your life to me?” asked Norbert reproachfully. “I
swear that I will devote everything to you, life, thought, and will. On
my knees I entreat you to fly with me.”

“I cannot,” murmured she; “it is impossible.”

“Then you do not love me,” said he in desponding accents. “I have been
a thrice-besotted fool to believe that your heart was mine, for you can
never have loved me.”

“Hear him, merciful powers! he says that I, who am all his, do not love
him.”

“Then why cast aside our only chance of safety?”

“Norbert, dearest Norbert!”

“I understand you too well; you are alarmed at the idea of the world’s
censure, and----”

He paused, checked by the gleam of reproach that shone in Diana’s eyes.

“Must it be so?” said she; “must I condescend to justify myself? You
talk to me of the world’s censure? Have I not already defied it, and has
it not sat in judgment upon me? And what have I done, after all? Every
act and word that has passed between us I can repeat to my mother
without a blush rising to my cheek; but would any one credit my words?
No, not a living soul. Most likely the world has come to a decision. My
reputation is gone, is utterly lost, and yet I am spotless as the driven
snow.”

Norbert was half-mad with anger.

“Who would dare to treat you with anything save the most profound
respect?” said he.

“Alas! my dear Norbert,” replied she, “to-morrow the scandal will be
even greater. While your father was talking to me with such brutal
violence and contempt, he was overheard by a woodcutter and perhaps by
some of his companions.”

“It cannot be.”

“No, it is quite true,” returned Daumon. “I had it from the man myself.”

Mademoiselle de Laurebourg shot one glance at the Counsellor; it was
only a glance, but he comprehended at once that she wished to be left
alone with her lover.

“Pardon me,” said he, “but I think I have a visitor, and I must hinder
any one from coming in here.”

He left the room as he spoke, closing the door noisily behind him.

“And so,” resumed Norbert when alone, “it seems that the Duke de
Champdoce did not even take the ordinary precaution of assuring himself
that you were in privacy before he spoke as he did, and was so carried
away by his fury that he never thought that in casting dishonor upon
you, he was heaping infamy on me. Does he think by these means to compel
me to marry the heiress whom he has chose for me, the Mademoiselle de
Puymandour?”

For the first time Diana learned the name of her rival.

“Ah!” moaned she between her sobs, “so it is Mademoiselle de Puymandour
that he wants you to marry?”

“Yes, the same, or rather her enormous wealth; but may my hand wither
before it clasps hers. Do you hear me, Diana?”

She gave a sad smile and murmured, “Poor Norbert!”

The heart of the young man sank; so melancholy was the tone of her
voice.

“You are very cruel,” said he. “What have I done to deserve this want of
confidence?”

Diana made no reply, and Norbert, believing that he understood the
reason why she refused to fly with him, said, “Is it because you have no
faith in me, that you will not accompany me in my flight?”

“No; I have perfect faith in you.”

“What is it, then? Do I not offer you fortune and happiness? Tell me
what it is then.”

She drew herself up, and said proudly, “Up to this time, my conscience
has enabled me to hold my own against all the scandalous gossip that has
been flying about, but now it says, ‘Halt, Diana de Laurebourg! You have
gone far enough.’ My burden is heavy, my heart is breaking, but I must
draw back now. No, Norbert; I cannot fly with you.”

She paused for a moment, as though unable to proceed, and then went on
with more firmness, “Were I alone and solitary in the world, I might act
differently; but I have a family, whose honor I must guard as I would my
own.”

“A family indeed, which sacrifices you to your elder brother.”

“It may be so, and therefore my task is all the greater. Whoever heard
of virtue as something easy to practise?”

Norbert never remembered what an example of rebellion she had set.

“My heart and my conscience dictate the same course to me. The result
must ever be fatal, when a young girl sets at defiance the rules and
laws of society; and you would never care to look with respect on one
upon whom others gazed with the eye of contempt.”

“What sort of an opinion have you of me, then?”

“I believe you to be a man, Norbert. Let us suppose that I fly with you,
and that the next day I should hear that my father has been killed in a
duel fought on my account; what then? Believe me, that when I tell you
to fly by yourself, I give you the best advice in my power. You will
forget me, I know; but what else can I hope for?”

“Forget you!” said Norbert angrily. “Can you forget me?”

His face was so close to hers that she felt the hot breath upon her
cheek.

“Yes,” stammered she, with a violent effort, “I can.”

Norbert drew a pace back, that he might read her meaning more fully in
her eyes.

“And if I go away,” asked he, “what will become of you?”

A sob burst from the young girl’s breast, and her strength seemed to
desert her limbs.

“I,” answered she, in the calm, resigned voice of a Christian virgin
about to be cast to the lions that roared in the arena, “I have my
destiny. To-day is the last time that we shall ever meet. I shall return
to my home, where everything will shortly be known. I shall find my
father angry and menacing. He will place me in a carriage, and the next
day I shall find myself within the walls of the hated convent.”

“But that life would be one long, slow agony to you. You have told me
this before.”

“Yes,” answered she, “it would be an agony, but it would also be an
expiation; and when the burden grows too heavy, I have this.”

And as she spoke, she drew the little bottle from its hiding-place in
her bosom, and Norbert too well understood her meaning. The young man
endeavored to take it from her, but she resisted. This contest seemed
to exhaust her little strength, her beautiful eyes closed, and she sank
senseless into Norbert’s arms. In an agony of despair, the young man
asked himself if she was dying; and yet there was sufficient life in
her to enable her to whisper, soft and low, these words, “My only
friend--let me have it back, dear Norbert.” And then, with perfect
clearness, she repeated all the deadly properties of the drug, and the
directions for its use that the Counsellor had given to her.

On hearing the woman whom he loved with such intense passion confess
that she would sooner die than live apart from him, Norbert’s brain
reeled.

“Diana, my own Diana!” repeated he, as he hung over her.

But she went on, as though speaking through the promptings of delirium.

“The very day after such a fair prospect! Ah, Duke de Champdoce! You are
a hard and pitiless man. You have robbed me of all I held dear in the
world, blackened my reputation, and tarnished my honor, and now you want
my life.”

Norbert uttered such a cry of anger, that even Daumon in the passage was
startled by it. He placed Diana tenderly in the Counsellor’s arm-chair,
saying,--

“No, you shall not kill yourself, nor shall you leave me.”

She smiled faintly, and held out her arms to him. Her magic spells were
deftly woven.

“No,” cried he; “the poison which you had intended to use on yourself
shall become my weapon of vengeance, and the instrument of punishment of
the one who has wronged you.”

And with the gait of a man walking in his sleep, he left the
Counsellor’s office.

Hardly had the young man’s footsteps died away, than Daumon entered the
room. He had not lost a word or action in the foregoing scene, and he
was terribly agitated; and he could scarcely believe his eyes when
he saw Diana, whom he had supposed to be lying half-sensible in the
arm-chair, standing at the window, gazing after Norbert, as he walked
along the road leading from the Counsellor’s cottage.

“Ah! what a woman!” muttered he. “Gracious powers, what a wonderful
woman!”

When Diana had lost sight of her lover, she turned round to Daumon. Her
face was pale, and her eyelids swollen, but her eyes flashed with the
conviction of success.

“To-morrow, Counsellor,” said she, “to-morrow I shall be the Duchess de
Champdoce.”

Daumon was so overwhelmed that, accustomed as he was to startling events
and underhand trickery, he could find no words to express his feelings.

“That is to say,” added Diana thoughtfully, “if all goes as it should
to-night.”

Daumon felt a cold shiver creep over him, but summoning up all his
self-possession, he said, “I do not understand you. What is this that
you hope will be accomplished to-night?”

She turned so contemptuous and sarcastic a look on him, that the words
died away in his mouth, and he at once saw his mistake in thinking that
he could sport with the girl’s feelings as a cat plays with a mouse; for
it was she who was playing with him, and she, a simple girl, had made
this wily man of the world her dupe.

“Success is, of course, a certainty,” answered she coldly; “but Norbert
is impetuous, and impetuous people are often awkward. But I must return
home at once. Ah, me!” she added, as her self-control gave way for a
moment, “will this cruel night never pass away, and give way to the
gentle light of dawn? Farewell, Counsellor. When we meet again, all
matters will be settled, one way or other.”

The Parthian dart which Mademoiselle de Laurebourg had cast behind
her went true to the mark; the allusion to Norbert’s impetuosity and
awkwardness rendered the Counsellor very unhappy. He sat down in his
arm-chair, and, resting his head on his hands, and his elbows on his
desk, he strove to review the position thoroughly. Perhaps by now
all might be over. Where was Norbert, and what was he doing? he asked
himself.

At the time that Daumon was reflecting, Norbert was on the road leading
to Champdoce. He had entirely lost his head, but he found that his
reason was clear and distinct. Those who have been accustomed to the
treatment of maniacs know with what startling rapidity they form a chain
of action, and the cloud that veiled Norbert’s brain appeared to throw
out into stronger relief the murderous determination he had formed. He
had already decided how the deed was to be done. The common wine of the
country was always served to the laborers at the table, but the Duke
kept a better quality for his own drinking, and the bottle containing
this was after meals placed on a shelf in a cupboard in the dining-room.
It was thus within every one’s reach, but not a soul in the household
would have ventured to lay a finger upon it. Norbert’s thoughts fell
upon this bottle, and in his mind’s eye he could see it standing in its
accustomed place. He crossed the courtyard, and the laborers, engaged
in their tasks, gazed at him curiously. He passed them, and entered the
dining-room, which was untenanted. With a caution that was not to
be expected from the agitation of his mind, he opened each door
successively, in order to be certain that no eyes were gazing upon him.
Then, with the greatest rapidity, he took down the bottle, drew the cork
with his teeth, and dropped into the wine, not one, but two or three
pinches of the contents of the little vial. He shook the bottle gently,
to facilitate the dissolution of the powder. A few particles of the
poison clung to the lip of the bottle; he wiped off these, not with a
napkin, a pile of which lay on the shelf beside him, but with his
own handkerchief. He replaced the bottle in its accustomed place, and
seating himself by the fire, awaited the course of events.

At this moment the Duke de Champdoce was coming up the avenue at a rapid
pace. For the first time, perhaps, in his life, this man perceived that
one of his last acts had been insensate and foolish in the extreme. All
the possibilities of the law to which Daumon had alluded struck the Duke
with over-whelming force, and he at once saw that his violent conduct
had given ample grounds upon which to base a plaint, with results which
he greatly feared. If the court entertained the matter, his son would
most likely be removed from his control. He knew that such an idea would
never cross Norbert’s brain, but there were plenty of persons to suggest
it to him. The danger of his position occurred to him, and at the
same time he felt that he must frame his future conduct with extreme
prudence. He had not given up his views regarding his son’s marriage
with Mademoiselle de Puymandour. No; he would sooner have resigned life
itself, but he felt that he must renounce violence, and gain his ends by
diplomacy. The first thing to be done was to get Norbert to return
home, and the father greatly doubted whether the son would do so. While
thinking over these things, with a settled gloom upon his face, one of
the servants came running up to him with the news of Norbert’s return.

“I hold him at last,” muttered he, and hastened on to the Chateau.

When the Duke entered the dining-room, Norbert did not rise from his
seat, and the Duke was disagreeably impressed by this breach of the
rules of domestic etiquette.

“On my word,” thought he, “it would appear that the young booby thinks
that he owes me no kind of duty whatever.”

He did not, however, allow his anger to be manifest in his features;
besides, the sight of the blood, with which his son’s face was still
smeared, caused him to feel excessively uncomfortable.

“Norbert, my son,” said he, “are you suffering? Why have you not had
that cut attended to?”

The young man made no reply, and the Duke continued,--

“Why have you not washed the blood away? Is it left there as a reproach
to me? There is no need for that, I assure you; for deeply do I deplore
my violence.”

Norbert still made no answer, and the Duke became more and more
embarrassed. To give himself time for reflection, more than because he
was thirsty, he took a glass, and filled it from his own special bottle.

Norbert trembled from head to foot as he saw this act.

“Come, my son,” continued the Duke, “just try if you cannot find some
palliation for what your old father has done. I am ready to ask your
forgiveness, and to apologize, for a man of honor is never ashamed to
acknowledge when he has been in the wrong.”

He raised his glass, and raised it up to the light half mechanically.
Norbert held his breath; the whole world seemed turning round.

“It is hard, very hard,” continued the Duke, “for a father thus to
humiliate himself in vain before his son.”

It was useless for Norbert to turn away his head; he saw the Duke place
the glass to his lips. He was about to drink, but the young man could
endure it no longer, and with a bound he sprang forward, snatched the
glass from his father’s hand, and hurled it from the window, shouting in
a voice utterly unlike his own,--

“Do not drink.”

The Duke read the whole hideous truth in the face and manner of his son.
His features quivered, his face grew purple, and his eyes filled with
blood. He strove to speak, but only an inarticulate rattle could be
heard; he then clasped his hands convulsively, swayed backwards and
forwards, and then fell helplessly backwards, striking his head against
an oaken sideboard that stood near. Norbert tore open the door.

“Quick, help!” cried he. “I have killed my father.”



CHAPTER IX.

THE HONOR OF THE NAME.

The account that the Duke of Champdoce had given of M. de Puymandour’s
mad longing for rank and title was true, and afforded a melancholy
instance of that peculiar kind of foolish vanity. He was a much happier
man in his younger days, when he was known simply as Palouzet, which was
his father’s name, whose only wish for distinction was to be looked upon
as an honest man. In those days he was much looked up to and respected,
as a man who had possessed brains enough to amass a very large fortune
by strictly honest means. All this vanished, however, when the unhappy
idea occurred to him to affix the title of Count to the name of an
estate that he had recently purchased.

From that moment, all his tribulations in life may have been said to
have commenced. The nobility laughed at his assumption of hereditary
rank, while the middle classes frowned at his pretensions to be superior
to them, so that he passed the existence of a shuttlecock, continually
suspended in the air, and struck at and dismissed from either side.

It may, therefore, be easily imagined how excessively anxious he was to
bring about the marriage between his daughter Marie and the son of that
mighty nobleman, the Duke of Champdoce. He had offered to sacrifice
one-third of his fortune for the honor of forming this connection, and
would have given up the whole of it, could he but have seen a child in
whose veins ran the united blood of Palouzet and the Champdoce seated
upon his knee. A marriage of this kind would have given him a real
position; for to have a Champdoce for a son-in-law would compel all
scoffers to bridle their tongues.

The day after he had received a favorable reply from the Duke, M.
de Puymandour thought that it was time to inform his daughter of his
intentions. He never thought that she would make any opposition, and, of
course, supposed that she would be as delighted as he was at the honor
that awaited her. He was seated in a magnificently furnished room which
he called his library when he arrived at this conclusion, and ringing
the bell, ordered the servant to inquire of mademoiselle’s maid if her
mistress could grant him an interview. He gave this curious message,
which did not appear to surprise the servant in the least, with an
air of the utmost importance. The communication between the father and
daughter was always carried on upon this basis; and scoffers wickedly
asserted that M. de Puymandour had modelled it upon a book of etiquette,
for the guidance of her household, written by a venerable arch-duchess.

Shortly after the man had departed on his errand, a little tap came to
the door.

“Come in,” exclaimed M. de Puymandour.

And Mademoiselle Marie ran in and gave her father a kiss upon each
cheek. He frowned slightly, and extricated himself from her embrace.

“I thought it better to come to you, my dear father,” said she, “than to
give you the trouble of coming all the way to me.”

“You always forget that there are certain forms and ceremonies necessary
for a young lady of your position.”

Marie gave a little gentle smile, for she was no stranger to her
father’s absurd whims; but she never thwarted them, for she was very
fond of him. She was a very charming young lady, and in the description
that the Duke had given of her to his son, he had not flattered her
at all. Though she differed greatly in appearance from Mademoiselle de
Laurebourg, Marie’s beauty was perfect in a style of its own. She was
tall and well proportioned, and had all that easy grace of movement,
characteristic of women of Southern parentage. Her large soft dark eyes
offered a vivid contrast to her creamy complexion; her hair, in utter
disregard of the fashionable mode of dressing, was loosely knotted at
the back of her head. Her nature was soft and affectionate, capable of
the deepest devotion, while she had the most equable temper that can be
imagined.

“Come, my dear papa,” said she; “do not scold me any more. You know
that the Marchioness of Arlanges has promised to teach me how to behave
myself according to all the rules of fashionable society next winter,
and I declare to you that I will so practise them up in secret, that you
will be astonished when you behold them.”

“How woman-like!” muttered her father. “She only scoffs at matters of
the most vital importance.”

He rose from his seat, and, placing his back to the fireplace, took up
an imposing position, one hand buried in his waistcoat, and the other
ready to gesticulate as occasion required.

“Oblige me with your deepest attention,” commenced he. “You were
eighteen years of age last month, and I have an important piece of
intelligence to convey to you. I have had an offer of marriage for you.”

Marie looked down, and endeavored to hide her confusion at these
tidings.

“Before coming to a conclusion upon a matter of such importance,”
 continued he, “it was, of course, necessary for me to go into the
question most thoroughly. I spared no means of obtaining information,
and I am quite certain that the proposed connection would be conducive
to your future happiness. The suitor for your hand is but little older
than yourself; he is very handsome, very wealthy, and is a Marquis by
hereditary right.”

“Has he spoken to you then?” inquired Marie in tones of extreme
agitation.

“He! Whom do you mean by he?” asked M. de Puymandour; and as his
daughter did not reply, he repeated his question.

“Who? Why, George de Croisenois.”

“Pray, what have you to do with Croisenois? Who is he, pray? Not that
dandy with a mustache, that I have seen hanging about you this winter?”

“Yes,” faltered Marie; “that is he.”

“And why should you presume that he had asked me for your hand? Did he
tell you that he was going to do so?”

“Father, I declare----”

“What, the daughter of a Puymandour has listened to a declaration of
love unknown to her father? Ten thousand furies! Has he written to you?
Where are those letters?”

“My dear father--”

“Silence; have you those letters? Let me see them. Come, no delay; I
will have those bits of paper, if I turn the whole house upside down.”

With a sigh Marie gave the much prized missives to her father; there
were four only, fastened together with a morsel of blue ribbon.

He took one out at random, and read it aloud, with a running fire of
oaths and invectives as a commentary upon its contents.

“MADEMOISELLE,--

“Though there is nothing upon earth that I dread so much as your anger,
I dare, in spite of your commands to the contrary, to write to you
once again. I have learned that you are about to quit Paris for several
months. I am twenty-four years of age. I have neither father nor mother,
and am entirely my own master. I belong to an ancient and honorable
family. My fortune is a large one, and my love for you is of the most
honorable and devoted kind. My uncle, M. de Saumeuse, knows your father
well; and will convey my proposals to him upon his return from Italy, in
about two or three weeks’ time. Once more intreating you to forgive me,

“I remain,

“Yours respectfully,

“GEORGE DE CROISENOIS.”


“Very pretty indeed,” said M. de Puymandour, as he replaced the letter
in its envelope. “This is sufficient, and I need not read the others;
but pray, what answer did you give?”

“That I must refer him to you, my dear father.”

“Indeed, on my word, you do me too much honor; and did you really think
that I would listen to such proposals? Perhaps you love him?”

She turned her lovely face towards her father, with the great tears
rolling down her cheeks for her sole reply.

This mute confession, for as such he regarded it, put the finishing
touch to M. de Puymandour’s exasperation.

“You absolutely love him, and have the impudence to tell me so?”

Marie glanced at her father, and answered,--

“The Marquis de Croisenois is of good family.”

“Pooh! you know nothing about it. Why, the first Croisenois was one of
Richelieu’s minions, and Louis XIII. conferred the title for some shady
piece of business which he carried out for him. Has this fine Marquis
any means of livelihood?”

“Certainly; about sixty thousand francs a year.”

“Humbug! What did he mean by addressing you secretly? Only to compromise
your name, and so to secure your fortune, and perhaps to break off your
marriage with another.”

“But why suppose this?”

“I suppose nothing; I am merely going upon facts. What does a man of
honor do when he falls in love?”

“My dear father--”

“He goes to his solicitor, acquaints him with his intentions, and
explains what his means are; the solicitor goes to the family solicitor
of the young lady, and when these men of the law have found out that all
is satisfactory, then love is permitted to make his appearance upon the
scene. And now you may as well attend to me. Forget De Croisenois
as soon as you can, for I have chosen a husband for you, and, having
pledged my word of honor, I will abide by it. On Sunday the eligible
suitor will be introduced to you, and on Monday we will visit the
Bishop, asking him to be good enough to perform the ceremony. On Tuesday
you will show yourself in public with him, in order to announce the
betrothal. Wednesday the marriage contract will be read. Thursday a
grand dinner-party. Friday an exhibition of the marriage presents;
Saturday a day of rest; Sunday the publication of the banns, and at the
end of the following week the marriage will take place.”

Mademoiselle Marie listened to her father’s determination with intense
horror.

“For pity’s sake, my dear father, be serious,” cried she.

M. de Puymandour paid no attention to her entreaty, but added, as an
afterthought:

“Perhaps you would wish to know the name of the gentleman I have
selected as a husband for you. He is the Marquis Norbert, the son and
heir of the Duke de Champdoce.”

Marie turned deadly pale.

“But I do not know him; I have never seen him,” faltered she.

“_I_ know him, and that is quite sufficient. I have often told you that
you should be a duchess, and I mean to keep my word.”

Marie’s affection for George de Croisenois was much deeper than she
had told her father, much deeper even than she had dared to confess to
herself, and she resented this disposal of her with more obstinacy than
any one knowing her gentle nature would have supposed her capable of;
but M. de Puymandour was not the man to give up for an instant the
object which he had sworn to attain. He never gave his daughter an
instant’s peace, he argued, insisted, and bullied until, after three
days’ contest, Marie gave her assent with a flood of tears. The word had
scarcely passed her lips, before her father, without even thanking her
for her terrible sacrifice, exclaimed in a voice of triumph:

“I must take these tidings to Champdoce without a moment’s delay.”

He started at once, and as he passed through the doorway said:

“Good-by, my little duchess, good-by.”

He was most desirous of seeing the Duke, for, on taking leave of him,
the old nobleman had said, “You shall hear from me to-morrow;” but no
letter had as yet reached him from Champdoce. This delay however, had
suited M. de Puymandour’s plans, for it had enabled him to wring the
consent from his daughter; but now that this had been done, he began to
feel very anxious, and to fear that there might be some unforeseen hitch
in the affair.

When he reached Bevron, he saw Daumon talking earnestly with Francoise,
the daughter of the Widow Rouleau. M. de Puymandour bowed graciously,
and stopped to talk with the man, for he was just now seeking for
popularity, as he was a candidate, and the elections would shortly take
place; and, besides, he never failed to talk to persons who exercised
any degree of influence, and he knew that Daumon was a most useful man
in electioneering.

“Good morning, Counsellor,” said he gayly. “What is the news to-day?”

Daumon bowed profoundly.

“Bad news, Count,” answered he. “I hear that the Duke de Champdoce is
seriously indisposed.”

“The Duke ill--impossible!”

“This girl has just given me the information. Tell us all about it,
Francoise.”

“I heard to-day at the Chateau that the doctors had quite given him
over.”

“But what is the matter with him?”

“I did not hear.”

M. de Puymandour stood perfectly aghast.

“It is always the way in this world,” Daumon philosophically said. “In
the midst of life we are in death!”

“Good morning, Counsellor,” said De Puymandour; “I must try and find out
something more about this.”

Breathless, and with his mind filled with anxiety, he hurried on.

All the servants and laborers on the Champdoce estate were gathered
together in a group, talking eagerly to each other, and as soon as M. de
Puymandour appeared, one of the servants, disengaging himself from his
fellows, came towards him. This was the Duke’s old, trustworthy servant.

“Well?” exclaimed M. de Puymandour.

“Oh, sir,” cried the old man, “this is too horrible; my poor master will
certainly die.”

“But I do not know what is the matter with him; no one has told me
anything, in fact.”

“It was terribly sudden,” answered the man. “It was about this time
the day before yesterday that the Duke was alone with M. Norbert in the
dining-room. All at once we heard a great outcry. We ran in and saw
my poor master lying senseless on the ground, his face purple and
distorted.”

“He must have had a fit of apoplexy.”

“Not exactly; the doctor called it a rush of blood to the brain; at
least, I think that is what he said, and he added that the reason he
did not die on the spot was because in falling he had cut open his head
against the oaken sideboard, and the wound bled profusely. We carried
him up to his bed; he showed no signs of life, and now----”

“Well, how is he now?”

“No one dare give an opinion; my poor master is quite unconscious, and
should he recover--and I do not think for a moment that he will--the
doctor says his mind will have entirely gone.”

“Horrible! Too horrible! And a man of such intellectual power, too. I
shall not ask you to let me look at him, for I could do no good, and the
sight would upset me. But can I not see M. Norbert?”

“Pray, do not attempt to do so, sir.”

“I was his father’s intimate friend, and if the condolences of such a
one could assuage the affliction under which--”

“Impossible!” answered the man in a quick, eager manner. “M. Norbert was
with his father at the time of his seizure, and has given strict orders
that he is not to be disturbed on any account; but I must go to him at
once, for we are expecting the physicians who are coming from Poitiers.”

“Very well, then I will go now, but to-night I will send up one of my
people for news.”

With these words, M. de Puymandour walked slowly away, absorbed in
thought. The manner and expression of the servant had struck him as
extremely strange. He noted the fact that Norbert was alone with his
father at the time of the seizure, and, recalling to mind the opposition
he had met with from his daughter, he began to imagine that the Duke had
found his son rebellious, and that the apoplectic fit had been brought
on by a sudden access of passion. Interest and ambition working together
brought him singularly near the truth.

“If the Duke dies, or becomes a maniac,” thought he to himself, “the end
as regards us will be the same for Norbert will break off the match to a
certainty.”

He felt that such a proceeding would cause him to be more jeered at and
ridiculed than ever, and that the only path of escape left open to him
was to marry his daughter to the Marquis de Croisenois, which was a
most desirable alliance, in spite of all he had said against it. A
voice close to his ear aroused him from his reflections: it was that of
Daumon, who had come up unperceived.

“Was the girl’s information correct, Count?” asked he. “How are the Duke
and M. Norbert, for of course you have seen them both?”

“M. Norbert is too much agitated by the sad event to see any one.”

“Of course that was to be looked for,” returned the wily Counsellor;
“for the seizure was terribly sudden.”

M. de Puymandour was too much occupied with his own thoughts to spare
much pity for Norbert. He would have given a great deal to have known
what the young man was doing, and especially what he was thinking of at
the present moment.

The poor lad was standing by the bedside of his dying father, watching
eagerly for some indication, however slight, of returning life or
reason. The hours of horror and self-reproach had entirely changed
his feelings and ideas; for it was only at the instant when he saw his
father raise the poisoned wine to his lips that he saw his crime in all
its hideous enormity. His soul rose up in rebellion against his crime,
and the words, “Parricide! murderer!” seemed to ring in his ears like a
trumpet call. When his father fell to the ground, his instinct made him
shout for aid; but an instant afterwards terror took possession of
him, and, rushing from the house, he sought the open country, as though
striving to escape from himself.

Jean, the old servant, who had noticed Norbert’s strange look, was
seized with a terrible fear. Trusted as he was by both the Duke and
his son, he had many means of knowing all that was going on in the
household, and was no stranger to the differences that had arisen
recently between father and son. He knew how violent the tempers of both
were, and he also knew that some woman was urging on Norbert to a course
of open rebellion. He had seen the cruel blow dealt by the Duke, and had
wondered greatly when he saw Norbert return to the Chateau. Why had he
done so? He had been in the courtyard when Norbert threw the glass from
the window. Putting all these circumstances together, as soon as the
inanimate body of the Duke had been laid upon a bed, Jean went into the
dining-room, feeling sure that he should make some discovery which would
confirm his suspicions. The bottle from which the Duke had filled his
glass stood half emptied upon the table. With the greatest care, he
poured a few drops of its contents into the hollow of his hand, and
tasted it with the utmost caution. The wine still retained its customary
taste and scent. Not trusting, however, to this, Jean, after making
sure that he was not observed, carried the bottle to his own room, and
concealed it. After taking this precaution, he ordered one of the other
servants to remain by the side of the Duke until the arrival of the
doctor, and then went in search of Norbert.

For two hours his efforts were fruitless. Giving up his search in
despair, he turned once more to regain the Chateau, and, taking the path
through the wood, suddenly perceived a human form stretched on the turf
beneath a tree. He moved cautiously towards the figure, and at once
recognized Norbert. The faithful servant bent over his young master,
and shook him by the arm to arouse him from his state of stupor. At the
first touch, Norbert started to his feet with a shriek of terror. With
mingled fear and pity, Jean noticed the look that shone in the young
man’s eyes, more like that of some hunted animal than a human being.

“Do not be alarmed, M. Norbert; it is only I,” said he.

“And what do you want?”

“I came to look for you, and to entreat you to come back with me to
Champdoce.”

“Back to Champdoce?” repeated Norbert hoarsely; “no, never!”

“You must, Master Norbert; for your absence now would cause a terrible
scandal. Your place at this critical time is by the bedside of your
father.”

“Never! never!” repeated the poor boy; but he yielded passively when
Jean passed his arm through his, and led him away towards the Chateau.
Supported thus by the old man’s arm, he crossed the courtyard, and
ascended the staircase; but at his father’s door he withdrew his hand,
and struggled to get away.

“I will not; no, no, I cannot,” gasped he.

“You must and you shall,” returned the old man firmly. “Whatever your
feelings may be, no stain shall rest on the family honor.”

These words roused Norbert; he stepped across the room, and dropped on
his knees by the bed, placing his forehead upon his father’s icy hand.
He burst into a passion of tears and sobs, and the simple peasants, who
surrounded the couch of the insensible nobleman, breathed a sigh; for,
from his pallid face and burning eyes, they believed he must be mad.
They were not far out in this surmise; but the tears relieved his
over-wrought brain, and with this relief came the sense of intense
suffering. When the physician arrived, he was able to appear before him
merely as a deeply anxious son.

“There is no hope for the Duke, I regret to say,” said the medical man,
who felt that it was useless to keep Norbert in suspense. “There is a
feeble chance of saving his life; but even should we succeed in doing
so, his intellect will be irretrievably gone. This is a sad truth, but I
feel it my duty to inform you of it. I will come again to-morrow.”

As the doctor left the room, Norbert threw himself into a chair, and
clasped his hands round his head, which throbbed until it seemed as if
it would burst. For more than half an hour he sat motionless, and then
started to his feet with a stifled cry; for he remembered the bottle
into which he had poured the poison, and which had been left on the
table. Had any one drunk from it? What had become of it? The agony of
his mind gave him the necessary strength to descend to the dining-room;
but the bottle was not on the table, nor was it in its customary place
in the cupboard. The unhappy boy was looking for it everywhere, when the
door silently opened, and Jean appeared on the threshold. The expression
upon his young master’s face so startled the faithful old man that he
nearly dropped the lighted candle that he carried in his hand.

“Why are you here, Master Norbert?” asked he in a voice that trembled
with emotion.

“I was looking for----I wanted to find----,” faltered Norbert.

Jean’s suspicions at once became certainties; he walked up to his young
master, and whispered in his ear,--

“You are looking for the Duke’s bottle of wine, are you not? It is quite
safe; for I have taken it to my room. To-morrow the contents shall be
emptied away, and there will be no proof existing.”

Jean spoke in such a low voice that Norbert guessed rather than heard
his words, and yet it seemed that the accusing whisper resounded like
thunder through the Chateau, filling the old house from cellar to
roof-tree.

“Be quiet,” said he, laying his hand on the old man’s lips, and gazing
around him with wild and affrighted glances.

A more complete confession could hardly have been made.

“Fear nothing, Master Norbert,” answered Jean; “we are quite alone. I
know that there are words which should never be even breathed; and if I
have ventured to speak, it was because it was my duty to warn you, and
to inculcate on you the necessity of caution.”

Norbert was filled with horror when he saw that the old man believed him
to be really guilty.

“Jean,” cried he, “you are wrong in your suspicions. I tell you that my
father never tasted that wine. I snatched the glass from him before
his lips had touched it. I flung it out into the courtyard, and, if you
search, you will find its scattered fragments there still.”

“I am not sitting in judgment upon you; what you tell me to believe I am
ready to accept.”

“Ah!” cried Norbert passionately, “he does not believe me; he thinks
that I am guilty. I swear to you by all that I hold most sacred in this
world, that I am innocent of this deed.”

The attached servant shook his head with a melancholy air.

“Of course, of course,” said he; “but it is for us two to save the honor
of the house of Champdoce. Should it happen that any suspicions should
be aroused, put all the guilt upon my shoulders. I will defend myself in
a manner which will only fix the crime more firmly upon me. I will not
throw away the bottle, but will retain it in my room, so that it may be
found there, and its contents will be a damnatory evidence against me.
What matters it how a poor man like me is sent out of the world? but
with you it is different. You--”

Norbert wrung his hands in abject despair; the sublime devotion of the
old servant showed how firmly Jean believed in his criminality. He was
about to assert his innocence further, when the loud sound of a closing
door was heard above stairs.

“Hush!” said the old man; “some one approaches; we must not be seen
whispering together like two plotters, for their suspicions would be
certainly awakened; and I fear that my face or your eyes will reveal the
secret. Quick, go upstairs, and endeavor, as soon as possible, to resume
your calmness. I beg you not to compromise the honor of your name, which
is in deadly peril.”

Without another word Norbert obeyed. His father was alone, and only
the man to whom Jean had delegated the task of watcher remained by his
bedside. At the sight of his young master he rose.

“The prescription which the doctor ordered to be made up has arrived,”
 said he. “I have administered a dose to the Duke, and it seems to me
that the result has been favorable.”

Norbert drew up a heavy arm-chair to the foot of the bed, and took his
seat upon it. From this position he could see his father’s face. His
brain was dazed, and it was with the utmost difficulty that he could
recall the chain of events which had drawn him towards the abyss into
which he had so nearly been precipitated.

The veil had been taken from his eyes, and he now saw with perfect
clearness and seemed again to hear his father’s voice as it roughly
warned him that the woman he loved was a mere plotter, who cared not
for him, but was scheming for his fortune and his name. Then he had been
furiously indignant and looked upon the words as almost blasphemous, but
now he saw that his father was right. How was it that he had not before
seen that Diana was flinging herself in his way, and that all her
affected openness and simplicity were merely the perfections of art, and
that step by step she had led him to the brink of the terrible precipice
which yawned before him? The whole hideous part as played by Daumon was
no longer a sealed book to him. She whom he had looked on as a pure and
innocent girl was merely the accomplice of a scheming villain like the
Counsellor, and after exciting his hatred and anger almost to madness,
had placed the poison which was to take his father’s life in his hands.
A cold shiver ran through him as he realized this, and all his ardent
love for Diana de Laurebourg was changed into a feeling of loathing and
disgust.

At last the first pale rays of dawn broke through the casement, but
before that Norbert, worn out with conflicting emotions, had fallen into
a restless and uneasy sleep, and when he awoke the doctor was standing
by the bedside of the sick man. At the first sound made by Norbert as
he stirred in the chair, the doctor came towards him, saying, “We shall
preserve his life.”

This prognostication was complete, for that very evening the Duke de
Champdoce was able to move in his bed, the next day he uttered some
incoherent words, and later on asked for food; but the will of iron had
passed away, the features had lost their expression of determination,
and the eye the glitter of pride and power. Never again would the Duke
be able to exert that keen, stern intellect which had enabled him to
influence all those around him; and in this terrible state of imbecility
the haughty nobleman would ever remain, fed and looked after like a
child, with no thought beyond his desires and his warm fire, and without
a care for anything that was going on in the world around him.

After the enormity of his crime had been brought before him, the
greatness of the punishment that he must endure now came across
Norbert’s mind. It was only now that Jean had ventured to tell him of M.
de Puymandour’s visit; and such a change had taken place in Norbert that
he looked upon this visit as a special arrangement made by Providence.

“My father’s will shall be carried out in every respect,” said he to
himself, and without an hour’s delay he wrote to M. de Puymandour,
begging him to call, and hoping that the grief which had fallen upon him
had in no way altered the plan which had already been arranged.



CHAPTER X.

A THUNDERBOLT.

As the miner, who sets fire to the fuse and seeks shelter from the
coming explosion, so did Diana de Laurebourg return to her father’s
house after her visit to Daumon. During dinner it was impossible for
her to utter a word, and it was with the greatest difficulty that she
succeeded in swallowing a mouthful. Fortunately neither her father
nor mother took any notice of her. They had that day received a letter
announcing the news that their son, for whose future prosperity they
had sacrificed Diana, was lying dangerously ill in Paris, where he was
living in great style. They were in terrible affliction, and spoke of
starting at once, so as to be with him. They therefore expressed no
surprise when, on leaving the table, Diana pleaded a severe headache as
an excuse for retiring to her own room. When once she was alone, having
dismissed her maid, she heaved a deep sigh of relief. She never thought
of retiring to bed, but throwing open her window, leaned out with her
elbow on the window-sill.

It seemed to her that Norbert would certainly make some effort to
see her, or at any rate by some means to let her know whether he had
succeeded or failed.

“But I must be patient,” murmured she, “for I can’t hear anything until
the afternoon of to-morrow.”

In spite, however, of her resolutions, patience fled from her mind, and
as soon as the servants had begun moving about, she went out into the
garden and took up a position which commanded a view of the highroad,
but no one appeared. The bell rang for breakfast. Again she had to seat
herself at table with her parents, and the terrible penance of the
past evening had to be repeated. At three o’clock she could endure the
suspense no longer, and making her escape from the Chateau, she went
over to Daumon, who, she felt, must have obtained some intelligence.
Even if she found that he knew nothing, it would be a relief to speak to
him and to ask him when he thought that this terrible delay would come
to an end. But she got no comfort at Daumon’s, for he had passed as
miserable a night as herself, and was nearly dead with affright. He had
remained in his office all the morning, starting at the slightest sound,
and though he was as anxious as Diana for information, he had only gone
out a little before her arrival. He met Mademoiselle Laurebourg on his
return at the door of his cottage, and taking her inside, he informed
her that at a late hour the night before the doctor had been sent for
to Champdoce to attend the Duke, who was supposed to be dying. Then he
reproved her bitterly for her imprudence in visiting him.

“Do you wish,” said he, “to show all Bevron that you and I are Norbert’s
accomplices?”

“What do you mean?” asked she.

“I mean that if the Duke does not die, we are lost. When I say we, I
mean myself, for you, as the daughter of a noble family, will be sure to
escape scot free, and I shall be left to pay for all.”

“You said that the effect was immediate.”

“I did say so, and I thought so too. Ah, if I had but reflected a
little! You will however see that I do not intend to give in without
a fight. I will defend myself by accusing you. I am an honest man, and
have been your dupe. You have thought to make me a mere tool; your fine
Norbert is a fool, but he will pay for his doings with his head all the
same.”

At these gross insults Mademoiselle de Laurebourg rose to her feet and
attempted to speak, but he cut her short.

“I can’t stop to pick and choose my words, for I feel at the present
moment as if the axe of the guillotine were suspended over my head. Now
just oblige me by getting out of this, and never show your face here
again.”

“As you like. I will communicate with Champdoce.”

“You shall not,” exclaimed Daumon with a gesture of menace. “You might
as well go and ask how the Duke enjoyed the taste of the poison.”

His words, however, did not deter Diana, for any risk seemed preferable
to her than the present state of suspense.

With a glance of contempt at the Counsellor she left the cottage,
determined to act as she thought fit.

After Diana’s departure, Daumon felt too that he must learn how matters
were going on, and going over to the Widow Rouleau’s, he despatched her
daughter Francoise to the Chateau de Champdoce, under the pretext that
he wanted some money which he had lent to one of the Duke’s servants.
He had instructed the girl so cunningly that she had no suspicion of
the real end and object of her mission, and set out on it with the most
implicit confidence. He had not long to wait for her return, for in
about half an hour his messenger returned.

“Well,” said he anxiously, “has the scamp sent my money?”

“No, sir, I am sorry to say that I could not even get to speak to him.”

“How was that? Was he not at Champdoce?”

“I cannot even tell you that. Ever since the Duke has been ill, the
great gates of the Chateau have been bolted, for it seems that the poor
old gentleman is at his last gasp.”

“Did you not hear what was the matter with him?”

“No, sir, the little I have told you I got from a stable boy, who spoke
to me through a grating in the gate, but before he could say ten words
Jean came up and sent him off.”

“Do you mean Jean, the Duke’s confidential man?”

“Just so,” returned the girl, “and very angry he was. He abused the lad
and told him to be off to the stables, and then asked, ‘Well, my girl,
and pray what do you want?’ I told him that I had come with a message
to the man Mechenit; but before I could say any more he broke in with,
‘Well, he isn’t here, you can call again in a month.’”

“You silly little fool, was that all you said?”

“Not quite, for I said that I must see Mechenit. Then, looking at me
very suspiciously, he said, ‘And who sent you here, you little spy?’”

The Counsellor started.

“Indeed! and what did you say in return?” asked he.

“Why, of course I said that you had sent me.”

“Yes, yes, that was right.”

“And then Jean rubbed his hand over his chin, and looking at me very
curiously, said sternly,--

“‘So you have come from the Counsellor, have you? Ah, I see it all, and
so shall he one of these days.’”

At these words Daumon felt his knees give way under him; but all further
questioning was stopped by the appearance of M. de Puymandour on his way
to Champdoce. He therefore dismissed Francoise, and awaited the return
of this gentleman, from whom he hoped to gain the fullest information
regarding the Duke’s malady. The intelligence which he received calmed
him a little, and repenting of his treatment of Diana, he went and hung
about the gates of the Chateau de Laurebourg, until he was lucky enough
to catch sight of the girl in the garden, for her anxiety would not
permit her to remain in the house. He beckoned to her, and then said,--

“M. Norbert did not make the dose strong enough. The Duke is as strong
as a horse; but it is all right, for should he live, he will be an
idiot, and so our end is as much gained as if he had died.”

“But why does not Norbert write to me?” asked Diana seriously.

“Why, because he has some faint glimmerings of common sense. How do you
know that he may not have half a dozen spies about him? You must wait.”

Diana and the Counsellor waited for a week, but Norbert made no sign.
Diana suffered agonies, and the days seemed to pass with leaden feet.
Sunday came at last. The Marchioness de Laurebourg had attended early
Mass, and had given orders that her daughter should go to high Mass
under the escort of her maid. Diana was highly pleased with this
arrangement, for she hoped to have a chance of seeing Norbert, but she
was disappointed. The Mass had commenced when she entered, but the spot
occupied by the Duke and his son was vacant. She followed the service
in a purely mechanical manner, and at last noticed that the priest had
taken his place in the pulpit.

This was generally an exciting moment for the inhabitants of Bevron,
for it was immediately before the sermon that the banns of marriage
were published. The priest gazed blandly down upon the expectant crowd,
coughed slightly, used his handkerchief, and finally took from his
breviary a sheet of paper.

“I have,” said he, “to publish the banns of marriage between----” here
he made a little pause, and all the congregation were on the tenterhooks
of expectation; “between,” he continued, “Monsieur Louis Norbert,
Marquis de Champdoce, a minor, and only legitimate son of Guillaume
Caesar, Duke de Champdoce, and of his wife Isabella de Barnaville, now
deceased, but who both formerly resided in this parish, and Desiree
Anne Marie Palouzet, minor, and legitimate daughter of Rene Augustus
Palouzet, Count de Puymandour, and of Zoe Staplet, his wife, but now
deceased, also residents of this parish.”

This was the thunderbolt launched from the pulpit, which seemed to crush
Diana into the earth, and her heart almost ceased to beat.

“Let any one,” continued the priest, “who knows of any impediment to
this marriage, take warning that he or she must acquaint us with it,
under the penalty of excommunication. At the same time let him be warned
under the same penalty to bring forward nothing in malice or without
some foundation.”

An impediment! What irony lay veiled beneath that word. Mademoiselle
de Laurebourg knew of more than one. A wild desire filled her heart to
start from her seat and cry out,--

“It is impossible for this marriage to take place, for that Norbert was
her affianced husband in the sight of Heaven, and that he was bound to
her by the strongest of all links, that of crime.”

But by a gigantic effort she controlled herself, and remained
motionless, pallid as a spectre, but with a forced smile on her lips,
and with unparalleled audacity made a little sign to one of her female
friends, which plainly meant, “This is, indeed, something unexpected.”
 All her mind was concentrated to preserve a calm and unmoved aspect. The
singing of the choir seemed to die away, the strong odor of the incense
almost overpowered her, and she felt that unless the service soon came
to an end, she must fall insensible from her chair. At last the priest
turned again to the congregation and droned out the _Ita missa est_,
and all was over. Diana grasped the arm of her maid and forced her away,
without saying a word. As she reached home, a servant ran up to her with
a face upon which agitation was strongly painted.

“Ah, mademoiselle,” gasped he, “such a frightful calamity. Your father
and mother are expecting you; it is really too terrible.”

Diana hastened to obey the summons. Her father and mother were seated
near each other, evidently in deep distress. She went towards them, and
the Marquis, drawing her to him, pressed her against his heart.

“Poor child! My dear daughter!” murmured he, “you are all that is left
to us now.”

Their son had died, and the sad news had been brought to the Chateau
while Diana was at Mass. By her brother’s death she had succeeded to a
princely fortune, and would now be one of the richest heiresses for many
a mile round. Had this event happened but a week before, her marriage to
Norbert would have met with no opposition from his father, and she would
never have plunged into this abyss of crime. It was more than the irony
of fate; it was the manifest punishment of an angry Divinity. She shed
no tear for her brother’s death. Her thoughts were all firmly fixed on
Norbert, and that fearful announcement made in the house of God rang
still in her ears. What could be the meaning of this sudden arrangement,
and why had the marriage been so suddenly decided on?

She felt that some mystery lay beneath it all, and vowed that she would
fathom it to its nethermost depths. What was it that had taken place
at Champdoce? Had the Duke, contrary to Daumon’s prognostications,
recovered? Had he discovered his son’ insidious attack upon his life,
and only pardoned it upon a blind compliance being given to his will?
She passed away the whole day in these vain suppositions, and tried to
think of every plan to stay the celebration of this union, for she had
not given up her hopes, nor did she yet despair of ultimate success. Her
new and unlooked-for fortune placed a fresh weapon at her disposal, and
she felt that the victory would yet be hers if she could but see Norbert
again, were it but for a single instant. Was she not certain of the
absolute power that she exercised over him, for had she not by a few
words induced him to enter upon the terrible path of crime? She must see
him, and that without a moment’s delay, for the danger was imminent. A
day now would be worth a year hereafter. She determined that, upon that
very night, she would visit Champdoce. A little after midnight, when the
inhabitants of the Chateau were wrapped in slumber, she crept on tiptoe
down the grand staircase, and made her exit by a side door. She had
arranged her plan as to how she would find Norbert, for he had often
described the interior arrangements of the Chateau to her. She knew that
his room was on the ground floor, with two windows looking on to the
courtyard. When, however, she reached the old Chateau, she hesitated.
Suppose that she should go to the wrong window. But she had gone too far
to recede, and determined that if any one else than Norbert should open
the window, she would turn and fly. She tapped at the window softly,
and then more loudly. She had made no mistake. Norbert threw open the
window, with the words,--

“Who is there?”

“It is I, Norbert; I, Diana.”

“What do you want?” asked Norbert in an agitated tone of voice. “What do
you want to do here?”

She looked at him anxiously and hardly recognized his face, so great was
the change that had come over it. It absolutely terrified her.

“Are you going to marry Mademoiselle de Puymandour?” asked she.

“Yes I am.”

“And yet you pretended to love me?”

“Yes, I loved you ardently, devotedly, with a love that drove me to
crime; but you had no love; you cared but for rank and fortune.”

Diana raised her hands to heaven in an agony of despair.

“Should I be here at this hour if what you say is true?” asked she
wildly. “My brother is dead, and I am as wealthy as you are, Norbert,
and yet I am here. You accuse me of being mercenary, and for what
reason? Was it because I refused to fly with you from my father’s house?
Oh, Norbert, it was but the happiness of our future life that I strove
to protect. It was----”

Her speech failed her, and her eyes dilated with horror, for the door
behind Norbert opened, and the Duke de Champdoce entered the room,
uttering a string of meaningless words, and laughing with that mirthless
laugh which is so sure a sign of idiotcy.

“Can you understand now,” exclaimed Norbert, pointing to his
father, “why the remembrance of my love for you has become a hateful
reminiscence? Do you dare to talk of happiness to me, when this spectre
of a meditated crime will ever rise between us?” and with a meaning
gesture he pointed to the open gate of the courtyard.

She turned; but before passing away, she cast a glance upon him full
of the deepest fury and jealousy. She could not forgive Norbert for his
share in the crime that she herself prompted,--for the crime which had
blighted all her hopes of happiness. Her farewell was a menace.

“Norbert,” she said, as she glided through the gate like a spectre of
the night, “I will have revenge, and that right soon.”



CHAPTER XI.

MARRIAGE BELLS; FUNERAL KNELLS.

Three days of hard work had completed all the arrangements necessary
for the marriage of Norbert and Mademoiselle de Puymandour. He had been
presented to the lady, and neither had received a favorable impression
of the other. At the very first glance each one felt that inevitable
repugnance which the lapse of years can never efface. While dreading the
anger of her obdurate father, Marie had at one time thought of confiding
the secret of her attachment to George de Croisenois to Norbert, for she
had the idea that if she told him that her heart was another’s, he
might withdraw his pretensions to her hand; but several times, when
the opportunity occurred, fear restrained her tongue, and she let the
propitious moment pass away. Had she done so, Norbert would at once have
eagerly grasped at a pretext for absolving himself from a promise which
he had made mentally of obeying in all things a father who now, alas!
had no means of enforcing his commands.

Each day he paid his visit to Puymandour as an accepted suitor, bearing
a large bouquet with him, which he regularly presented to his betrothed
upon his entrance into the drawing-room, which she accepted with a
painful flush rising to her cheek. The pair conversed upon indifferent
topics, while an aged female connection sat in the room to play
propriety. For many hours they would remain thus, the girl bending over
her fancy work, and he vainly striving to find topics of conversation,
and, consequently, saying hardly anything, in spite of Marie’s feeble
efforts to assist in the conversation. It was a slight relief when M.
de Puymandour proposed a walk; but this was a rare occurrence, for that
gentleman usually declared that he never had a moment’s leisure. Never
had he seemed so gay and busy since the approaching marriage of
his daughter had been the theme of every tongue. He took all the
preparations for the ceremony into his own hands, for he had determined
that everything should be conducted on a scale of unparalleled
magnificence. The Chateau was refurnished, and all the carriages
repainted and varnished, while the Champdoce and the Puymandour arms
were quartered together on their panels. This coat of arms was to be
seen everywhere--over the doors, on the walls, and engraved on the
silver, and it was believed that M. de Puymandour would have made no
objection to their being branded on his breast.

In the midst of all this turmoil and bustle Norbert and Marie grew
sadder and sadder as each day passed on. One day M. de Puymandour
heard so astounding a piece of intelligence that he hurried into the
drawing-room, where he knew that he should find the lovers (as he styled
them) together.

“Well, my children,” exclaimed he, “you have set such an excellent
example, that everybody seems disposed to copy you, and the mayor and
the priest will be kept to their work rather tightly this year.”

His daughter tried to put on an appearance of interest at this speech.

“Yes,” continued M. de Puymandour, “I have just heard of a marriage that
will come off almost directly after yours has been celebrated, and will
make a stir, I can assure you.”

“And whose is that, pray?”

“You are acquainted, I presume,” returned the father, addressing himself
to Norbert, “with the son of the Count de Mussidan?”

“What, the Viscount Octave?”

“The same.”

“He lives in Paris, does he not?”

“Yes, generally; but he has been staying at Mussidan, and in the short
space of a week has managed to lose his heart here; and to whom do you
think? Come, give a guess.”

“We cannot think who it can be, my dear father,” said Marie, “and we are
devoured with curiosity.”

“It is reported that the Viscount de Mussidan has proposed for the hand
of Mademoiselle de Laurebourg.”

“Why,” remarked Marie, “it is only three weeks since her brother died!”

Norbert flushed scarlet, and then turned a livid white; so great was his
agitation at hearing this news, that he nearly dropped the album which
he held in his hand.

“I like the Viscount,” continued M. de Puymandour, “while Mademoiselle
Diana is a charming girl. She is very handsome, and, I believe, has many
talents; and she is a good model for you to copy, Marie, as you are so
soon to become a duchess.”

When he got upon his favorite hobby, it was very difficult to check M.
de Puymandour. His daughter, therefore, waited until he had concluded,
and then left the room, under the pretext of giving an order to the
servants. The Count hardly noticed her absence, as he had still Norbert
at his mercy.

“Reverting again to Mademoiselle Diana,” said he: “she looks charming
in black, for women should look upon a death in the family as a most
fortunate occurrence; but I ought not to be praising her to you, who are
so well acquainted with her.”

“I?” exclaimed Norbert.

“Yes, you. I do not suppose that you intend to deny that you have had a
little flirtation with her?”

“I do not understand you.”

“Well, _I_ do then, my boy; I heard all about your making love to her.
Why, you are really blushing! What is up now?”

“I can assure you----”

De Puymandour burst into a loud laugh.

“I have heard a good deal of your little country walks, and all the
pretty things that you used to say to each other.”

In vain did Norbert deny the whole thing, for his intended father-in-law
would not believe him; and at last he got so annoyed that he refused to
remain and dine with the Count, alleging anxiety for his father as an
excuse. He returned home as soon as he possibly could, much agitated by
what he had heard; and as he was walking rapidly on, he heard his name
called by some one who was running after him: Norbert turned round, and
found himself face to face with Montlouis.

“I have been here a week,” said the young man. “I am here with my
patron, for I have one now. I am now with the Viscount de Mussidan, as
his private secretary. M. Octave is not the most agreeable man in the
world to get on with, as he gets into the most violent passions on very
trivial occasions; but he has a good heart, after all, and I am very
pleased with the position I have gained.”

“I am very glad to hear it, Montlouis, very much pleased indeed.”

“And you, Marquis, I hear, are to marry Mademoiselle de Puymandour; I
could scarcely credit the news.”

“And why, pray?”

“Because I remembered when we used to wait outside a certain garden
wall, until we saw a certain door open discreetly.”

“But you must efface all this from your memory, Montlouis.”

“Do not be alarmed; save to you, my lips would never utter a word of
this. No one else would ever make me speak.”

“Stop!” said Norbert, with an angry gesture. “Do you venture to say--”

“To say what?”

“I wish you to understand that Mademoiselle Diana is as free from blame
to-day as she was when first I met her. She has been indiscreet, but
nothing more, I swear it before heaven!”

“I believe you perfectly.”

In reality Montlouis did not believe one word of Norbert’s assertion,
and the young Marquis could read this in his companion’s face.

“The more so,” continued the secretary, “as the young lady is about to
be married to my friend and patron.”

“But where,” asked Norbert, “did the Viscount meet with Mademoiselle de
Laurebourg?”

“In Paris; the Viscount and her brother were very intimate, and nursed
him during his last illness, and as soon as the scheming parents heard
of the Viscount being in the neighborhood they asked him to call on
them. Of course he did so, and saw Mademoiselle Diana, and returned home
in a perfect frenzy of love.”

Norbert seemed so incensed at this that Montlouis broke off his recital,
feeling confident that the Marquis still loved Diana, and was consumed
with the flame of jealousy.

“But, of course,” he added carelessly, “nothing is yet settled.”

Norbert, however, was too agitated to listen to the idle gossip of
Montlouis any longer, so he pressed his hand and left him rather
abruptly, walking away at the top of his speed, leaving his friend
silent with astonishment. It seemed to Norbert as if he was imprisoned
in one of those iron dungeons he had read of, which slowly contracted
day by day, and at last crushed their victims to atoms. He saw Diana
married to the Viscount de Mussidan, and compelled to meet daily the man
who knew all about her illicit meetings with her former lover, and who
had more than once, when Norbert was unable to leave Champdoce, been
intrusted with a letter or a message for her. And how would Montlouis
behave under the circumstances? Would he possess the necessary tact and
coolness to carry him through so difficult a position? What would be the
end of this cruel concatenation of circumstances? Would Diana be able to
endure the compromising witness of her youthful error? She would eagerly
seek out some pretext for his dismissal; he could easily detect this,
and in his anger at the loss of a position which he had long desired,
would turn on her and repeat the whole story. Should Montlouis let loose
his tongue, the Viscount, indignant at the imposition that had been
practised upon him, would separate from his wife. What would be Diana’s
conduct when she found herself left thus alone, and despised by the
society of which she had hoped to be a queen? Would she not, in her
turn, seek to revenge herself on Norbert? He had just asked himself
whether at this juncture death would not be a blessing to him, when he
caught sight of Francoise, the daughter of the Widow Rouleau, close by
him. For two hours she had been awaiting his coming, concealed behind a
hedge.

“I have something to give you, my lord Marquis,” said she.

He took the letter that she held out to him, and, opening it, he read,--

“You said that I did not love you--perhaps this was but a test to prove
my love. I am ready to fly with you to-night. I shall lose all, but
it will be for your sake. Reflect, Norbert; there is yet time, but
to-morrow it will be too late.”

These were the words that Mademoiselle de Laurebourg had had the courage
to pen, which to the former lover were full of the most thrilling
eloquence. The usually bold, firm writing of Diana was, in the letter
before him, confused and almost illegible, showing the writer’s frame of
mind. There were blurs and blisters upon the paper as though tears had
fallen upon it, perhaps because the writing had been made purposely
irregular and drops of water are an excellent substitute for tears.

“Does she really love me?” murmured he.

He hesitated; yes, he absolutely hesitated, impressed by the idea that
for him she was ready to sacrifice position and honor, that he had but
to raise his finger and she was his, and that in the space of a couple
of hours she might be the companion of his flight to some far-distant
land. His pulse throbbed madly, and he could scarcely draw his breath,
when some fifty paces down the road he caught sight of the figure of a
man; it was his father. This was the second time that the Duke by his
mere presence had spread the web of Diana’s temptations and allurements.

“Never!” exclaimed Norbert, with such fire and energy that the girl fell
back a pace. “Never! no, never!” and crushing up the letter, he dashed
it upon the ground, from whence Francoise picked it up as he ran forward
to meet his father. The Duke had recovered from his attack as far as the
mere fact of his life not having been sacrificed; he could walk, sleep,
eat and drink as he had formerly done. He could look at the laborers in
the fields or the horses in the stables, but five minutes afterwards
he had no recollection of what he heard or saw. The sudden loss of his
father’s aid would have caused Norbert much embarrassment had it not
been for the shrewdness and sagacity of M. de Puymandour, who had
assisted him greatly. But all these arrangements which had to be
made had necessarily delayed the wedding. But it came at last; M. de
Puymandour took absolute possession of him, and after the unhappy young
man had passed a sleepless night, he was allowed no time for reflection.
At eleven o’clock he entered the carriage, and was driven fast to the
Mayor’s office, and from thence to the chapel, and by twelve o’clock
all was finished and he fettered for life. A little before dinner the
Viscount de Mussidan came to offer his congratulations, and gained
them at the same time for himself by announcing his speedy union with
Mademoiselle Diana de Laurebourg.

Five days later the newly married pair took possession of their mansion
at Champdoce. Hampered with a wife whom he had never affected to love,
and whose tearful face was a constant reproach to him, and with a
father who was an utter imbecile, the thoughts of suicide more than once
crossed Norbert’s brain. One day a servant informed Norbert that his
father refused to get up. A doctor was sent for, and he declared that
the Duke was in a highly critical condition. A violent reaction
had taken place, and all day the invalid was in a state of intense
excitement. The power of speech, which he had almost entirely lost,
seemed to have returned to him in a miraculous manner; at length,
however, he became delirious, and Norbert dismissed the servants who had
been watching by his father’s bed, lest in the incoherent ravings of the
invalid, the words “Parricide” or “Poison” should break forth. At eleven
o’clock he grew calmer, and slept a little, when all at once he started
up in bed, exclaiming: “Come here, Norbert,” and Jean, who had remained
by his old master’s side, ran up to the bed and was much startled at the
sight. The Duke had entirely recovered his former appearance. His eyes
flashed, and his lips trembled, as they always did when he was greatly
excited.

“Pardon, father; pardon,” cried Norbert, falling upon his knees.

The Duke softly stretched out his hand. “I was mad with family pride,”
 said he; “and God punished me. My son, I forgive you.”

Norbert’s sobs broke the stillness of the chamber.

“My son, I renounce my ideas,” continued the Duke. “I do not desire you
to wed Mademoiselle de Puymandour if you feel that you cannot love her.”

“Father,” answered Norbert, “I have obeyed your wishes, and she is now
my wife.”

A gleam of terrible anguish passed over the Duke’s countenance; he
raised his hands as though to shield his eyes from some grizzly spectre,
and in tones of heartrending agony exclaimed: “Too late! Too late!”

He fell back in terrible convulsions, and in a moment was dead. If, as
has been often asserted, the veil of the hereafter is torn asunder, then
the Duke de Champdoce had a glimpse into a terrible future.



CHAPTER XII.

“RASH WORD, RASH DEED.”

After her repulse by Norbert, Diana, with the cold chill of death in her
heart, made her way back to the Chateau of the De Laurebourgs, over
the same road which but a short time before she had traveled full of
expectation and hope. The sudden appearance of the Duke de Champdoce
had filled her with alarm, but her imagination was not of that kind upon
which unpleasant impressions remain for any long period; for after she
had regained her room, and thrown aside her out-door attire, and removed
all signs of mud-stains, she once more became herself, and even laughed
a little rippling laugh at all her own past alarms. Overwhelmed with the
shame of her repulse, she had threatened Norbert; but as she reasoned
calmly, she felt that it was not he for whom she felt the most violent
animosity. All her hatred was reserved for that woman who had come
between her and her lover--for Marie de Puymandour. Some hidden feeling
warned her that she must look into Marie’s past life for some reason for
the rupture of her engagement with Norbert, though the banns had already
been published. This was the frame of mind in which Diana was when the
Viscount de Mussidan was introduced to her, the friend of the brother
whose untimely death had left her such a wealthy heiress. He was tall
and well made, with handsomely chiseled features; and, endowed with
physical strength and health, Octave de Mussidan had the additional
advantages of noble descent and princely fortune. Two women, both
renowned for their wit and beauty, his aunt and his mother, had been
intrusted with the education which would but enable him to shine in
society.

Dispatched to Paris, with an ample allowance, at the age of twenty, he
found himself, thanks to his birth and connections, in the very center
of the world of fashion. At the sight of Mademoiselle de Laurebourg
his heart was touched for the first time. Diana had never been more
charmingly fascinating than she was at this period. Octave de Mussidan
did not suit her fancy; there was too great a difference between him and
Norbert, and nothing would ever efface from her memory the recollection
of the young Marquis as he had appeared before her on the first day of
their meeting in the Forest of Bevron, clad in his rustic garb, with
the game he had shot dangling from his hand. She delighted to feast her
recollection, and thought fondly of his shyness and diffidence when
he hardly ventured to raise his eyes to hers. Octave, however, fell a
victim at the first glance he caught of Diana, and permitted himself
to be swept away by the tide of his private emotions, which upon every
visit that he paid to Laurebourg became more powerful and resistless.
Like a true knight, who wishes that he himself should gain the love of
his lady fair, Octave addressed himself directly to Diana, and after
many attempts succeeded in finding himself alone with her, and then he
asked her if she could permit him to crave of her father, the Marquis
de Laurebourg, the honor of her hand. This appeal surprised her, for
she had been so much absorbed in her own troubles that she had not
even suspected his love for her. She was not even frightened at his
declaration, as is the patient when the surgeon informs him that he
must use the knife. She glanced at De Mussidan strangely as he put this
question to her, and after a moment’s hesitation, replied that she would
give him a reply the next day. After thinking the matter over, she wrote
and dispatched the letter which Francoise had carried to Norbert. The
prisoner in the dock as he anxiously awaits the sentence of his judge,
can alone appreciate Diana’s state of agonized suspense as she stood at
the end of the park at Laurebourg awaiting the return of the girl. Her
anxiety of mind lasted nearly three hours, when Francoise hurried up
breathless.

“What did the Marquis say?” asked Diana.

“He said nothing; that is, he cried out very angrily, ‘Never! no,
never!’”

In order to prevent any suspicions arising in the girl’s mind,
Mademoiselle de Laurebourg contrived to force a laugh, exclaiming: “Ah!
indeed, that is just what I expected.”

Francoise seemed as if she had something to say on the tip of her
tongue, but Diana hurriedly dismissed her, pressing a coin into her
hand. All anxiety was now at an end; for her there was no longer any
suspense or anguish; all her struggles were now futile, and she felt
grateful to Octave for having given her his love. “Once married,”
 thought she, “I shall be free, and shall be able to follow the Duke and
Duchess to Paris.”

Upon her return to the Chateau, she found Octave awaiting her. His eyes
put the question that his lips did not dare to utter; and, placing her
hand in his with a gentle inclination of her head, she assented to his
prayer.

This act on her part would, she believed, free her from the past; but
she was in error. Upon hearing that his dastardly attempt at murder had
failed, the Counsellor was for the time utterly overwhelmed with terror,
but the news that he had gained from M. de Puymandour calmed his mind
in a great measure. He was not, however, completely reassured until he
heard for certain that the Duke had become a helpless maniac, and that
the doctor, having given up all hopes of his patient’s recovery, had
discontinued his visits to the Chateau. As soon as he had heard that
Norbert’s marriage had been so soon followed by his father’s death, he
imagined that every cloud had disappeared from the sky. All danger now
seemed at an end, and he recalled with glee that he had in his strong
box the promissory notes, signed by Norbert, to the amount of twenty
thousand francs, which he could demand at any moment, now that Norbert
was the reigning lord of Champdoce. The first step he took was to hang
about the neighborhood of Laurebourg, for he thought that some
lucky chance would surely favor him with an opportunity for a little
conversation with Mademoiselle Diana. For several days in succession
he was unsuccessful, but at last he was delighted at seeing her alone,
walking in the direction of Bevron. Without her suspecting it, he
followed her until the road passed through a small plantation, when he
came up and addressed her.

“What do you want with me?” asked she angrily.

He made no direct reply; but after apologizing for his boldness, he
began to offer his congratulations upon her approaching marriage, which
was now the talk of the whole neighborhood, and which pleased him much,
as M. de Mussidan was in every way superior to--

“Is that all you have to say to me?” asked Diana, interrupting his
string of words.

As she turned from him, he had the audacity to lay his hand upon the
edge of her jacket.

“I have more to say,” said he, “if you will honor me with your
attention. Something about--you can guess what.”

“About whom or what?” asked she, making no effort to hide her supreme
contempt.

He smiled, glanced around to see that no one was within hearing, and
then said in a low voice,--

“It is about the bottle of poison.”

She recoiled, as though some venomous reptile had started up in front of
her.

“What do you mean?” cried she. “How dare you speak to me thus?”

All his servile manner had now returned to him, and he uttered a string
of complaints in a whining tone of voice. She had played him a most
unfair trick, and had stolen a certain little glass bottle from his
office; and if anything had leaked out, his head would have paid the
penalty of a crime in which he had no hand. He was quite ill, owing to
the suspense and anxiety he had endured; sleep would not come to his
bed, and the pangs of remorse tortured him continually.

“Enough,” cried Diana, stamping her foot angrily on the ground. “Enough,
I say.”

“Well, mademoiselle, I can no longer remain here. I am far too nervous,
and I wish to go to some foreign country.”

“Come, let me hear the real meaning of this long preface.”

Thus adjured, Daumon spoke. He only wished for some little memento
to cheer his days and nights of exile, some little recognition of his
services; in fact, such a sum as would bring him in an income of three
thousand francs.

“I understand you,” replied Diana. “You wish to be paid for what you
call your kindness.”

“Ah, mademoiselle!”

“And you put a value of sixty thousand francs upon it; that is rather a
high price, is it not?”

“Alas! it is not half what this unhappy business has cost me.”

“Nonsense; your demand is preposterous.”

“Demand!” returned he; “I make no demand. I come to you respectfully
and with a little charity. If I were to demand, I should come to you in
quite a different manner. I should say, ‘Pay me such and such a sum,
or I tell everything.’ What have I to lose if the whole story comes to
light? A mere nothing. I am a poor man, and am growing old. You and M.
Norbert are the ones that have something to fear. You are noble, rich,
and young, and a happy future lies before you.”

Diana paused and thought for an instant.

“You are speaking,” answered she at last, “in a most foolish manner.
When charges are made against people, proofs must be forthcoming.”

“Quite right, mademoiselle; but can you say that these proofs are not in
my hands? Should you, however, desire to buy them, you are at liberty to
do so. I give you the first option, and yet you grumble.”

As he spoke, he drew a battered leather pocket-book from his breast,
and took from it a paper, which, after having been crumpled, had been
carefully smoothed out again. Diana glanced at it, and then uttered a
stifled cry of rage and fear, for she at once recognized her last letter
to Norbert.

“That wretch, Francoise, has betrayed me,” exclaimed she, “and I saved
her mother from a death by hunger and cold.”

The Counsellor held out the letter to her. She thought that he had no
suspicion of her, and made an attempt to snatch it from him; but he was
on his guard, and drew back with a sarcastic smile on his face.

“No, mademoiselle,” said he; “this is not the little bottle of poison;
however, I will give it to you, together with another one, when I have
obtained what I ask. Nothing for nothing, however; and if I must go to
the scaffold, I will do so in good company.”

Mademoiselle de Laurebourg was in utter despair.

“But I have no money,” said she. “Where is a girl to find such a sum?”

“M. Norbert can find it.”

“Go to him, then.”

Daumon made a negative sign with his head.

“I am not quite such a fool,” answered he; “I know M. Norbert too
well. He is the very image of his father. But you can manage him,
mademoiselle; besides, you have much interest in having the matter
settled.”

“Counsellor!”

“There is no use in beating about the bush. I come to you humbly enough,
and you treat me like so much dirt. I will not submit to this, as you
will find to your cost. _I_ never poisoned any one; but enough of this
kind of thing. To-day is Tuesday; if on Friday, by six o’clock, I do not
have what I have asked for, your father and the Count Octave will have a
letter from me, and perhaps your fine marriage may come to nothing after
all.”

This insolence absolutely struck Diana dumb, and Daumon had disappeared
round a turning of the road before she could find words to crush him for
his vile attempt at extortion. She felt that he was capable of keeping
his word, even if by so doing he seriously injured himself without
gaining any advantage.

A nature like Diana’s always looks danger boldly in the face. She had,
however, but little choice how she would act--for to apply to Norbert
was the only resource left to her--for she knew that he would do all
in his power to ward off the danger which threatened both of them so
nearly. The idea, however, of applying to him for aid was repugnant to
her pride. To what depths of meanness and infamy had she descended! and
to what avail had been all her aspirations of ambition and grandeur?

She was at the mercy of a wretch--of Daumon, in fact. She was forced to
go as a suppliant to a man whom she had loved so well that she now hated
him with a deadly hatred. But she did not hesitate for a moment. She
went straight to the cottage of Widow Rouleau, and despatched Francoise
in quest of Norbert.

She ordered the girl to tell him that he must without fail be at the
wicket gate in the park wall at Laurebourg on the coming night, where
she would meet him, and that the matter was one of life and death.

As Diana gave these orders to Francoise, the woman’s nervous air
and flushed features plainly showed that she was a mere creature of
Daumon’s; but Mademoiselle de Laurebourg felt it would be unwise to
take any notice of her discovery, but to abstain from employing her in
confidential communications for the future.

As the hour of the meeting drew near a host of doubts assailed her.
Would Norbert come to the meeting? Had Francoise contrived to see him?
Might he not be absent from home? It was now growing dark, and the
servants brought candles into the dining-room, and Diana, contriving to
slip away, gained the appointed spot. Norbert was waiting, and when he
caught sight of her, rushed forward, but stopped as though restrained by
a sudden thought, and remained still, as if rooted to the ground.

“You sent for me, mademoiselle?” said he.

“I did.”

After a pause, in which she succeeded in mastering her emotion, Diana
began with the utmost volubility to explain the extortion that Daumon
was endeavoring to practise upon her, magnifying, though there was but
little need to do so, all the threats and menaces that he had made use
of. She had imagined that this last piece of roguery on the part of
Daumon would drive Norbert into a furious passion, but to her surprise
it had no such effect. He had suffered so much and so deeply, that his
heart was almost dead against any further emotion.

“Do not let this trouble you,” answered he apathetically; “I will see
Daumon and settle with him.”

“Can you leave me thus, at our last meeting, without even a word?” asked
she.

“What have I to say? My father forgave me on his death-bed, and I pardon
you.”

“Farewell, Norbert; we shall see no more of each other. I am going to
marry, as you have doubtless been informed. Can I oppose my parent’s
will? Besides, what does it signify? Farewell; remember no one wishes
more sincerely for your future happiness than I do.”

“Happy!” exclaimed Norbert. “How can I ever be happy again? If you know
the secret, for pity’s sake break it to me. Tell me how to forget and
how to annihilate thought. Do you not know that I had planned a life of
perfect happiness with you by my side? I had visions; and now plans and
visions are alike hateful to me. And as they ever and anon recur to my
memory, they will fill me with terror and despair.”

As Diana heard these words of agony, a wild gleam of triumph shot from
her eyes, but it faded away quickly, and left her cold and emotionless
as a marble statue; and when she reappeared in the drawing-room, after
taking leave of Norbert, her face wore so satisfied an expression, that
the Viscount complimented her upon her apparent happiness.

She made some jesting retort, but there was a shade of earnestness mixed
with her playfulness, for to her future husband she only wished to show
the amiable side of her character; but all the time she was thinking.
Will Norbert see Daumon in time?

The Duke kept his word, and the next day the faithful Jean discreetly
handed her a packet. She opened it and found that besides the two
letters of which the Counsellor had spoken, it contained all her
correspondence with Norbert--more than a hundred letters in all, some
of great length, and all of them compromising to a certain extent. Her
first thought was to destroy them, but on reflection she decided not
to do so, and hid the packet in the same place as she had concealed the
letters written by Norbert to her.

Norbert had given Daumon sixty thousand francs, and in addition owed him
twenty thousand on his promissory notes. This sum, in addition to what
he had already saved, would form such a snug little fortune that it
would enable the Counsellor to quit Bevron, and take up his abode in
Paris, where his peculiar talents would have more scope for development.
And eight days later the village was thrown into a state of intense
excitement by the fact becoming known that Daumon had shut up his house
and departed for Paris, taking Francoise, the Widow Rouleau’s daughter,
with him. The Widow Rouleau was furious, and openly accused Mademoiselle
de Laurebourg of having aided in the committal of the act which had
deprived her of her daughter’s services in her declining years; and the
old woman who had acted as housekeeper, who on Daumon’s departure had
thrown open the place, did not hesitate to assert that all her late
master’s legal lore had been acquired in prison, where he had undergone
a sentence of ten years’ penal servitude.

In spite of all this, however, Mademoiselle de Laurebourg was secretly
delighted at the departure of Daumon and Francoise; for she experienced
an intense feeling of relief at knowing that she no longer was in any
risk of meeting her accomplice in her daily walks. Norbert, too, was
going to Paris with his wife; and M. de Puymandour was going about
saying that his daughter, the Duchess of Champdoce, would not return to
this part of the country for some time to come.

Diana drew a long breath of relief, for it seemed to her as if all the
threatening clouds, which had darkened the horizon, were fast breaking
up and drifting away. Her future seemed clear, and she could continue
the preparations for her marriage, which was to be celebrated in a
fortnight’s time; and the friend of Octave who had been asked to act as
his best man had answered in the affirmative.

Diana had taken accurate measurement of the love that Octave lavished
upon her, and did her utmost to increase it. She had another cruel idea,
and that was that the bewitching manner which she had assumed towards
her betrothed was excellent practice, and by it she might judge of her
future success in society when she resided in Paris. Octave was utterly
conquered, as any other man would have been under similar circumstances.

Upon the day of her wedding she was dazzling in her beauty, and her face
was radiant with happiness; but it was a mere mask, which she had put on
to conceal her real feelings. She knew that many curious eyes were fixed
on her as she left the chapel; and the crowd formed a line for her to
pass through. She saw many a glance of dislike cast upon her; but a more
severe blow awaited her, for on her arrival at the Chateau de Mussidan,
to which she was driven directly after the ceremony, the first person
she met was Montlouis, who came forward to welcome her. Bold and
self-possessed as she was, the slight of this man startled her, and a
bright flush passed across her face. Fortunately Montlouis had had time
to prepare himself for this meeting, and his face showed no token
of recognition. But though his salutation was of the most respectful
description, Madame de Mussidan thought she saw in his eyes that
ironical expression of contempt which she had more than once seen in
Daumon’s face.

“That man must not, shall not, stay here,” she murmured to herself.

It was easy enough for her to ask her husband to dismiss Montlouis from
his employ, but it was a dangerous step to take; and her easiest course
was to defer the dismissal of the secretary until some really good
pretext offered itself. Nor was this pretext long in presenting itself;
for Octave was by no means satisfied with the young man’s conduct.
Montlouis who had been full of zeal while in Paris, had renewed his
_liaison_, on his return to Mussidan, with the girl with whom he had
been formerly entangled at Poitiers. This, of course, could not be
permitted to go on, and an explosion was clearly to be expected; but
what Diana dreaded most was the accidental development of some unseen
chance.

After she had been married some two weeks, when Octave proposed in the
afternoon that they should go for a walk, she agreed. Her preparations
were soon completed, and they started off, blithe and lively as children
on a holiday ramble. As they loitered in a wooded path, they heard a dog
barking in the cover. It was Bruno, who rushed out, and, standing on his
hind legs, endeavored to lick Diana’s face.

“Help, help, Octave!” she exclaimed, and her husband, springing to her
side, drove away the animal.

“Were you very much alarmed, dearest?” asked he.

“Yes,” answered she faintly; “I was almost frightened to death.”

“I do not think that he would do you any harm,” remarked Octave.

“No matter; make him go away;” and as she spoke she struck at him with
her parasol. But the dog never for a moment supposed that Diana was in
earnest, and, supposing that she intended to play with him, as she had
often done before, began to gambol round her, barking joyously the whole
time.

“But this dog evidently knows you, Diana,” observed the Viscount.

“Know me? Impossible!” and as she spoke Bruno ran up and licked her
hand. “If he does, his memory is better than mine; at any rate, I am
half afraid of him. Come, Octave, let us go.”

They turned away, and Octave would have forgotten all about the
occurrence had not Bruno, delighted at having found an old acquaintance,
persisted in following them.

“This is strange,” exclaimed the Viscount, “very strange indeed.
Look here, my man,” said he, addressing a peasant, who was engaged in
clipping a hedge by the roadside, “do you know whose dog this is?”

“Yes, my lord, it belongs to the young Duke of Champdoce.”

“Of course,” answered Diana, “I have often seen the dog at the Widow
Rouleau’s, and have occasionally given it a piece of bread. He was
always with Francoise, who ran off with that man Daumon. Oh, yes, I know
him now; here, Bruno, here!”

The dog rushed to her, and, stooping down, she caressed him, thus hoping
to conceal her tell-tale face.

Octave drew his wife’s arm within his without another word. A strange
feeling of doubt had arisen in his mind. Diana, too, was much disturbed,
and abused herself mentally for having been so weak and cowardly. Why
had she not at once confessed that she knew the dog? Had she said at
once, “Why, that is Bruno, the Duke of Champdoce’s dog,” her husband
would have thought no more about the matter; but her own folly had made
much of a merely trivial incident.

Ever since that fatal walk the Viscount’s manner appeared to have
changed, and more than once Diana fancied that she caught a look of
suspicion in his eyes. How could she best manage to make him forget this
unlucky event? She saw that for the rest of her life she must affect a
terror of dogs; and, for the future, whenever she saw one, she uttered
a little cry of alarm, and insisted upon all Octave’s being chained
up. But for all this she lived in a perfect atmosphere of suspicion and
anxiety, while the very ground upon which she walked seemed to have been
mined beneath her feet. Her sole wish now was to fly from Mussidan, and
leave Bevron and its environs, she cared not for what spot. It has been
first arranged that immediately after the marriage they should make a
short tour; but in spite of this, they still lingered at Mussidan; and
all that Diana could do was to keep this previous determination before
her husband, without making any direct attack.

The blow came at last, and was more unexpected and terrible than she
had anticipated. On the afternoon of the 26th of October, as Diana was
gazing from her window, an excited crowd rushed into the courtyard of
the Chateau, followed by four men bearing a litter covered with a sheet,
under which could be distinguished the rigid limbs of a dead body, while
a cruel crimson stain upon one side of the white covering too plainly
showed that some one had met with a violent death.

The hideous sight froze Diana with terror, and it was impossible for her
to leave the window or quit the object on the litter, which seemed to
have a terrible fascination for her. That very morning her husband,
accompanied by his friend the Baron de Clinchain, Montlouis, and a
servant named Ludovic, had gone out for a day’s shooting. It was evident
that something had happened to one of the party; which of them could
it be? The doubt was not of very long duration; for at that moment her
husband entered the courtyard, supported by M. de Clinchain and Ludovic.
His face was deadly pale, and he seemed scarcely able to drag one leg
after the other. The dead man therefore must be Montlouis. She need
no longer plot and scheme for the dismissal of the secretary, for his
tongue had been silenced for ever.

A ray of comfort dawned in Diana’s heart at this idea, and gave her the
strength to descend the staircase. Halfway down she met M. de Clinchain,
who was ascending. He seized her by the arm, and said hoarsely,--

“Go back, madame, go back!”

“But tell me what has happened.”

“A terrible calamity. Go back to your room, I beg of you. Your husband
will be here presently;” and, as Octave appeared, he absolutely pushed
her into her own room.

Octave followed, and, extending his arms, pressed his wife closely to
his breast, bursting as he did so into a passion of sobs.

“Ah!” cried M. de Clinchain joyously, “he is saved. See, he weeps; I had
feared for his reason.”

After many questions and incoherent answers, Madame de Mussidan at last
arrived at the fact that her husband had shot Montlouis by accident.
Diana believed this story, but it was far from the truth. Montlouis had
met his death at her hands quite as much as the Duke de Champdoce had
done. He had died because he was the possessor of a fatal secret.

This was what had really occurred. After lunch, Octave, who had drunk
rather freely, began to rally Montlouis regarding his mysterious
movements, and to assert that some woman must be at the bottom of them.
At first Montlouis joined in the laugh; but at length M. de Mussidan
became too personal in remarks regarding the woman his secretary loved,
and Montlouis responded angrily. This influenced his master’s temper,
and he went on to say that he could no longer permit such doings, and he
reproached his secretary for risking his present and future for a woman
who was worthy neither of love nor respect, and who was notoriously
unfaithful to him. Montlouis heard this last taunt with compressed lips
and a deep cloud upon his brow.

“Do not utter a word more, Count,” said he; “I forbid you to do so.”

He spoke so disrespectfully that Octave was about to strike him, but
Montlouis drew back and avoided the blow; but he was so intoxicated with
fury that this last insult roused him beyond all bounds.

“By what right do you speak thus,” said he, “who have married another
man’s mistress? It well becomes you to talk of woman’s virtue, when your
wife is a--”

He had no time to finish his sentence, for Octave, levelling his gun,
shot him through the heart.

M. de Mussidan kept these facts from his wife because he really loved
her, and true love is capable of any extreme; and he felt that, however
strong the cause might be, he should never have the courage to separate
from Diana; that whatever she might do in the future, or had already
done in the past, he could not choose but forgive her.

Acquitted of all blame, thanks to Clinchain’s and Ludovic’s
evidence--for they had mutually agreed that the tragical occurrence
should be represented to have been the result of an accident--the
conscience of M. de Mussidan left him but little peace. The girl whom
Montlouis had loved had been driven from her home in disgrace, owing to
having given birth to a son. Octave sought her out, and, without giving
any reason for his generosity, told her that her son, whom she had named
Paul, after his father, Montlouis, should never come to want.

Shortly after this sad occurrence, M. de Mussidan and his wife quitted
Poitiers, for Diana had more than once determined that she would make
Paris her residence for the future. She had taken into her service a
woman who had been in the service of Marie de Puymandour, and through
her had discovered that, previous to her marriage with Norbert, Marie
had loved George de Croisenois; and she intended to use this knowledge
at some future date as a weapon with which to deal the Duke de Champdoce
a deadly blow.



CHAPTER XIII.

A SCHEME OF VENGEANCE.

The marriage between Norbert and Mademoiselle de Puymandour was entirely
deficient in that brief, ephemeral light that shines over the honeymoon.
The icy wall that stood between them became each day stronger and
taller. There was no one to smooth away inequalities, no one to exercise
a kindly influence over two characters, both haughty and determined.
After his father’s death, when Norbert announced his intention of
residing in Paris, M. de Puymandour highly approved of this resolution,
for he fancied that if he were to remain alone in the country, he could
to a certain extent take the place and position of the late Duke, and,
with the permission of his son-in-law, at once take up his residence at
Champdoce.

Almost as soon as the young Duchess arrived in Paris she realized the
fact that she was the most unfortunate woman in the world. As Champdoce
was almost like her own home, her eyes lighted on familiar scenes;
and if she went out, she was sure of being greeted by kindly words and
friendly features; but in Paris she only found solitude, for everything
there was strange and hostile. The late Duke, pinching and parsimonious
as he had been towards himself and his son, launched out into the
wildest extravagances when he imagined he was working for his coming
race, and the home which he had prepared for his great-grandchildren was
the incarnation of splendor and luxury.

Upon the arrival of Norbert and his wife, they could almost fancy that
they had only quitted their town house a few days before, so perfect
were all the arrangements. Had Norbert been left to act for himself, he
might have felt a little embarrassed, but his trusty servant Jean aided
him with his advice, and the establishment was kept on a footing to do
honor to the traditions of the house of Champdoce. Everything can be
procured in Paris for money, and Jean had filled the ante-rooms with
lackeys, the kitchens and offices with cooks and scullions, and the
stables with grooms, coachmen, and horses, while every description of
carriage stood in the place appointed for their reception.

But all this bustle and excitement did not seem in the eyes of the young
Duchess to impart life to the house. It appeared to her dead and empty
as a sepulchre. It seemed as if she were living beneath the weight of
some vague and indefinable terror, some hideous and hidden spectre which
might at any moment start from its hiding place and drive her mad with
the alarm it excited. She had not a soul in whom she could confide. She
had been forbidden by Norbert to renew her acquaintance with her old
Parisian friends, for Norbert did not consider them of sufficiently good
family, and in addition he had used the pretext of the deep mourning
they were in to put off receiving visitors for a twelvemonth at least.
She felt herself alone and solitary, and, in this frame of mind, how was
it possible for her not to let her thoughts wander once again to George
de Croisenois. Had her father been willing, she might have been his
wife now, and have been wandering hand in hand in some sequestered
spot beneath the clear blue sky of Italy. _He_ had loved her, while
Norbert----.

Norbert was leading one of those mad, headstrong lives which have but
two conclusions--ruin or suicide. His name had been put up for election
at a fashionable club by his uncle, the Chevalier de Septraor, as soon
as he arrived in Paris. He had been elected at once, being looked on as
a decided acquisition to the list of members. He bore one of the oldest
names to be found among the French nobility, while his fortune--gigantic
as it was--had been magnified threefold by the tongue of common report.
He was received with open arms everywhere, and lived in a perfect
atmosphere of flattery. Not being able to shine by means of cultivation
or polish, he sought to gain a position in his club by a certain
roughness of demeanor and a cynical mode of speech. He flung away his
money in every direction, kept racers, and was uniformly fortunate in
his betting transactions. He frequented the world of gallantry, and was
constantly to be seen in the company of women whose reputations were
exceedingly equivocal. His days were spent on horseback, or in the
fencing room, and his nights in drinking, gambling, and all kinds of
debauchery. His wife scarcely ever saw him, for when he returned home
it was usually with the first beams of day, either half intoxicated or
savage from having lost large sums at the gambling table. Jean, the old
and trusty retainer of the house of Champdoce, was deeply grieved, not
so much at seeing his master so rapidly pursuing the path to ruin as
at the fact that he was ever surrounded by dissolute and disreputable
acquaintances.

“Think of your name,” he would urge; “of the honor of your name.”

“And what does that matter,” sneered Norbert, “provided that I live a
jolly life, and shuffle out of the world rapidly?”

There was one fixed star in all the dark clouds that surrounded him,
which now seemed to blaze brightly, and this star was Diana de Mussidan.
Do what he would, it was impossible to efface her image from his memory.
Even amidst the fumes of wine and the debauched revelry of the supper
table he could see the form that he had once so passionately loved
standing out like a pillar of light, clear and distinct against the
darkness. He had led this demoralizing existence for fully six months,
when one day, as he was riding down the Avenue des Champs Elysees, he
saw a lady give him a friendly bow. She was seated in a magnificent open
carriage, wrapped in the richest and most costly furs. Thinking that she
might be one of the many actresses with whom he was acquainted, Norbert
turned his horse’s head towards the carriage; but as he got nearer he
saw, to his extreme amazement and almost terror, that it was Diana de
Mussidan who was seated in it. He did not turn back, however; and as
the carriage had just drawn up, he reined in his horse alongside of it.
Diana was as much agitated as he was, and for a moment neither of them
spoke, but their eyes were firmly fixed upon each other, and they sat
pale and breathless, as if each had some sad presentiment which fate
was preparing for them both. At last Norbert felt that he must break
the silence, for the servants were beginning to gaze upon them with eyes
full of curiosity.

“What, madame, you here, in Paris?” said he with an effort.

She had drawn out a slender hand from the mass of furs in which she was
enveloped, and extended it to him, as she replied in a tone which had a
ring of tenderness beneath its commonplace tone,--

“Yes, we are established here, and I hope that we shall be as good
friends as we were once before. Farewell, until we meet again.”

As if her words had been a signal, the coachman struck his horses
lightly with his whip, and the magnificent equipage rolled swiftly
away. Norbert had not accepted Diana’s proffered hand, but presently he
realized the whole scene, and plunging his spurs into his horse dashed
furiously up the Avenue in the direction of the Arc de Triomphe.

“Ah!” said he, as a bitter pang of despair shot through his heart, “I
still love her, and can never care for any one else; but I will see her
again. She has not forgotten me. I could read it in her eyes, and detect
it all in the tones of her voice.” Here a momentary gleam of reason
crossed his brain. “But will a woman like Diana ever forgive an offence
like mine? and when she seems most friendly the danger is the more
near.”

Unfortunately he thrust aside this idea, and refused to listen to
the voice of reason. That evening he went down to his club with the
intention of asking a few questions regarding the Mussidans. He heard
enough to satisfy himself, and the next day he met Madame de Mussidan
in the Champs Elysees, and for many days afterwards in rapid succession.
Each day they exchanged a few words, and at last Diana, with much
simulated hesitation, promised to alight from her carriage when next
they met in the Bois, and talk to Norbert unhampered by the presence of
the domestics.

Madame de Mussidan had made the appointment for three o’clock, but
before two Norbert was on the spot, in a fever of expectation and doubt.

“Is it I,” asked he of himself, “waiting once more for Diana, as I have
so often waited for her at Bevron?”

Ah, how many changes had taken place since then! He was now no longer
waiting for Diana de Laurebourg, but for the Countess de Mussidan,
another man’s wife, while he also was a married man. It was no longer
the whim of a monomaniac that kept them apart, but the dictates of law,
honor, and the world.

“Why,” said he, in a mad burst of passion, “why should we not set at
defiance all the cold social rules framed by an artificial state of
society; why should not the woman leave her husband and the man his
wife?” Norbert had consulted his watch times without number before the
appointed hour came. “Ah,” sighed he, “suppose that she should not come
after all.”

As he said these words a cab stopped, and the Countess de Mussidan
alighted from it. She came rapidly along towards him, crossing an
open space without heeding the irregularities of the ground, as that
diminished the distance which separated her from Norbert. He advanced
to meet her, and taking his arm, they plunged into the recesses of the
Bois. There had been heavy rain on the day previous, and the pathway was
wet and muddy, but Madame de Mussidan did not seem to notice this.

“Let us go on,” said she, “until we are certain of not being seen from
the road. I have taken every precaution. My carriage and servants are
waiting for me in front of St. Philippe du Roule; but for all that I may
have been watched.”

“You were not so timid in bygone days.”

“Then I was my own mistress; and if I lost my reputation, the loss
affected me only; but on my wedding day I had a sacred trust confided
to me--the honor of the man who has given me his name, and that I must
guard with jealous care.”

“Then you love me no longer.”

She stopped suddenly, and overwhelming Norbert with one of those glacial
glances which she knew so well how to assume, answered in measured
accents,--

“Your memory fails you; all that has remained to me of the past is the
rejection of a proposal conveyed in a certain letter that I wrote.”

Norbert interrupted her by a piteous gesture of entreaty.

“Mercy!” said he. “You would pardon me if you knew all the horrors of
the punishment that I am enduring. I was mad, blind, besotted, nor did I
love you as I do at this moment.”

A smile played round Diana’s beautiful mouth, for Norbert had told her
nothing that she did not know before, but she wished to hear it from his
own lips.

“Alas!” murmured she; “I can only frame my reply with the fatal words,
‘_Too late_!’”

“Diana!”

He endeavored to seize her hand, but she drew it away with a rapid
movement.

“Do not use that name,” said she; “you have no right to do so. Is it not
sufficient to have blighted the young girl’s life? and yet you seek to
compromise the honor of the wife. You must forget me; do you understand?
It is to tell you this that I am here. The other day, when I saw you
again, I lost my self-command. My heart leapt up at the sight of you,
and, fool that I was, I permitted you to see this; but base no hopes
on my weakness. I said to you, Let us be friends. It was a mere act of
madness. We can never be friends, and had better, therefore, treat each
other as strangers. Do you forget that lying tongues at Bevron accused
me of being your mistress? Do you think that this falsehood has not
reached my husband’s ears? One day, when your name was mentioned in
his presence, I saw a gleam of hatred and jealousy in his eye. Great
heavens! should he, on my return, suspect that my hand had rested in
yours, he would expel me from his house like some guilty wretch! The
door of our house must remain for ever closed to you. I am miserable
indeed. Be a man; and if your heart still holds one atom of the love you
once bore for me, prove it by never seeking me again.”

As she concluded she hurried away, leaving in Norbert’s heart a more
deadly poison than the one she had endeavored to persuade the son to
administer to his father, the Duke de Champdoce. She knew each chord
that vibrated in his heart, and could play on it at will. She felt sure
that in a month he would again be her slave, and that she could exercise
over him a sway more despotic than she had yet done, and, in addition to
this, that he would assist her in executing a cruel scheme of revenge,
which she had long been plotting.

After having followed Diana about like her very shadow for several days,
Norbert at last ventured to approach her in the Champs Elysees. She was
angry, but not to such an extent that he feared to repeat his offence.
Then she wept, but her tears could not force him to avoid her. At first
her system of defence was very strong, then it gradually grew weaker.
She granted him another interview, and then two others followed. But
what were these meetings worth to him? They took place in a church or a
public gallery, in places where they could scarcely exchange a grasp of
the hand. At length she told him that she had thought of a place which
would render their interviews less perilous, but that she hardly dared
tell him where it was. He pressed her to tell him, and, by degrees, she
permitted herself to be persuaded. Her idea was to become the friend of
the Duchess of Champdoce.

Norbert now felt that she was more an angel than a woman, and it was
agreed that on the next day he himself would introduce her to his wife.



CHAPTER XIV.

FALSE FRIEND, OLD LOVER.

It was on a Wednesday morning that the Duke de Champdoce, instead of, as
usual, going to his own or one of his friends’ clubs to breakfast, took
his seat at the table where his wife was partaking of her morning meal.
He was in excellent spirits, gay, and full of pleasant talk, a mood in
which his wife had never seen him since their ill-fated marriage. The
Duchess could not understand this sudden change in her husband; it
terrified and alarmed her, for she felt that it was the forerunner of
some serious event, which would change the current of her life entirely.

Norbert waited until the domestics had completed their duty and retired,
and as soon as he was alone with his wife he took her hand and kissed it
with an air of gallantry.

“It has been a long time, my dear Marie, since I had resolved to open
my heart to you entirely, and now a full and open explanation has become
absolutely necessary.”

“An explanation!” faltered Marie.

“Yes, certainly; but do not let the word alarm you. I fear that I must
have appeared in your eyes the most morose and disagreeable of husbands.
Permit me to explain. Since we came here, I have gone about my own
affairs, I have gone out early and returned extremely late, and
sometimes three days have elapsed without our even setting eyes on each
other.”

The young Duchess listened to him like a woman who could not believe her
ears. Could this be her husband who was heaping reproaches upon himself
in this manner?

“I have made no complaint,” stammered she.

“I know that, Marie; you have a noble and forgiving nature; but,
however, it is impossible, as a woman, that you should not have
condemned me.”

“Indeed, but I have not done so.”

“So much the better for me. On this I shall not have to find either
defence or excuse for my conduct; you must know, however, that you are
ever foremost in my thoughts, even when I am away from you.”

He was evidently doing his best to put on an air of tenderness and
affection, but he failed; for though his words were kind, the tone of
his voice was neither tender nor sympathetic.

“I hope I know my duty,” said the Duchess.

“Pray, Marie,” broke in he, “do not let the word duty be uttered between
us. You know that you have been much alone, because it was impossible
for the friends of Mademoiselle de Puymandour to be those of the Duchess
de Champdoce!”

“Have I made any opposition to your orders?”

“Then, too, our mourning prevents us going out into the world for five
months longer at least.”

“Have I asked to go out?”

“All the more reason that I should endeavor to make your home less dull
for you. I should like you to have with you some person in whose society
you could find pleasure and distraction. Not one of those foolish girls
who have no thought save for balls and dress, but a sensible woman of
the world, and, above all, one of your own age and rank,--a woman, in
short, of whom you could make a friend. But where can such a one be
found? It is a perilous quest to venture on, and upon such a friend
often depends the happiness and misery of a home.

“But,” continued he, after a brief pause, “I think that I have
discovered the very one that will suit you. I met her at the house of
Madame d’Ailange, who spoke eloquently of her charms of mind and body,
and I hope to have the pleasure of presenting her to you to-day.”

“Here, at our house?”

“Certainly; there is nothing odd in this. Besides, the lady is no
stranger to us; she comes from our own part of the country, and you know
her.”

A flush came over his face, and he busied himself with the fire to
conceal it as he added,--

“You recollect Mademoiselle de Laurebourg?”

“Do you mean Diana de Laurebourg?”

“Exactly so.”

“I saw very little of her, for my father and hers did not get on
very well together. The Marquis de Laurebourg looked on us as too
insignificant to--”

“Ah, well,” interrupted he, “I trust that the daughter will make up for
the father’s shortcomings. She married just after our wedding had been
celebrated, and her husband is the Count de Mussidan. She will call on
you to-day, and I have told your servants to say that you are at home.”

The silence that followed this speech lasted for nearly a couple of
minutes, and became exceedingly embarrassing, when suddenly the sound
of wheels was heard on the gravel of the courtyard, and in a moment
afterwards a servant came and announced that the Countess de Mussidan
was in the drawing-room. Norbert rose, and, taking his wife’s arm, led
her away.

“Come, Marie, come,” said he; “she has arrived.”

Diana had reflected deeply before she had taken this extraordinarily
bold step. In paying a visit so contrary to all the usual rules of
etiquette, she exposed herself to the chance of receiving a severe
rebuff. The few seconds that elapsed while she was still alone in the
drawing-room seemed like so many centuries; but the door was opened, and
Norbert and his wife appeared. Then, with a charming smile, Madame de
Mussidan rose and bowed gracefully to the Duchess de Champdoce, making a
series of half-jesting apologies for her intrusion. She had been utterly
unable, she said, to resist the pleasure she should experience in seeing
an old country neighbor, the more so as they were now separated by
so short a distance. She had, therefore, disregarded all the rules of
etiquette so that they might have a cozy chat about Poitiers, Bevron,
Champdoce, and all the country where she had been born, and which she so
dearly loved.

The Duchess listened in silence to this torrent of words, and the
expression of her face showed how surprised she was at this unexpected
visit. A less perfectly self-possessed woman than Diana de Mussidan
might have felt abashed, but the slight annoyance was not to be compared
to the prospective advantages that she hoped to gain, and she brought
all the mettle of her talent and diplomacy into play.

Norbert was moving about the room, half ashamed of the ignoble part that
he was playing. As soon as he thought that the welcome between the
two ladies had been partially got over, and imagined that they were
conversing more amicably together, he slipped out of the room, not
knowing whether to be pleased or angry at the success of the trick.

The trick was rather a more difficult one than Diana had, from Norbert’s
account, anticipated, as she had thought that she would have been
received by the Duchess like some ministering angel sent down to earth
to console an unhappy captive. She had expected to find a simple,
guileless woman, who, upon her first visit, would throw her arms round
her visitor’s neck and yield herself entirely to her influence.
Far, however, from being dismayed, Diana was rather pleased at
this unexpected difficulty, and so fully exerted all her powers of
fascination, that when she took her leave, she believed that she had
made a little progress.

On that very evening the Duchess remarked to her husband,--

“I think that I shall like Madame de Mussidan; she seems an excellent
kind of woman.”

“Excellent is just the proper word,” returned Norbert. “All Bevron was
in tears when she was married and had to leave, for she was a real angel
among the poor.”

Norbert was intensely gratified by Diana’s success; for was it not for
him that she had displayed all her skill, and was not this a proof that
she still cherished a passion for him?

He was not, however, quite so much pleased when he met Madame de
Mussidan the next day in the Champs Elysees. She looked sad and
thoughtful.

“What has gone wrong?” asked he.

“I am very angry with myself for having listened to the voice of my own
heart and to your entreaties,” answered she, “and I think that both of
us have committed a grave error.”

“Indeed, and what have we done?”

“Norbert, your wife suspects something.”

“Impossible! Why, she was praising you after you had left.”

“If that is the case, then she is indeed a much more clever woman than
I had imagined, for she knows how to conceal her suspicions until she is
in a position to prove them.”

Diana spoke with such a serious air of conviction, that Norbert became
quite alarmed.

“What shall we do?” asked he.

“The best thing would be to give up meeting each other, I think.”

“Never; I tell you, never!”

“Let me reflect; in the meantime be prudent; for both our sakes, be
prudent.”

To further his ends, Norbert entirely changed his mode of life. He
gave up going to his clubs, refused invitations to fast suppers, and no
longer spent his nights in gambling and drinking. He drove out with his
wife, and frequently spent his evenings with her, and at the club began
to be looked on as quite a model husband. This great change, however,
was not effected without many a severe inward struggle. He felt deeply
humiliated at the life of deception that he was forced to lead, but
Diana’s hand, apparently so slight and frail, held him with a grip of
steel.

“We must live in this way,” said she, in answer to his expostulations,
“first, because it must be so; and, secondly, because it is my will. On
our present mode of conduct depends all our future safety, and I wish
the Duchess to believe that with me happiness and content must have come
to her fireside.”

Norbert could not gainsay this very reasonable proposition on the
part of Madame de Mussidan, for he was more in love than ever, and the
terrible fear that if he went in any way contrary to her wishes that
she would refuse to see him any more, stayed the words of objection that
rose to his lips.

After hesitating for a little longer, the Duchess made up her mind to
accept the offer of friendship which Diana had so ingenuously offered to
her, and finished by giving herself up to the bitterest enemy that she
had in the world. By degrees she had no secrets from her new friend, and
one day, after a long and confidential conversation, she acknowledged to
Diana the whole secret of the early love of her girlish days, the memory
of which had never faded from the inmost recesses of her heart, and was
rash enough to mention George de Croisenois by name. Madame de Mussidan
was overjoyed at what she considered so signal a victory.

“Now I have her,” thought she, “and vengeance is within my grasp.”

Marie and Diana were now like two sisters, and were almost constantly
together; but this intimacy had not given to Norbert the facile means
of meeting Diana which he had so ardently hoped for. Though Madame de
Mussidan visited his house nearly every day, he absolutely saw less of
her than he had done before, and sometimes weeks elapsed without his
catching a glimpse of her face. She played her game with such consummate
skill, that Marie was always placed as a barrier between Norbert and
herself, as in the farce, when the lover wishes to embrace his mistress,
he finds the wrinkled visage of the duenna offered to his lips.
Sometimes he grew angry, but Diana always had some excellent reason
with which to close his mouth. Sometimes she held up his pretensions
to ridicule, and at others assumed a haughty air, which always quelled
incipient rebellion upon his part.

“What did you expect of me?” she would say, “and of what base act did
you do me the honor to consider me capable?”

He was treated exactly like a child, or more cruel still, like a person
deficient in intellect, and this he was thoroughly aware of. He could
not meet Madame de Mussidan as he had formerly done, for now in the
Bois, at Longchamps, or at any place of public amusement she was
invariably surrounded by a band of fashionable admirers, among whom
George de Croisenois was always to be found. Norbert disliked all these
men, but he had a special antipathy to George de Croisenois, whom he
regarded as a supercilious fool; but in this opinion he was entirely
wrong, for the Marquis de Croisenois was looked upon as one of the most
talented and witty men in Parisian society, and in this case the opinion
of the world was a well-founded one. Many men envied him, but he had
no enemies, and his honest and straightforward conduct was beyond all
doubt. He had the noble instincts of a knight of the days of chivalry.

“Pray,” asked Norbert, “what is it that you can see in this sneering
dandy who is always hanging about you?”

But Diana, with a meaning smile, always made the same reply,--

“You ask too much; but some time you will learn all.”

Every day she contrived, when with the Duchess, to turn the conversation
skilfully upon George de Croisenois, and she had in a manner accustomed
Marie to look certain possibilities straight in the face, from the very
idea of which she would a few months back have recoiled with horror.
This point once gained, Madame de Mussidan believed that the moment had
arrived to bring the former lovers together again, and fancied that one
sudden and unexpected encounter would advance matters much more quickly
than all her half-veiled insinuations. One day, therefore, when the
Duchess had called on her friend, on entering the drawing-room, she
found it only tenanted by George de Croisenois. An exclamation of
astonishment fell from the lips of both as their eyes met; the cheek
of each grew pale. The Duchess, overcome by her feelings, sank
half-fainting into a chair near the door.

“Ah,” murmured he, scarcely knowing the meaning of the words he uttered,
“I had every confidence in you, and you have forgotten me.”

“You do not believe the words you have just spoken,” returned the
Duchess haughtily; “but,” she added in softer accents, “what could I do?
I may have been weak in obeying my father, but for all that I have never
forgotten the past.”

Madame de Mussidan, who had stationed herself behind the closed door,
caught every word, and a gleam of diabolical triumph flashed from her
eyes. She felt sure that an interview which began in this manner would
be certain to be repeated, and she was not in error. She soon saw that
by some tacit understanding the Duchess and George contrived to meet
constantly at her house, and this she carefully abstained from noticing.
Things were working exactly as she desired and she waited, for she could
well afford to do so, knowing that the impending crash could not long be
delayed.



CHAPTER XV.

A STAB IN THE DARK.

September had now arrived; and though the weather was very bad, the Duke
de Champdoce, accompanied by his faithful old servant, Jean, left Paris
on a visit to his training stables. Having had a serious difference with
Diana, he had made up his mind to try whether a long absence on his part
would not have the effect of reducing her to submission, and at the
same time remembering the proverb, that “absence makes the heart grow
fonder.”

He had already been away two whole days, and was growing extremely
anxious at not having heard from Madame de Mussidan, when one evening,
as he was returning from a late inspection of his stud, he was informed
that there was a man waiting to see him. The man was a poor old fellow
belonging to the place, who eked out a wretched subsistence by begging,
and executing occasional commissions.

“Do you want me?” asked the Duke.

With a sly look, the man drew from his pocket a letter.

“This is for you,” muttered he.

“All right; give it to me, then.”

“I was told to give it to you only in private.”

“Never mind that; hand it over.”

“Well, if I must, I must.”

Norbert’s sole thought was that this letter must have come from Diana,
and throwing the man a coin, hurried to a spot where it was light enough
to read the missive. He did not, however, recognize Diana’s firm, bold
hand on the envelope.

“Who the devil can this be from?” thought Norbert, as he tore open
the outer covering. The paper within was soiled and greasy, and the
handwriting was of the vilest description, it was full of bad spelling,
and ran thus:--

“Sir,--

“I hardly dare tell you the truth, and yet my conscience will give me
no relief until I do so. I can no longer bear to see a gentleman such as
you are deceived by a woman who has no heart or honorable feeling. Your
wife is unfaithful to you, and will soon make you a laughing stock to
all. You may trust to this being true, for I am a respectable woman,
and you can easily find out if I am lying to you. Hide yourself this
evening, so that you may command a view of the side-door in the wall
of your garden, and between half-past ten and eleven you will see your
wife’s lover enter. It is a long time since he has been furnished with
a key. The hour for the meeting has been judiciously fixed, for all the
servants will be out; but I implore you not to be violent, for I would
not do your wife any harm, but I feel that you ought to be warned.

“From one

“WHO KNOWS.”


Norbert ran through the contents of this infamous anonymous letter in an
instant. The blood surged madly through his brain, and he uttered a howl
of fury. His servants ran in to see what was the matter.

“Where is the fellow who brought this letter?” said he. “Run after him
and bring him back to me.”

In a few minutes the sturdy grooms made their appearance, pushing in the
messenger, who seemed over-powered with tears.

“I am not a thief,” exclaimed he. “It was given to me, but I will give
it back.”

He was alluding to the louis given to him by Norbert, for the largeness
of the sum made him think that the donor had made a mistake.

“Keep the money,” said the Duke; “I meant it for you; but tell me who
gave this letter to you.”

“I can’t tell you,” answered the man. “If I ever saw him before, may my
next glass of wine choke me. He got out of a cab just as I was passing
near the bridge, and calling to me, said, ‘Look at this letter; at
half-past seven take it to the Duke de Champdoce, who lives by his
stables in the road to the Forest. Do you know the place?’ ‘Yes,’ I
says, and then he slips the letter and a five-franc piece into my hand,
got back into the cab, and off he went.”

“What was the man like?” asked he.

“Well, I can hardly say. He wasn’t young or old, or short or tall.
I recollect he had a gold watch-chain on, but that was about all I
noticed.”

“Very well; you can be off.”

At this moment Norbert’s anger was turned against the writer of
the letter only, for he did not place the smallest credence in the
accusations against his wife. If he did not love her, he at any rate
respected her. “My wife,” said he to himself, “is an honorable and
virtuous woman, and it is some discharged menial who has taken this
cowardly mode of revenge.” A closer inspection of the letter seemed to
show him that the faults in caligraphy were intentional. The concluding
portion of the letter excited his attention, and, calling Jean, he asked
him if it was true that all the servants would be absent from the house
to-day.

“There will be none there this evening; not until late at night,”
 answered the old man.

“And why, pray?”

“Have you forgotten, your Grace, that the first coachman is going to be
married, and the Duchess was good enough to say that all might go to the
wedding dinner and ball, as long as some one remained at the porter’s
lodge?”

After the first outburst, Norbert affected an air of calmness, and
laughed at the idea of having permitted himself to be disturbed for so
trivial a cause. But this was mere pretence, for doubt and suspicion had
entered his soul, and no power on earth could expel them. “Why should
not my wife be unfaithful to me?” thought Norbert. “I give her credit
for being honorable and right-minded, but then all deceived husbands
have the same idea. Why should I not take advantage of this information,
and judge for myself? But no. I will not stoop to such an act of
baseness. I should be as infamous as the writer of this letter if I
was to play the spy, as she recommends me to do.” He glanced round,
and perceived that his servants were looking at him with undisguised
curiosity.

“Go to your work,” said he. “Extinguish the lights, and see that all the
doors and windows are carefully closed.”

He had made up his mind now, and taking out his watch, saw that it was
just eight o’clock. “I have time to reach Paris,” muttered he, “by the
appointed time.” Then he called Jean to him again. There was no need to
conceal anything from this trusty adherent of the house of Champdoce. “I
must start for Paris,” said the Duke, “without an instant’s delay.”

“On account of that letter?” asked the old man with an expression of the
deepest sorrow upon his features.

“Yes, for that reason only.”

“Some one has been making false charges against the Duchess.”

“How do you know that?”

“It was easy enough to guess.”

“Have the carriage got ready, and tell the coachman to wait for me in
front of the club. I myself will go on foot.”

“You must not do that,” answered Jean gravely. “The servants may have
conceived the same suspicions as I have. You ought to creep away without
any one being a bit the wiser. The other domestics need not even suppose
that you have left the house. I can get you a horse out of the little
stables without any one being the wiser. I will wait for you on the
other side of the bridge.”

“Good; but remember that I have not a moment to lose.”

Jean left the room, and as he reached the passage Norbert heard him say
to one of the servants, “Put some cold supper on the table; the Duke
says that he is starving.”

Norbert went into his bedroom, put on a great coat and a pair of high
boots, and slipped into his pocket a revolver, the charges of which he
had examined with the greatest care. The night was exceedingly dark, a
fine, icy rain was falling, and the roads were very heavy. Norbert found
Jean with the horse at the appointed spot, and as he leaped into the
saddle the Duke exclaimed, “Not a soul saw me leave the house.”

“Nor I either,” returned the attached domestic. “I shall go back and
act as if you were at supper. At three in the morning I will be in the
wine-shop on the left-hand side of the road. When you return, give a
gentle tap on the window-pane with the handle of your whip.” Norbert
sprang into the saddle, and sped away through the darkness like a
phantom of the night. Jean had made an excellent choice in the horse he
had brought for his master’s use, and the animal made its way rapidly
through the mud and rain; but Norbert by this time was half mad with
excitement, and spurred him madly on. As he neared home a new idea
crossed his brain. Suppose it was a practical joke on the part of
some of the members of the club? In that case, they would doubtless
be watching for his arrival, and, after talking to him on indifferent
subjects, would, when he betrayed any symptoms of impatience, overwhelm
him with ridicule. The fear of this made him cautious. What should he do
with the horse he was riding? The wine-shops were open, and perhaps he
might pick up some man there who would take charge of it for him. As he
was debating this point, his eyes fell upon a soldier, probably on his
way to barracks.

“My man,” asked the Duke, “would you like to earn twenty francs?”

“I should think so, if it is nothing contrary to the rules and
regulations of the army.”

“It is only to take my horse and walk him up and down while I pay a
visit close by.”

“I can stay out of the barracks a couple of hours longer, but no more,”
 returned the soldier.

Norbert told the soldier where he was to wait for him, and then went on
rapidly to his own house, and reached the side street along which ran
the garden belonging to his magnificent residence. On the opposite side
of the street the houses all had porticoes, and Norbert took up his
position in one of these, and peered out carefully. He had studied the
whole street, which was not a long one, from beginning to end, and was
convinced that he was the only person in it. He made up his mind that he
would wait until midnight; and if by that time no one appeared, he would
feel confident that the Duchess was innocent, and return without any one
but Jean having known of his expedition. From his position he could see
that three windows on the second floor of his house were lighted up, and
those windows were in his wife’s sleeping apartment. “She is the last
woman in the world to permit a lover to visit her,” thought he. “No, no;
the whole thing is a hoax.” He began to think of the way in which he
had treated his wife. Had he nothing to reproach himself with? Ten days
after their marriage he had deserted her entirely; and if during the
last few weeks he had paid her any attention, it was because he was
acting in obedience to the whims of another woman. Suppose a lover was
with her now, what right had he to interfere? The law gave him leave,
but what did his conscience say? He leaned against the chill stone until
he almost became as cold as it was. It seemed to him at that moment that
life and hope were rapidly drifting away from him. He had lost all count
of how long he had been on guard. He pulled out his watch, but it was
too dark to distinguish the hands or the figures on the dial-plate. A
neighboring clock struck the half-hour, but this gave him no clue as
to the time. He had almost made up his mind to leave, when he heard the
sound of a quick step coming down the street. It was the light, quick
step of a sportsman,--of a man more accustomed to the woods and fields
than the pavement and asphalt of Paris. Then a shadow fell upon the
opposite wall, and almost immediately disappeared. Then Norbert knew
that the door had opened and closed, and that the man had entered the
garden. There could be no doubt upon this point, and yet the Duke would
have given worlds to be able to disbelieve the evidence of his senses.
It might be a burglar, but burglars seldom work alone; or it might be
a visitor to one of the servants, but all the servants were absent. He
again raised his eyes to the windows of his wife’s room. All of a sudden
the light grew brighter; either the lamp had been turned up, or fresh
candles lighted. Yes, it was a candle, for he saw it borne across the
room in the direction of the great staircase, and now he saw that the
anonymous letter had spoken the truth, and that he was on the brink of a
discovery. A lover had entered the garden, and the lighted candle was a
signal to him. Norbert shuddered; the blood seemed to course through
his veins like streams of molten fire, and the misty atmosphere that
surrounded him appeared to stifle him. He ran across the street, forced
the lock, and rushed wildly into the garden.



CHAPTER XVI.

HUSBAND AND LOVER.

The writer of the anonymous communication had only known the secret too
well, for the Duchess de Champdoce was awaiting a visit that evening
from George de Croisenois; this was, however, the first time. Step by
step she had yielded, and at length had fallen into the snare laid for
her by the treacherous woman whom she believed to be her truest friend.
The evening before this eventful night she had been alone in Madame
de Mussidan’s drawing-room with George de Croisenois. She had been
impressed by his ardent passion, and had listened with pleasure to his
loving entreaties.

“I yield,” said she. “Come to-morrow night, at half-past ten, to the
little door in the garden wall; it will only be kept closed by a stone
being placed against it inside; push it, and it will open; and when
you have entered the garden, acquaint me with your presence by clapping
yours hands gently once or twice.”

Diana had, from a secure hiding-place, overheard these words, and
feeling certain that the Duchess would repent her rash promise, she kept
close to her side until George’s departure, to give her no chance of
retracting her promise. The next day she was constantly with her victim,
and made an excuse for dining with her, so as not to quit her until the
hour for the meeting had almost arrived.

It was not until she was left alone that the Duchess saw the full extent
of her folly and rashness. She was terrified at the promise that she had
given in a weak moment, and would have given worlds had she been able to
retract.

There was yet, however, one means of safety left her--she could
hurry downstairs and secure the garden gate. She started to her
feet, determined to execute her project; but she was too late for the
appointed signal was heard through the chill gloom of the night. Unhappy
woman! The light sound of George de Croisenois’ palms striking one upon
the other resounded in her ears like the dismal tolling of the funereal
bell. She stooped to light a candle at the fire, but her hand trembled
so that she could scarcely effect her object. She felt sure that George
was still in the garden, though she had made no answer to his signal.
She had never thought that he would have had the audacity to open a door
that led into the house from the garden, but this is what he had done.
In the most innocent manner imaginable, and so that her listener in
no way suspected the special reason that she had for making this
communication, Diana de Mussidan had informed George de Croisenois that
upon this night all the domestics of the Champdoce household would be
attending the coachman’s wedding, and that consequently the mansion
would be deserted. George knew also that the Duke was away at his
training establishment, and he therefore opened the door, and walked
boldly up the main staircase, so that when the Duchess, with the lighted
candle in her hand, came to the top steps she found herself face to
face with George de Croisenois, pallid with emotion and quivering with
excitement.

At the sight of the man she loved she started backwards with a low cry
of anguish and despair.

“Fly!” she said “fly, or we are lost!”

He did not, however, seem to hear her, and the Duchess recoiled slowly,
step by step, through the open door of her chamber, across the carpeted
floor, until she reached the opposite wall of her room, and could go no
farther.

George followed her, and pushed to the door of the room as he entered
it. This brief delay, however, had sufficed to restore Marie to the full
possession of her senses. “If I permit him to speak,” thought she,--“if
he once suspects that my love for him is still as strong as ever, I am
lost.”

Then she said aloud,--

“You must leave this house, and that instantly. I was mad when I said
what I did yesterday. You are too noble and too generous not to listen
to me when I tell you that the moment of infatuation is over, and that
all my reason has returned to me, and my openness will convince you of
the truth of what I say--George de Croisenois, I love you.”

The young man uttered an exclamation of delight upon hearing this news.

“Yes,” continued Marie, “I would give half the years of my remaining
life to be your wife. Yes, George, I love you; but the voice of duty
speaks louder than the whispers of the heart. I may die of grief, but
there will be no stain upon my marriage robe, no remorse eating out my
heart. Farewell!”

But the Marquis would not consent to this immediate dismissal, and
appeared to be about to speak.

“Go!” said the Duchess, with an air of command. “Leave me at once!”
 Then, as he made no effort to obey her, she went on, “If you really love
me, let my honor be as dear to you as your own, and never try to see
me again. The peril we are now in shows how necessary this last
determination of mine is. I am the Duchess de Champdoce, and I will keep
the name that has been intrusted to me pure and unsullied, nor will I
stoop to treachery or deception.”

“Why do you use the word deception?” asked he. “I do, it is true,
despise the woman who smiles upon the husband she is betraying, but I
respect and honor the woman who risks all to follow the fortunes of the
man she loves. Lay aside, Marie, name, title, fortune, and fly with me.”

“I love you too much, George,” answered she gently, “to ruin your
future, for the day would surely come when you would regret all your
self-denial, for a woman weighed down with a sense of her dishonor is a
heavy burden for a man to bear.”

George de Croisenois did not understand her thoroughly.

“You do not trust me,” said he. “You would be dishonored. Shall I not
share a portion of the world’s censure? And, if you wish me, I will be
a dishonored man also. To-night I will cheat at play at the club,
be detected, and leave the room an outcast from the society of all
honorable men for the future. Fly with me to some distant land, and we
will live happily under whatever name you may choose.”

“I must not listen to you,” cried she wildly. “It is impossible now.”

“Impossible!--and why? Tell me, I entreat you.”

“Ah, George,” sobbed she, “if you only knew----”

He placed his arm around her waist, and was about to press his lips on
that fair brow, when all at once he felt Marie shiver in his clasp,
and, raising one of her arms, point towards the door, which had opened
silently during their conversation, and upon the threshold of which
stood Norbert de Champdoce, gloomy and threatening.

The Marquis saw in an instant the terrible position in which his
insensate folly had placed the woman he loved.

“Do not come any nearer,” said he, addressing Norbert; “remain where you
are.”

A bitter laugh from the Duke made him realize the folly of his command.
He supported the Duchess to a couch, and seated her upon it. She
recovered consciousness almost immediately, and, as she opened her eyes,
George read in them the most perfect forgiveness for the man who had
ruined her life and hopes.

This look, and the fond assurance conveyed in it, restored all George’s
coolness and self-possession, and he turned towards Norbert.

“However compromising appearances may seem, I am the only one deserving
punishment; the Duchess has nothing to reproach herself with in any way;
it was without her knowledge, and without any encouragement from her,
that I dared to enter this house, knowing as I did that the servants
were all absent.”

Norbert, however, still maintained the same gloomy silence. He too had
need to collect his thoughts. As he ascended the stairs he knew that
he should find the Duchess with a lover, but he had not calculated
upon that lover being George de Croisenois, a man whom he loathed
and detested more than any one that he was in the habit of meeting in
society. When he recognized George, it was with the utmost difficulty
that he restrained himself from springing upon him and endeavoring
to strangle him. He had suspected this man of having gained Diana’s
affections, and now he found him in the character of the lover of his
wife, and he was silent simply because he had not yet made up his mind
what he would say. If his face was outwardly calm and rigid as marble,
while the flames of hell were raging in his heart, it was because his
limbs for the moment refused to obey his will; but, in spite of this,
Norbert was, for the time, literally insane.

Croisenois folded his arms, and continued,--

“I had only just come here at the moment of your arrival. Why were you
not here to listen to all that passed between us? Would to heaven
that you had been! Then you would have understood all the grandeur and
nobility of your wife’s soul. I admit the magnitude of my fault, but I
am at your service, and am prepared to give you the satisfaction that
you will doubtless demand.”

“From your words,” answered Norbert slowly, “I presume that you allude
to a duel; that is to say, that having effected my dishonor to-night,
you purpose to kill me to-morrow morning. In the game that you have been
playing a man stakes his life, and you, I think, have lost.”

Croisenois bowed. “I am a dead man,” thought he as he glanced towards
the Duchess, “and not for your sake, but on account of quite another
woman.”

The sound of his own voice excited Norbert, and he went on more rapidly:
“What need have I to risk my life in a duel? I come to my own home,
I find you with my wife, I blow out your brains, and the law will
exonerate me.” As he said these last words, he drew a revolver from his
pocket and levelled it at George. The moment was an intensely exciting
one, but Croisenois did not show any sign of emotion, Norbert did not
press the trigger, and the suspense became more than could be borne.

“Fire!” cried George, “fire!”

“No,” returned Norbert coldly; “on reflection I have come to
the conclusion that your dead body would be a source of extreme
inconvenience to me.”

“You try my forbearance too far. What are your intentions?”

“I mean to kill you,” answered Norbert in such a voice of concentrated
ferocity that George shuddered in spite of all his courage, “but it
shall not be with a pistol shot. It is said that blood will wash out
any stain, but it is false; for even if all yours is shed, it will not
remove the stain from my escutcheon. One of us must vanish from the face
of the earth in such a manner that no trace of him may remain.”

“I agree. Show me how this is to be done.”

“I know a method,” answered Norbert. “If I was certain that no human
being was aware of your presence here to-night----”

“No one can possibly know it.”

“Then,” answered the Duke, “instead of taking advantage of the rights
that the law gives me and shooting you down on the spot, I will consent
to risk my life against yours.”

George de Croisenois breathed a sigh of relief. “I am ready,” replied
he, “as I before told you.”

“I heard you; but remember that this will be no ordinary duel, in the
light of day, with seconds to regulate the manner of our conduct.”

“We will fight exactly as you wish.”

“In that case, I name swords as the weapons, the garden as the spot, and
this instant as the hour.”

The Marquis cast a glance at the window.

“You think,” observed Norbert, comprehending his look, “that the night
is so dark that we cannot see the blades of our swords?”

“Quite so.”

“You need not fear; there will be light enough for this death struggle
of the one who remains in the garden, for you understand that one _will_
remain.”

“I understand you; shall we go down at once?”

Norbert shook his head in the negative.

“You are in too great a hurry,” said he, “and have not given me time to
fix my conditions.”

“I am listening.”

“At the end of the garden there is a small plot of ground, so damp that
nothing will grow there, and consequently is almost unfrequented; but
for all that it is thither that you must follow me. We will each take
spade and pick-axe, and in a very brief period we can hollow out
a receptacle for the body of the one who falls. When this work is
completed, we will take to our swords and fight to the death, and the
one who can keep his feet shall finish his fallen adversary, drag his
body to the hole, and shovel the earth over his remains.”

“Never!” exclaimed Croisenois. “Never will I agree to such barbarous
terms.”

“Have a care then,” returned Norbert; “for I shall use my rights. That
clock points to five minutes to eleven. If, when it strikes, you have
not decided to accept my terms, I shall fire.”

The barrel of the revolver was but a few inches from George de
Croisenois’ heart, and the finger of his most inveterate enemy was
curved round the trigger; but his feelings had been so highly wrought up
that he thought not of this danger. He only remembered that he had four
minutes in which to make up his mind. The events of the last thirty
minutes had pressed upon each other’s heels with such surprising
alacrity that he could hardly believe that they had really occurred, and
it seemed to him as if it might not, after all, be only a hideous vision
of the night.

“You have only two minutes more,” remarked the Duke.

Croisenois started; his soul was far away from the terrible present. He
glanced at the clock, then at his enemy, and lastly at Marie, who lay
upon the couch, and from her ashen complexion might have been regarded
as dead, save for the hysterical sobs which convulsed her frame. He felt
that it was impossible to leave her in such a condition without aid of
any kind, but he saw well that any show of pity on his part would only
aggravate his offence. “Heaven have mercy on us!” muttered he. “We are
at the mercy of a maniac,” and with a feeling of deadly fear he
asked himself what would be the fate of this woman, whom he loved so
devotedly, were he to die. “For her sake,” he thought, “I must slay this
man, or her life will be one endless existence of torture--and slay him
I will.”

“I accept your terms,” said he aloud.

He spoke just in time, for as the words were uttered came the whirr of
the machinery and then the first clear stroke of the bell.

“I thank you,” answered Norbert coldly as he lowered the muzzle of his
revolver.

The icy frigidity of manner in a period of extreme danger, which is the
marked characteristic of a certain type of education, had now vanished
from the Marquis’s tone and behavior.

“But that is not all,” he continued; “I, too, have certain conditions to
propose.”

“But we agreed--”

“Let me explain; we are going to fight in the dark in your garden
without seconds. We are to dig a grave and the survivor is to bury his
dead antagonist. Tell me, am I right?”

Norbert bowed.

“But,” went on the Marquis, “how can you be certain that all will end
here, and that the earth will be content to retain our secret? You do
not know, and you do not seem to care, that if one day the secret will
be disclosed and the survivor accused of being the murderer of the
other, arrested, dragged before a tribunal, condemned, and sent to a
life-long prison----”

“There is a chance of that, of course.”

“And do you think that I will consent to run such a risk as that?”

“There is such a risk, of course,” answered Norbert phlegmatically;
“but that will be an incentive for you to conceal my death as I should
conceal yours.”

“That will not be sufficient for me,” returned De Croisenois.

“Ah! take care,” sneered Norbert, “or I shall begin to think that you
are afraid.”

“I _am_ afraid; that is, afraid of being called a murderer.”

“That is a danger to which I am equally liable with yourself.”

Croisenois, however, was fully determined to carry his point. “You say,”
 continued he, “that our chances are equal; but if I fall, who would
dream of searching here for my remains? You are in your own house and
can take every precaution; but suppose, on the other hand, I kill
you. Shall I look to the Duchess to assist me? Will not the finger of
suspicion be pointed at her? Shall she say to her gardener when all
Paris is hunting for you, ‘Mind that you do not meddle with the piece of
land at the end of the garden.’”

The thought of the anonymous letter crossed Norbert’s mind, and he
remembered that the writer of it must be acquainted with the coming of
George de Croisenois. “What do you propose then?” asked he.

“Merely that each of us, without stating the grounds of our quarrel,
write down the conditions and sign our names as having accepted them.”

“I agree; but use dispatch.”

The two men, after the conditions had been described, wrote two letters,
dated from a foreign country, and the survivor of the combat was to post
his dead adversary’s letter, which would not fail to stop any search
after the vanished man. When this talk was concluded, Norbert rose to
his feet.

“One word in conclusion,” said he: “a soldier is leading the horse on
which I rode here up and down in the Place des Invalides. If you kill
me, go and take the horse from the man, giving him the twenty francs I
promised him.”

“I will.”

“Now let us go down.”

They left the room together. Norbert was stepping aside to permit
Croisenois to descend the stairs first, when he felt his coat gently
pulled, and, turning round, saw that the Duchess, too weak to rise to
her feet, had crawled to him on her knees. The unhappy woman had heard
everything, and in an almost inaudible voice she uttered an agonized
prayer:

“Mercy, Norbert! Have mercy! I swear to you that I am guiltless. You
never loved me, why should you fight for me. Have pity! To-morrow, by
all that I hold sacred, I swear to you that I will enter a convent, and
you shall never see my face again. Have pity!”

“Pray heaven, madame, that it may be your lover’s sword that pierces my
heart. It is your only hope, for then you will be free.”

He tore his coat from her fingers with brutal violence, and the unhappy
woman fell to the floor with a shriek as he closed the door upon her,
and followed his antagonist downstairs.



CHAPTER XVII.

BLADE TO BLADE.

Several times in the course of this interview Norbert de Champdoce had
been on the point of bursting into a furious passion, but he restrained
himself from a motive of self-pride; but now that his wife was no
longer present, he showed a savage intensity of purpose and a deadly
earnestness that was absolutely appalling. As he followed Croisenois
down the great staircase, he kept repeating the words, “Quick! quick!
we have lost too much time already;” for he saw that a mere trifle might
upset all his plans--such as a servant returning home before the others.
When they reached the ground-floor, he led George into a by-room which
looked like an armory, so filled was it with arms of all kinds and
nations.

“Here,” said he, with a bitter sneer, “we can find, I think, what we
want;” and placing the candle he carried on the mantelpiece, he leaped
upon the cushioned seat that ran round the room, and took down from
the wall several pairs of duelling swords, and, throwing them upon the
floor, exclaimed, “Choose your own weapon.”

George was an anxious as Norbert to bring this painful scene to a close,
for anything was preferable to this hideous state of suspense. The last
despairing glance of the Duchess had pierced his heart like a dagger
thrust, and when he saw Norbert thrust aside his trembling wife with
such brutality, it was all he could do to refrain from striking him
down. He made no choice of weapons, but grasped the nearest, saying,--

“One will do as well as another.”

“We cannot fight in this darkness,” said Norbert, “but I have a means to
remedy that. Come with me this way, so that we may avoid the observation
of the porter.”

They went into the stables, where he took up a large lantern, which he
lighted.

“This,” said he, “will afford ample light for our work.”

“Ah, but the neighbors will see it, too; and at this hour a light in the
garden is sure to attract attention,” observed George.

“Don’t be afraid; my grounds are not overlooked.”

They entered the garden, and soon reached the spot to which the Duke had
alluded. Norbert hung the lantern on the bough of a tree, and it gave
the same amount of light as an ordinary street lamp.

“We will dig the grave in that corner,” observed he; “and when it is
filled in, we can cover it with that heap of stones over there.”

He threw off his great coat, and, handing a spade to Croisenois, took
another himself, repeating firmly the words,--

“To work! To work!”

Croisenois would have toiled all night before he could have completed
the task, but the muscles of the Duke were hardened by his former
laborious life, and in forty minutes all was ready.

“That will do,” said Norbert, exchanging his spade for a sword. “Take
your guard.”

Croisenois, however, did not immediately obey. Impressible by nature, he
felt a cold shiver run through his frame; the dark night, the flickering
lantern, and all these preparations, made in so cold-blooded a manner,
affected his nerves. The grave, with its yawning mouth, fascinated him.

“Well,” said Norbert impatiently, “are you not ready?”

“I will speak,” exclaimed De Croisenois, driven to desperation. “In a
few minutes one of us will be lying dead on this spot. In the presence
of death a man’s words are to be relied on. Listen to me. I swear to
you, on my honor and by all my hopes of future salvation, that the
Duchess de Champdoce is entirely free from guilt.”

“You have said that before; why repeat it again?”

“Because it is my duty; because I am thinking that, if I die, it will
be my insane passions that have caused the ruin of one of the best and
purest women in the world. I entreat you to believe that she has nothing
to repent of. See, I am not ashamed to descend to entreaty. Let my
death, if you kill me, be an expiation for everything. Be gentle with
your wife; and if you survive me, do not make her life one prolonged
existence of agony.”

“Silence, or I shall look upon you as a dastard,” returned Norbert
fiercely.

“Miserable fool!” said De Croisenois. “On guard, then, and may heaven
decide the issue!”

There was a sharp clash as their swords crossed, and the combat began
with intense vigor.

The space upon which the rays of the lantern cast a glimmering and
uncertain light was but a small one; and while one of the combatants
was in complete shade the other was in the light, and exposed to thrusts
which he could not see. This was fatal to Croisenois, and, as he took
a step forward, Norbert made a fierce lunge which pierced him to the
heart.

The unfortunate man threw up his arms above his head; his sword escaping
from his nerveless fingers and his knees bending under him, he fell
heavily backwards without a word escaping from his lips. Thrice he
endeavored to regain his feet, and thrice he failed in his attempts. He
strove to speak, but he could only utter a few unintelligible words,
for his life blood was suffocating him. A violent convulsion shook every
limb, then arose a long, deep-drawn sigh, and then silence--George de
Croisenois was dead.

Yes, he was dead, and Norbert de Champdoce stood over him with a wild
look of terror in his eyes, and his hair bristling upon his head, as
a shudder of horror convulsed his body. Then, for the first time, he
realized the horror of seeing a man slain by his own hand; and yet
what affected Norbert most was not that he had killed George de
Croisenois--for he believed that justice was on his side and that he
could not have acted otherwise--but the perspiration stood in thick
beads upon his forehead, as he thought that he must raise up that still
warm and quivering body, and place it in its unhallowed grave.

He hesitated and reasoned with himself for some time, going over all
the reasons that made dispatch so absolutely necessary--the risk of
detection, and the honor of his name.

He stooped and prepared to raise it, but recoiled again before his hands
had touched the body. His heart failed him, and once more he assumed an
erect position. At last he nerved himself, grasped the body, and, with
an immense exertion of strength, hurled it into the gaping grave. It
fell with a dull, heavy sound which seemed to Norbert like the roar of
an earthquake. The violent emotions which he had endured had ended
by acting on his brain, and, snatching up the spade which his late
antagonist had used with so unpracticed a hand, shovelled the earth upon
the body, flattened down the ground, and finally covered it with straw
and dead leaves.

“And this is the end of a man who wronged a Champdoce; yes, his life has
paid the penalty of his deed.”

All at once, a few paces off, in the deep shadow of the trees, he
thought that he detected the outline of a human head with a pair of
glittering eyes fixed upon him. The shock was so terrible that for an
instant he stopped and nearly fell, but he quickly recovered himself,
and, snatching up his blood-stained sword, he dashed to the spot where
he fancied he had seen this terrible witness of his deed.

At this rapid movement on the part of the Duke, a figure started up with
a faint cry for mercy. It was a woman.

She fled with inconceivable swiftness towards the house, but he caught
her just as she had gained the steps.

“Have mercy on me!” cried she. “Do not murder me!”

He dragged her back to where the lantern was hanging. She was a girl
of about eighteen years of age, ugly, badly clothed, and dirty looking.
Norbert looked earnestly at her, but could not say who she was, though
he was certain that he had seen her face somewhere.

“Who are you?” asked he.

She burst into a flood of tears, but made no other reply.

“Come,” resumed he, in more soothing accents; “you shall not be hurt.
Tell me who you are.”

“Caroline Schimmel.”

“Caroline?” repeated he.

“Yes. I have been in your service as scullery maid for the last three
months.”

“How is it that you did not go to the wedding with the rest of them?”

“It was not my fault. I was asked, and I did so long to go, but I was
too shabby; I had no finery to put on. I am very poor now, for I have
only fifteen francs a month, and none of the other maids would lend me
anything to wear.”

“How did you come into the garden?” asked Norbert.

“I was very miserable, and was sitting in the garden crying, when I
suddenly saw a light down there. I thought it was theirs, and crept down
the back stairs.”

“And what did you see?”

“I saw it all.”

“All what?”

“When I got down here, you and the other were digging. I thought you
were looking for money! but ah, dear me! I was wrong. Then the other
began to say something, but I couldn’t catch a word; then you fought.
Oh, it was awful! I was so frightened, I could not take my eyes off you.
Then the other fell down on his back.”

“And then?”

“Then,” she faltered, “you buried him, and then----”

“Could you recognize this--this other?”

“Yes, my lord duke, I did.”

“Had you ever seen him before? Do you know who he was?”

“No.”

“Listen to me, my girl. If you know how to hold your tongue, if you can
forget all you have seen to-night, it will be the greatest piece of luck
for you in the world that you did not go to this wedding.”

“I won’t open my lips to a soul, my lord duke. Hear me swear, I won’t.
Oh, do believe me!”

“Very well; keep your oath, and your fortune is made. To-morrow I will
give you a fine, large sum of money, and you can go back to your village
and marry some honest fellow to whom you have taken a fancy.”

“Are you not making game of me?”

“No; go to your room and go to bed, as if nothing had happened. Jean
will tell you what to do to-morrow, and you must obey him as you would
me.”

“Oh, my lord! Oh, my lord duke!”

Unable to contain her delight, she mingled her laughter and her tears.

And Norbert knew that his name, his honor, and perhaps his life were in
the hands of a wretched girl like this. All the peace and happiness of
his life were gone, and he felt like some unhappy prisoner who through
the bars of his dungeon sees his jailer’s children sporting with lighted
matches and a barrel of gunpowder. He was at her mercy, for well he knew
that it would resolve into this--that the smallest wish of this girl
would become an imperative command that he dared not disobey. However
absurd might be her whims and caprices, she had but to express them, and
he dared not resist. What means could he adopt to free himself from this
odious state of servitude? He knew but of one--the dead tell no tales.
There were four persons who were the sharer of Norbert’s secret. First,
the writer of the anonymous letter; then the Duchess; then Caroline
Schimmel; and, finally, Jean, to whom he must confide all. With these
thoughts ringing through his brain, Norbert carefully effaced the last
traces of the duel, and then bent his steps towards his wife’s chamber.

He had expected to find her still unconscious on the spot where he had
left her lying. Marie was seated in an armchair by the side of the fire;
her face was terribly pale, and her eyes sparkling with the inward flame
that consumed her.

“My honor has been vindicated; the Marquis de Croisenois is no more; I
have slain your lover, madame.”

Marie did not start; she had evidently prepared herself for this blow.
Her face assumed a more proud and disdainful expression, and the light
in her dark eyes grew brighter and brighter.

“You are wrong,” said she, “M. de Croisenois was not my lover.”

“You need no longer take the pains to lie; I ask nothing now.”

Marie’s utter calmness jarred inexpressibly upon Norbert’s exasperated
frame of mind. He would have given much to change this mood of hers,
which he could not at all understand. But in vain did he say the most
cutting things, and coupled them with bitter taunts, for she had reached
a pitch of exaltation far above his sarcasms and abuse.

“I am not lying,” answered she frigidly. “What should I gain by it? What
more have I to gain in this world? You desire to learn the truth; here
it is then: It was with my knowledge and permission that George was here
to-night. He came because I had asked him to do so, and I left the gate
in the garden wall open, so as to facilitate his entrance. He had not
been more than five minutes in the room, when you arrived, and he had
never been there before. It would have been easy for me to have left
you; but as I bear your name, I could not dishonor it. As you entered,
he was entreating me to fly with him; both his life and his honor were
in my hands. Ah, why did I pause for an instant? Had I consented, he
would still have been alive, and in some far distant country he and
I might have learned that this world has something more to offer than
unhappiness and misery. Yes, as you will have it, you shall have all. I
loved him ere I knew that you even existed. I have only my own folly to
blame, only my own unhappy weakness to deplore. Why did I not steadily
refuse to become your wife? You say that you have slain George. Not so,
for in my heart his memory will ever remain bright and ineffaceable.”

“Beware!” said Norbert furiously, “beware if----”

“Ah, would you kill me too? Do not fear resistance; my life is a blank
without him. He is dead; let death come to me; it would be a welcome
visitant. The only kindness that you could now bestow upon me would
be my death-blow. Strike then, and end it all! In death we should be
united, George and I; and as my limbs grew stiff and my breath passed
away, my whitening lips would murmur words of thanks.”

Norbert listened to her, overwhelmed by the intensity of her passion,
and marvelling that he had any power to feel after the terrible event
which had fallen upon his devoted head.

Could this be Marie, the soft and gentle woman, who spoke with such
passionate vehemence and boldly braved his anger? How could he have so
misunderstood her? He forgot all his anger in his admiration. She seemed
to him to have undergone a complete change. There was an unearthly style
of beauty around her--her eyes blazed and shone with the lurid light of
a far-distant planet, while her wealth of raven hair fell in disordered
masses on her shoulders. It was passion, real passion, that he beheld
to-night, not that mere empty delusion which he had so long followed
blindly. Marie was really capable of a deep-rooted feeling of adoration
for the man she loved, while with Diana de Mussidan, the woman with her
fair hair and the steel-blue eyes, love was but the lust of conquest, or
the desire to jeer at a suitor’s earnestness. Ah, what a revelation had
been made to him now! And what would he not have given to have wiped out
the past! He advanced towards her with outstretched arms.

“Marie!” said he, “Marie!”

“I forbid you to call me Marie!” shrieked she wildly.

He made no reply, but still advanced towards her, when, with a terrible
cry, she recoiled from him.

“Blood!” she screamed, “ah, heavens! he has blood upon his hands!”

Norbert glanced downwards; upon the wristband of his shirt there was a
tell-tale crimson stain.

The Duchess raised her hand, and pointed towards the door.

“Leave me,” said she, with an extraordinary assumption of energy, “leave
me; the secret of your crime is safe; I will not betray you or hand you
over to justice. But remember that a murdered man stands between us, and
that I loathe and execrate you.”

Rage and jealousy tortured Norbert’s soul. Though George de Croisenois
was no more, he was still his successful rival in Marie’s love.

“You forget,” said he in a voice hoarse with passion, “that you are
mine, and that, as your husband, I can make your existence one long
scene of agony and misery. Keep this fact in your memory. To-morrow, at
six o’clock, I shall be here.”

The clock was striking two as he left the house and hastened to the spot
where he had left his horse.

The soldier was still pacing backwards and forwards, leading the Duke’s
horse.

“My faith!” said the man, as soon as he perceived Norbert, “you pay
precious long visits. I had only leave to go to the theatre, and I shall
get into trouble over this.”

“Pshaw! I promised you twenty francs. Here are two louis.”

The soldier pocketed the money with an air of delighted surprise, and
Norbert sprang into the saddle.

An hour later he gave the appointed signal upon the window pane, behind
which the trusty Jean was waiting.

“Take care that no one sees you as you take the horse to the stable,”
 said the Duke hastily, “and then come to me, for I want your assistance
and advice.”



CHAPTER XVIII.

THE HEIR OF CHAMPDOCE.

As long as she was in Norbert’s presence, anger and indignation gave
the Duchess de Champdoce strength; but as soon as she was left alone her
energy gave way, and with an outburst of tears she sank, half fainting,
upon a couch. Her despair was augmented from the fact that she felt that
had it not been for her, George de Croisenois would never have met with
his death.

“Had I not made that fatal appointment,” she sobbed, “he would be alive
and well now; my love has slain him as surely as if my hand had held the
steel that has pierced his heart!”

She at first thought of seeking refuge with her father, but abandoned
the idea almost immediately, for she felt that he would refuse to
enter into her grievance, or would say, “You are a duchess; you have an
enormous fortune. You must be happy; and if you are not, it must be your
own fault.”

In terrible anguish the night passed away; and when her maids entered
the room, they found her lying on the floor, dressed as she had been the
night before. No one knew what to do, and messengers were dispatched in
all directions to summon medical advice.

Norbert’s return was eagerly welcomed by the terrified domestics, and a
general feeling of relief pervaded the establishment.

The Duke had grown very uneasy as to what might have happened during his
absence. He questioned the servants as diplomatically as he could; and
while he was thus engaged, the doctors who had been summoned arrived.

After seeing their patient, they did not for a moment conceal their
opinion that the case was a very serious one, and that it was possible
that she might not survive this mysterious seizure. They impressed upon
Norbert the necessity of the Duchess being kept perfectly quiet and
never left alone, and then departed, promising to call again in the
afternoon.

Their injunctions were unnecessary, for Norbert had established himself
by his wife’s bedside, resolved not to quit her until her health was
re-established or death had intervened to release her from suffering.
Fever had claimed her for its own, and in her delusion she uttered
many incoherent ravings, the key to which Norbert alone held, and which
filled his soul with dread and terror.

This was the second time that Norbert had been compelled to watch over
a sick-bed, guarding within his heart a terrible secret. At Champdoce
he had sat by his father’s side, who could have revealed the terrible
attempt against his life; and now it was his wife that he was keeping a
watch on, lest her lips should utter the horrible secret of the death of
George de Croisenois.

Compelled to remain by his wife’s side, the thoughts of his past life
forced themselves upon him, and he shuddered to think that, at the age
of twenty-five he had only to look back upon scenes of misery and crime,
which cast a cloud of gloom and horror over the rest of his days. What a
terrible future to come after so hideous a past!

He had another source of anxiety, and frequently rang the bell to
inquire for Jean.

“Send him to me as soon as he comes,” was his order.

At last Jean made his appearance, and his master led him into a
deeply-recessed window.

“Well?” asked he.

“All is settled, my lord; be easy.”

“And Caroline?”

“Has left. I gave her twenty thousand francs, and saw her into the train
myself. She is going to the States, where she hopes to find a cousin who
will marry her; at least, that is her intention.”

Norbert heaved a deep sigh of relief, for the thought of Caroline
Schimmel had laid like a heavy burden upon his heart.

“And how about the other matter?” asked he.

The old man shook his head.

“What has been done?”

“I have got hold of a young fellow who believes that I wish to send him
to Egypt, to purchase cotton. He will start to-morrow, and will post the
two letters written by the Marquis de Croisenois, one at Marseilles, and
the other at Cairo.”

“Do you not think that these letters will insure my perfect security?”

“I see that any indiscretion on our agent’s part, or a mere act of
carelessness, may ruin us.”

“And yet it must be done.”

After consulting together, the doctors had given some slight hope, but
the position of the patient was still very precarious. It was suggested
that her intellect might be permanently affected; and during all these
long and anxious hours Norbert did not even dare to close his eyes, and
it was with feelings of secret terror that he permitted the maids to
perform their duties around their invalid mistress.

Upon the fourth day the fever took a favorable turn, and Marie slept,
giving Norbert time to review his position.

How was it that Madame de Mussidan, who was a daily visitor, had
not appeared at the house since that eventful night? He was so much
surprised at this that he ventured to dispatch a short note, acquainting
her of the sudden illness of his wife.

In an hour he received a reply, merely containing these words:--

“Can you account for M. de Mussidan’s sudden determination to spend the
winter in Italy? We leave this evening. Farewell.--D.”

And so she, too, had abandoned him, taking with her all the hopes he had
in the world. Still, however, his infatuation held its sway over him,
and he forced himself to believe that she felt this separation as keenly
as he did.

Some five days afterwards, when the Duchess de Champdoce had been
pronounced out of immediate danger, one of the doctors took him
mysteriously aside. He said that he wanted to inform the Duke of a
startling, but he hoped a welcome piece of intelligence--that the
Duchess de Champdoce was in the way to present the Duke with an heir to
his title and estates.

It was the knowledge of this that had decided her not to leave her
husband’s roof, and had steeled her heart against George’s entreaties.
She had hesitated, and had almost yielded to the feelings of her heart,
when this thought troubled her.

Unfortunately for herself, she had not disclosed her condition to her
husband, and, at the news, all Norbert’s former suspicions revived, and
his wrath rose once more to an extraordinary height. His lips grew pale,
and his eyes blazed with fury.

“Thank you, doctor!” exclaimed he. “Of course, the news is very welcome.
Good-by. I must go to the Duchess at once.”

Instead of going to his wife, Norbert went and locked himself up in his
own private apartment. He had need to be alone, in order to look this
fresh complication more fully in the face, and the more he reflected,
the more convinced was he that he had been the dupe of a guilty woman.
He had begun by doubting, and he ended by being convinced that the child
was not his. Was he to accept this degraded position, and rear up as his
own the child of George de Croisenois? The child would grow up under his
own roof-tree, bear his name, and finally inherit his title and gigantic
fortune. “Never,” muttered he. “No, never; for sooner than that, I will
crush the life out of it with my own hands!”

The more he thought how he should have to deceive the world by feigning
love and lavishing caresses upon this interloping child, the more he
felt that it would be impossible to perform his task. He had, however,
much to do at present. The sudden and mysterious disappearance of George
de Croisenois had created much stir and excitement in Paris, and the
letter which had been posed by the agent dispatched by Jean, instead
of explaining matters, had only deepened the mystery and caused fresh
grounds of surprise to arise in the minds of the friends of the Marquis
and the police authorities. But the disappearance of the Marquis was
only a nine days’ wonder after all. Some other strange event excited the
attention of the fickle public, and George de Croisenois’ name was no
longer in every one’s mouth.

Norbert breathed freely once more, for he felt his secret was safe.

Diana de Mussidan had now been absent for three months and had not
vouchsafed him a single line. A river of blood flowed between him and
his wife. Among all his acquaintances he had not one friend on whom he
could rely, and his reckless life of debauchery and dissipation began
to weary him. His thoughts were always fixed upon this coming child. How
could he ever bear to bring it up as if it were his own? He had thought
over many plans, but always trusted to the first one he had conceived.
This was to procure an infant, it mattered not where or by what means,
and substitute it for the new-born child of his wife. As time rolled on,
he became more imbued with this idea, and at length he summoned Jean
to him, that faithful old man, who served his master so truly out of
affection to the house of Champdoce.

For the first time Jean raised an objection to his master’s proposal,
declaring that such an act would bring shame and misery upon all
concerned in it; but when he found that Norbert was determined, and
that, if he refused, his master would employ some less scrupulous
agent, he, with tears in his eyes and a tremor in his voice, promised
obedience.

About a month later, Jean came to his master and suggested that it would
be best the _accouchement_ of the Duchess should take place at a chateau
belonging to the Champdoce family near Montroire, and that this once
done, he, Jean would arrange everything. The removal was effected almost
at once, and the Duchess, who was a mere shadow of her former self,
made no opposition. She and Norbert lived together as perfect strangers.
Sometimes a week would elapse without their meeting; and if they had
occasion to communicate, it was done by letter.

The estate to which Norbert had conducted the Duchess was admirably
adapted for his purpose. The unhappy woman was entirely alone in the
world, and had no one to whom she could apply for protection or advice.
Her father, the Count de Puymandour, had died suddenly a month before,
owing to chagrin caused by his defeat when a candidate for a seat in the
Chamber. The brief note from the despairing mother, in which followed
the words, “Have mercy! Give me back my child!” hardly describes the
terrible events that occurred in the lonely Chateau to which Norbert had
conducted his innocent victim.

The child of the Duchess de Champdoce had been placed by Jean in the
Foundling Hospital at Vendome, while the infant that was baptized with
the grandiloquent names of Anne Rene, Gontran de Duepair, Marquis de
Champdoce, was the bastard child of a girl living near Montroire, who
was known in the neighborhood as “The Witch.”



CHAPTER XIX.

MASCARIN SPEAKS.

This was the conclusion of the manuscript handed by Mascarin to Paul
Violaine, and the young man laid down the roll of paper with the remark,
“And that is all.”

He had consumed six hours in reading this sad account of the follies and
crimes of the owners of illustrious names.

Mascarin had listened with the complacency of an author who hears his
own work read aloud to him, but all the while he was keenly watching him
beneath his spectacles and the faces of his companions. The effect that
was produced was immense, and exactly what he had anticipated. Paul,
Hortebise, and Catenac gazed upon each other with faces in which
astonishment at the strange recital, and then at the power of the man
who had collected these facts together, were mingled, and Catenac was
the first who spoke. The sound of his own voice seemed gradually to
dispel the vague sense of apprehension that hung about the office.

“Aha!” cried he, “I always said that our old friend Mascarin would
make his mark in literature. As soon as his pen touches the paper the
business man vanishes; we have no longer a collection of dry facts and
proofs, but the stirring pages of a sensational novel.”

“Do you really consider that as a mere romance?” asked Hortebise.

“It reads like one certainly; you must allow that.”

“Catenac,” remarked Mascarin in his bitterly sarcastic tone, “is best
able to pronounce upon the truth or falsehood of this narrative, as he
is the professional adviser of this same Duke de Champdoce, the very
Norbert whose life has just been read to you.”

“I do not deny that there is some slight foundation to it,” returned the
lawyer.

“Then what is it that you do deny?”

“Nothing, nothing; I merely objected, more in jest than otherwise, to
the sentimental manner in which you have set forward your case.”

“Catenac,” remarked Mascarin, addressing the others, “has received many
confidential communications from his noble client, which he has not
thought fit to communicate to us; and though he fancied that we were
drifting into quicksands and among breakers, he displayed no signal of
warning to save us from our danger, hoping, like a true friend, that, by
this means, he might get rid of us.”

Catenac began to utter protestations and denials, but Mascarin cut him
short with an imperative gesture, and, after a long pause, he again
commenced,--

“You must understand that my inquisitors have had but little to do in
this affair, for my work has chiefly consisted in putting fragments
together. It is not to me that you are indebted for the sensational
(I think that that was the term used) part of my story, but rather to
Madame de Mussidan and Norbert de Champdoce. I am sure that some of the
phrases must have struck you considerably.”

“It seems to me,” objected Catenac--

“Perhaps,” broke in Mascarin, “you have forgotten the correspondence
which the Countess de Mussidan preserved so carefully--both his letters
and her own, which Norbert returned to her.”

“And we have those?”

“Of course we have, only there is a perfect romance contained in these
letters. What I have read is a mere bald extract from them; and this
is not all. The man who assisted me in the unravelling of this dark
intrigue was the original promoter--Daumon.”

“What, is the Counsellor still alive?”

“Certainly, and you know him. He is not quite in his first youth, and
has aged somewhat, but his intellect is as brilliant as ever.”

Catenac grew serious. “You tell me a great deal,” said he.

“I can tell you even more. I can tell you that the account of the
deed was written under the dictation of Caroline Schimmel,” broke in
Mascarin. “This unlucky woman started for Havre, intending to sail for
the United States, but she got no further than that seaport town, for
the good looks and the persuasive tongue of a sailor induced her to
alter her plans. As long as her money lasted he remained an ardent
lover, but vanished with the disappearance of her last thousand-franc
note. Starving and poverty-stricken, Caroline returned to Paris and to
the Duke de Champdoce, who accepted her constant demands for money as a
penitent expiation of his crime. But she remained faithful to her oath;
and had it not been for her terrible propensity for drink, Tantaine
would never have succeeded in extracting her secret from her. If, on
her recovery from her fit of drunk coma, she recollects what has taken
place, she will, if I read her character right, go straight to the Duke
de Champdoce and tell him that his secret has passed into better hands.”

At this idea being promulgated, Catenac started from his chair with a
loud oath.

“Did you think,” asked Mascarin, “that I should feel so much at my ease
if I found that there was the slightest risk? Let us consider what it
is that Caroline can say. Who is it that she can accuse of having stolen
her secret from her? Why, only a poor old wretch named Tantaine. How can
the Duke possibly trace any connection between this miserable writer and
Catenac?”

“Yes, I think that it would be a difficult task.”

“Besides,” pursued Mascarin, “what have we to fear from the Duke de
Champdoce? Nothing, as far as I can see. Is he not as much in our power
as the woman he formerly loved--Diana de Mussidan? Do we not hold the
letters of both of them, and do we not know in what corner of his garden
to dig to discover a damning piece of evidence? Remember that there will
be no difficulty in identifying the skeleton, for at the time of his
disappearance, Croisenois had about him several Spanish doubloons, a
fact which was given to the police.”

“Well,” said Catenac, “I will act faithfully. Tell me your plans, and I
will let you know all that I hear from the Duke.”

For a moment a smile hovered upon Mascarin’s lips, for this time he
placed firm reliance upon the good faith of the lawyer.

“Before we go further,” said he, “let me conclude this narrative which
Paul has just read. It is sad and simple. The united ages of the Duke
and Duchess did not exceed fifty years; they had unlimited wealth, and
bore one of the grandest historic names of France; they were surrounded
with every appliance of luxury, and yet their lives were a perfect
wreck. They simply dragged on an existence and had lost all hopes of
happiness, but they made up their minds to conceal the skeleton of their
house in the darkest cupboard, and the world knew nothing of their inner
life. The Duchess suffered much in health, and merely went out to visit
the sick and poor. The Duke worked hard to make up for the deficiencies
of his early education, and made a name and reputation throughout
Europe.”

“And how about Madame de Mussidan?” asked Catenac.

“I am coming to that,” returned Mascarin. “With that strange
determination that fills the hearts of our women, she did not consider
her revenge complete until Norbert learned that she was the sole
instrument in heaping the crowning sorrow of his life on his head; and
on her return from Italy, she sent for him and told him everything. Yes,
she absolutely had the audacity to tell him that it was she who had done
her best to throw his wife into De Croisenois’ arms. She told him that
it was she who had worked the arrangements for the meeting, and had
written the anonymous letter.”

“Why did he not kill her?” cried Hortebise. “Had she not all his
letters, and taunted him with the production of them? Ah, my dear
friends, do not let us flatter ourselves that we have the sole monopoly
of blackmailing. The high-born Countess plunged her hand into the Duke’s
coffers just as if she had been a mere adventuress. It is only ten days
ago that she borrowed--you will observe the entry of it as a loan--a
large sum to settle an account of Van Klopen’s. But let us now speak of
the child who took the place of the boy whom the Duchess brought into
the world. You know him, doctor?”

“Yes, I have often seen him. He was a good-looking young fellow.”

“He was, but he was a degraded scoundrel, after all. He was educated
and brought up without regard to expense, but he always displayed low
tastes, and, had he lived, would have brought discredit on the name he
bore. He was a thorn in the side of the Duke and Duchess, and I believe
that they felt great relief when he died of brain fever, brought on by a
drunken debauch. His parents, or those whom he supposed to be such, were
present at his death-bed, for they had learned to consider their sorrows
as the just chastisement of heaven. The boy having died, the family of
Champdoce seemed likely to become extinct, and then it was that Norbert
decided to do what his wife had long urged upon him, to seek for and
reclaim the child which he had caused to be placed in the Foundling
Hospital at Vendome. It went against his pride to diverge from the
course he had determined on as best, but doubts had arisen in his mind
as to his wife’s guilt, and Diana’s confessions had reassured him as to
the paternity of the missing boy. It was thus with hope in his heart,
and furnished with every necessary document, that he started for
Vendome; but there a terrible disappointment awaited him. The
authorities of the hospital, on consulting the register, found that a
child had been admitted on the day and hour mentioned by Norbert, and
that his description of the infant’s clothing tallied exactly with the
entries. But the child was no longer in the hospital, and there was no
clue to his whereabouts. He had, at the age of twelve, been apprenticed
to a tanner, but he had run away from his master, and the most active
and energetic search had failed to arrest the fugitive.”

Catenac listened to all these exact details with an unpleasant feeling
gnawing at his heart, for he saw that his associates knew everything,
and he had relied upon again securing their confidence by furnishing
them with those details which were evidently already known to them.
Mascarin, however, affected not to notice his surprise, and went on with
his narrative.

“This terrible disappointment will certainly kill the Duke de Champdoce.
It seemed to him that after having so bitterly expiated the crimes and
follies of his youth, he might hope to have his old age in peace
and quiet, with a son who might cheer the loneliness of his desolate
fireside. His countenance, as soon as he appeared before the Duchess,
who had been expecting his return in an agony of anguish and suspense,
told her at once that all hope had fled. In a few days, however, the
Duke had perfectly recovered from the shock, and had decided that to
give up the search would be an act of madness. The world is wide, and
a friendless boy, without a name, difficult to trace; but, with ample
funds, almost anything can be done, and he was willing to sacrifice both
life and fortune to attain his object. So immense were his resources,
that it was easy for him to employ the most skilful detectives; and
whatever the result might be, he had come to look upon this task as a
sacred duty to which he ought to devote all the remaining years of his
life. He swore that he would never rest or cease from his search until
he had been furnished with the indisputable proofs of the existence
or the death of his son. He did not confide all this project to the
Duchess; for he feared--and he had by this time learned to have some
consideration for her enfeebled frame--her health had given way so
completely that any extra degree of excitement might prove fatal to her.
He, therefore, as a preliminary, applied to that element which in the
Rue de Jerusalem acts as the terrestrial guardians of society. But the
police could do nothing for the Duke. They heard what he had to say
gravely, took notes, told him to call again later on, and there was an
end to their proceedings. It can easily be understood that the rank and
position of the Duke prevented him from making his name known in his
inquiries; and as he dared not divulge the whole truth, he gave such a
bald version of the case, that it excited no deep feelings of interest.
At last he was sent to a certain M. Lecoq.”

To Paul’s utter astonishment, the name produced a sudden and terrible
effect upon Doctor Hortebise, who started to his feet as if propelled
from his chair by the unexpected application of some hidden motive
power, and, fingering the locket that hung from his chain, gazed round
upon his associates with wild and excited eyes.

“Stop!” cried he. “If that fellow Lecoq is to put his nose into your
case, I withdraw; I will have nothing to do with it, for it is certain
to be a failure.”

He appeared to be so thoroughly frightened, that Catenac condescended to
smile.

“Yes, yes,” said he, “I can understand your alarm; but be at ease; Lecoq
has nothing to do with us.”

But Hortebise was not satisfied with Catenac’s assurance, and looked for
confirmation from Mascarin.

“Lecoq has nothing to do with us,” repeated his friend. “The fool
said that his position prevented him from giving his time to any
investigation of a private nature, which, by the way, is quite true.
The Duke offered him a heavy sum to throw up his appointment, but
he refused, saying he did not work for money, but from love for his
profession.”

“Which is quite true,” interrupted Catenac.

“However,” continued Mascarin, “to cut short my narrative, the Duke, on
the refusal of Lecoq to act, applied to Catenac.”

“Yes,” answered the lawyer, “and the Duke has placed the conduct of the
search in my hands.”

“Have you formed any plan of action?”

“Not at present. The Duke said, ‘Ask every living soul in the world,
if you can succeed in no other way’; this is all the instruction he has
given me; and,” added he, with a slight shrug of his shoulders, “I am
almost of Perpignan’s opinion, that the search will be a fruitless one.”

“Lecoq did not think so.”

“He only said that he believed he should succeed if he were to take it
in hand.”

“Well,” answered Mascarin coldly, “I have been certain of success from
the very commencement.”

“Have you been to Vendome?” asked Catenac.

“Never mind, I have been somewhere, and at this very moment could place
my hand upon the shoulder of the heir to the dukedom of Champdoce.”

“Are you in earnest?”

“I was never more in earnest in my life. I have found him; only as it is
impossible for me to appear in the matter, I shall delegate to you and
Perpignan the happiness of restoring the lost son to his father’s arms.”

Catenac glanced from Mascarin to Hortebise, and from them to Paul, and
seemed to wish to be certain that he was not being made an object of
ridicule.

“And why do you not wish to appear in the matter?” asked he at last, in
a suspicious tone of voice. “Do you foresee some risk, and want me to
bear the brunt?”

Mascarin shrugged his shoulders.

“First,” said he, “I am not a traitor, as you know well enough; and
then the interests of all of us depend on your safety. Can one of us be
compromised without endangering his associates? You know that this
is impossible. All you have to do is to point out where the traces
commence; others will follow them at their own risk, and all you will
have to do will be to look calmly on.”

“But--”

Mascarin lost his patience, and with a deep frown, replied,--

“That is enough. We require no more argument, I am the master, and it is
for you to obey.”

When Mascarin adopted this tone, resistance was out of the question; and
as he invariably made all yield to him, it was best to obey with a good
grace, and Catenac relapsed into silence, completely subjugated and very
much puzzled.

“Sit down at my desk,” continued Mascarin, “and take careful notes of
what I now say. Success is, as I have told you, inevitable, but I must
be ably backed. All now depends upon your exactitude in obeying my
orders; one false step may ruin us all. You have heard this, and cannot
say that you are not fully warned.”



CHAPTER XX.

A SUDDEN CHECK.

Catenac seated himself at the writing-table without a word, concealing
his anger and jealousy beneath a careless smile. Mascarin was no longer
the plotter consulting with his confederates; he was the master issuing
his orders to his subordinates. He had now taken from a box some of
those square pieces of pasteboard, which he spent his time in reading
over.

“Try and not miss one word of what I am saying,” remarked he, bending
his keen glance upon Paul; then, turning to Catenac, he continued, “Can
you persuade the Duke de Champdoce and Perpignan to start for Vendome on
Saturday?”

“Perhaps I may be able to do so.”

“I want a Yes or No. Can you or can you not make these people go there?”

“Well, yes, then.”

“Very well. Then, on going to Vendome, you will stop at the Hotel de
Porte.”

“Hotel de Porte,” repeated Catenac, as he made a note of the name.

“Upon the day of your arrival at Vendome,” continued Mascarin, “you
could do very little. Your time would be taken up in resting after your
journey, and perhaps you may make a few preliminary inquiries. It will
be on Sunday that you will go to the hospital together, and make the
same inquires which the Duke formerly made by himself. The lady superior
is a woman of excellent taste and education, and she will do all that
she can to be useful to you. Through her you will be able to obtain
the boy’s description, and the date on which he left the hospital to
be apprenticed to a tanner. She will tell you that, disliking the
employment, he ran away from them at the age of twelve and a half years,
and that since then no trace of him has been found. You will hear from
her that he was a tall, well-built lad, looking two years older than he
really was, with an intelligent cast of feature, and keen, bright
eyes, full of health and good looks. He had on, on the day of his
disappearance, blue and white striped trousers, a gray blouse, a cap
with no peak, and a spotted silk cravat. Then to assist you still
further in your researches she will add that he carried in a bundle,
enveloped in a red plaid cotton handkerchief, a white blouse, a pair of
gray cloth trousers, and a pair of new shoes.”

Catenac watched Mascarin as he was speaking with an expression of
ill-concealed enmity.

“You are well informed, on my word,” muttered he.

“I think I am,” returned Mascarin. “After this you will go back to the
hotel, and not until then--do you understand?--and you will consult as
to the first steps to be taken. The plan proposed by Perpignan is an
excellent one.”

“What! you know it then?”

“Of course I do. He proposed to divide Vendome and its suburbs into a
certain number of circles, and to make a house-to-house visitation in
each of them. Let him go to work in this manner. Of course, to do so,
you will require a guide.”

“Of course we should require such a person.”

“Here, Catenac, I must leave a little to chance, for I am not quite
omnipotent. But there are nine chances out of ten that your host will
advise you to avail yourself of the services of a man called Frejot,
who acts as commissioner to the hotel. It may be, however, that he may
designate some one else; but in that case you must, by some means or
other, manage to employ the services of one other man.”

“What am I to say to him?”

“He understands what he is to do completely. Well, these preliminaries
being settled, you will commence on Monday morning to search the
suburb called Areines, under the guidance of Frejot. Leave all the
responsibility to Perpignan, but make sure that the Duke comes with
you. Ask the denizens a series of questions which you have prepared
beforehand, such as ‘My friends, we are in search of a boy. A reward of
ten thousand francs is offered to any one who will put us on his track.
He must have left these parts in August, 1856, and some of you may have
seen him.’”

Here Catenac stopped Mascarin.

“Wait a moment. Your own words are excellent; I will write them down.”

“All Monday,” continued Mascarin, “you will not make much progress,
and for the next few days it will be the same, but on Saturday prepare
yourself for a great surprise; for on that day Frejot will take you to a
large, lonely farmhouse, on the shores of a lake. This farm is held by
a man named Lorgelin, who cultivates it with the assistance of his wife
and his two sons. You will find these worthy people at dinner. They will
offer you some refreshment, and you will accept. At the next word you
utter you will find that they will glance at each other in a meaning
manner, and the wife will exclaim, ‘Blessed Virgin! Surely the gentleman
is speaking of the poor lad we have so often talked about.’”

As Mascarin went on describing his arrangements, his whole form seemed
to dilate, and his face shone with the knowledge of mastery and power.
His voice was so clear and his manner so full of authority and command,
that it carried conviction to the minds of all those who were seated
listening to him. He spoke of what would happen as if he was dealing
with an absolute certainty, and went on with such wonderful lucidity and
force of reasoning that they seemed to be absolutely real.

“Oh! the farmer’s wife will say this, will she?” demanded Catenac, in a
tone of the utmost surprise.

“Yes, this, and nothing more. Then the husband will explain that they
found the poor lad half dead in a ditch by the side of the road, and
that they took him home, and did what they could for him; and will add,
this was in the beginning of September, 1856. You will offer to read him
your description of the lad, but he will volunteer his own, which you
will find exactly to tally with the one you have. Then Lorgelin will
tell you what an excellent lad he was, and how the farm seemed quite
another place as long as he remained there. All the family will join
in singing his praises--he was so good-tempered, so obliging, and
at thirteen he could write like a lawyer’s clerk. And then they will
produce some of his writing in an old copy book. But after all the old
woman, with a tear in her eye, will say that she found the lad had
not much gratitude in his composition, for at the end of the following
September he left the farm where he had received so much kindness. Yes,
he left them to go away with some strolling performers. You will be
absolutely affected by the words of these worthy people, and before you
leave they will show you the clothes the lad left behind him.”

Catenac was waiting for the conclusion, and then exclaimed, in rather a
disappointed tone,--

“But I do not see what we have gained when Lorgelin’s story has been
repeated to us.”

Mascarin raised his hand, as though to deprecate immediate criticism,
and to ask for further patience on the part of his audience.

“Permit me to go on,” said he. “You would now not know what to do, but
Perpignan will not hesitate for a moment. He will tell you that he holds
the end of the clue, and that all that remains to be done is to follow
it up carefully.”

“I think that you overrate Perpignan’s talents.”

“Not a bit; each man to his own line of business. Besides, if he wanders
off the course, you must get him back to it. In this you must act
diplomatically. His first move will naturally be to take you to the
office of the mayor of the township, where a register of licenses is
kept. There you will find that in September, 1857, there passed through
the place a troupe of travelling performers, consisting of nine persons,
with the caravans, under the management of a man known as Vigoureux,
nicknamed the Grasshopper.”

Catenac rapidly jotted down these items. “Not so fast,” said he; “I
cannot follow you.”

After a short pause, Mascarin continued.

“An attentive examination of the book will prove to you that no other
troupe of itinerant performers passed through the place during that
month; and it is clear that it must have been the Grasshopper with
whom the lad went away. You will then peruse the man’s description.
Vigoureux, born at Bourgogne, Vosges. Age, forty-seven. Height, six feet
two inches. Eyes, small and gray, rather near-sighted. Complexion dark.
Third finger of left hand cut off at first joint. If you confound him,
after reading this, with any other man of his profession, you must
certainly be rather foolish.”

“I shall now be able to find him,” muttered Catenac.

“But that is Perpignan’s business. You will see him put on an air of
the greatest importance, and appear quite overjoyed at the news he has
obtained at the office of the mayor. He will say that the inquiry at
Vendome is over, and that it will be best to return to Paris at once. Of
course, you will make no objection. You will permit the Duke to make a
handsome present to Lorgelin and Frejot; but take care not to leave him
behind you. I advise you to regain Paris without a moment’s delay. The
wily Perpignan, on your return, will at once take you to the head police
office, where Vigoureux will have left his papers, like other men of his
profession. If there is any difficulty in obtaining a sight of them, the
Duke de Champdoce will act as a talisman. You will then discover that
in 1864, the man Vigoureux was sentenced to a term of imprisonment for
disorderly conduct, and that he now keeps a wine-shop at the corner of
the Rue Depleux.”

“Stop a bit,” said Catenac, “and let me take down the address.”

“When you go there, you will recognize Vigoureux by the loss of his
finger. He will at once admit that the lad followed him, and remained in
the troupe for ten months. He was a good enough lad, but as grand as a
peacock, and as lazy as a dormouse. He made great friends with an old
Alsatian, called Fritz, who was the conductor of the orchestra, and
by-and-by both were so fond of each other, that one day they went off in
each other’s company. Now you want to know what has become of Fritz? I
know Vigoureux will get tired of this prolonged string of questions, and
behave violently; then you will threaten him for having carried off
a youth of tender years, and he will calm down, and become as mild as
mother’s milk, and will promise to gain information for you. In a week
he will give the information that Fritz is to be found at the Hospital
Magloire.”

Absolutely dumb with surprise, the audience listened to these strange
assertions, which dovetailed so exactly into each other, and seemed to
have been the work of years of research.

“Fritz,” continued Mascarin, “is a sly old dog. You will find an old,
rickety, blue-eyed man at the hospital, and remember to tell the Duke
de Champdoce that he must not put too much faith in him. This wily old
Alsatian will tell you of all the sacrifices he made for the dear lad.
He will tell you that he often went without his beer and tobacco in
order to pay for the music lessons that he forced the boy to take. He
will tell you that he wanted to get him into the Government School of
Music, for that he possessed great vocal and instrumental talent, and he
cherished the hope of one day seeing him a great composer, like Weber
or Mozart. I expect that this flow of self-praise will melt the heart of
your client, for he will see that his son had made an effort to rise out
of the mire by his own exertions, and will, in this energy, recognize
one of the characteristics of the Champdoce family; and on the strength
of this testimony he will almost be ready to accept the young man as his
son.”

Catenac had for some time past been striving to decipher the meaning
hidden behind the inscrutable countenance of Mascarin, but in vain.

“Let us get on,” said the lawyer impatiently. “All that you have told me
I shall hear later on in the course of the inquiry.”

“If your sagacity requires no further explanation from me,” rejoined
Mascarin, “you will, I trust, permit me to continue them for the benefit
of our young friend, Paul Violaine. You will feel compassion when the
Alsatian tells you of his sufferings, at the boys’ description of him,
and his subsequent prosperity in the Rue d’Arras. You had better listen
to the old man as long as he continues to grumble on, the more so as you
will detect in the rancor and bitterness of his remarks all the vexation
of a disappointed speculator. He will confess to you besides that he
subsists entirely on the bounty of the lad, whom he had stigmatized as
an ungrateful villain. Of course, the Duke will have to leave behind
him some testimonial of his pleasure, and you will hurry off to the Rue
d’Arras. The proprietor of the house will tell you that some four years
ago he got rid of his musician, the only one of his class who had
dared to establish himself there, and a small present and a few adroit
questions will obtain for you the address of one of the young man’s
pupils, Madame Grandorge, a widow lady, residing in the Rue St. Louis.
This lady will tell you that she does not know the address of her former
master, but that he used to live at 57, Rue de la Harpe. From the Rue de
la Harpe you will be sent to the Rue Jacob, and from thence to the Rue
Montmartre, at the corner of the Rue Joquelet.”

Mascarin paused, drew a long breath, and chuckled inwardly, as though at
some excellent joke.

“Be comforted, Catenac,” said he. “You have nearly reached the end of
your journey. The portress at the house in the Rue Montmartre is the
most obliging woman in the world. She will tell you that the musician
still retains his rooms in the house, but that he resides there no
longer, for he has made a lucky hit, and last month he married
the daughter of a wealthy banker living close by. The young lady,
Mademoiselle Rigal, saw him, and fell in love with him.”

A clever man like Catenac should have foreseen what was coming, but
he had not, and at this conclusion he uttered a loud exclamation of
surprise.

“Yes, just so,” said Mascarin, with an air of bland triumph. “The Duke
de Champdoce will then drag you off to our mutual friend Martin Rigal,
and there you will find our young _protégé_, the happy husband of the
beautiful Flavia.”

Mascarin drew himself up, and adjusted his glasses firmly on his nose.

“Now, my dear Catenac, show the liberality and amiability of your
disposition by congratulating our friend Paul as Gontran, Marquis de
Champdoce.”

Hortebise, of course, knew what was coming; he knew the lines of the
plot of the play as if he had been a joint author of it, and was as much
excited as if he were assisting at a first rehearsal.

“Bravo!” he exclaimed, clapping his hands together. “Bravo, my dear
Mascarin, you have excelled yourself to-day!”

Worried and perplexed as Paul had been, as Mascarin concluded he sank
back in his chair, sick and giddy with emotion.

“Yes,” said Mascarin in a clear and ringing voice, “I accept your praise
without any affectation of false modesty. We have no reason to fear the
intervention of that grain of sand which sometimes stops the working of
the machine. Perpignan, poor fool though he is, will be our best friend,
and will do our work quite unconsciously. Can the Duke retain any atom
of suspicion after these minute investigations? Impossible. But to
remove the slightest element of doubt, I have another and an additional
plan. I will make him retrace the path upon which he has started. He
shall take Paul to all these various places, and at all of them the
statements will be even more fully confirmed. Paul, the son-in-law
of Martin Rigal, the husband of Flavia, will be recognized in the Rue
Montmartre, the Rue Jacob, and the Rue de la Harpe. He will be joyfully
welcomed in the Rue d’Arras; Fritz will embrace his ungrateful pupil;
Vigoureux will remind him of his skillful feats on the trapeze; the
Lorgelin family will press the lad whom they gave shelter to, to their
hearts, and this will happen, Catenac, because I will it, and because
all the people from the portress in the Rue Montmartre to the Lorgelins
are my slaves, and dare not disobey one single command which I may
issue.”

Catenac rose slowly and solemnly from his seat.

“I recognize your patience and ingenuity thoroughly, only I am going
with one word to crush the fabric of hope that you have so carefully
erected.”

Catenac might be a coward, he might also be a traitor but he was a
clever and clear-sighted man too. Consequently Hortebise shivered as
he heard these words, but Mascarin smiled disdainfully, basking in his
dream of success.

“Go on then,” said he.

“Well, then, let me tell you that you will not overreach and deceive the
Duke.”

“And why not, pray?” asked Mascarin. “But are you sure that I wish to
deceive him? You have not been open with me, why should I be frank
with you? Am I in the habit of confiding in those who do not repose
confidence in me? Does Perpignan for a moment suspect the part that he
is to play? Why may I not have judged it best to keep from you the fact
that Paul is really the child you are seeking?”

Mascarin spoke so confidently that Catenac gazed upon him, hardly
knowing to what conclusion to come, for his conscience was by no means
clear. His intellect quickly dived into the depths of all probabilities,
and yet he could not see in all these combinations any possible peril to
himself.

“I only hope,” said he, “that Paul is all that you represent him to
be; but why all these precautions? Only, mark my words, the Duke has
an infallible way of detecting, or rather of preventing, any attempt at
imposition. It is ever thus, the most trivial circumstance will overset
the best laid plans, and the inevitable destroy the combinations of the
most astute intellect.”

Mascarin interrupted his associate.

“Paul is the son of the Duke de Champdoce,” said he decisively.

What was the meaning of this? Catenac felt that he was being played
with, and grew angry.

“As you please; but you will, I presume, permit me to convince myself of
the truth of this assertion.”

Then, advancing towards Paul, the lawyer said,--

“Have the goodness to remove your coat.”

Paul took it off, and threw it upon the back of a chair.

“Now,” added Catenac, “roll up your right shirt sleeve to the shoulder.”

Scarcely had the young man obeyed, and the lawyer cast a rapid glance at
the bare flesh, than he turned to his associates and observed,--

“No, he is not the right man.”

To his extreme surprise, Mascarin and Hortebise burst into a fit of
unrestrained laughter.

“No,” pursued the lawyer, “this is not the child who was sent to the
Hospital of Vendome, and the Duke will recognize this better than I can.
You laugh, but it is because you do not know all.”

“Enough,” returned Mascarin, and then, turning to the doctor, he
remarked, “Tell him, my friends, that we know more than he thinks.”

“And so,” said Hortebise, taking Paul’s hand, “you are certain that this
is not the lost child because he has not certain marks about him; but
these will be seen upon the day on which Paul is introduced to the Duke,
and legibly enough to satisfy the most unbelieving.”

“What do you mean?”

“Let me explain in my own way. If in early childhood Paul had been
scalded on his shoulder by boiling water, he would have a scar whose
appearance would denote its origin?”

Catenac nodded, “You are quite accurate,” said he.

“Well, then listen. Paul is coming home with me. I shall take him into
my consulting-room; he will lie on a couch. I shall give him chloroform,
for I do not wish him to suffer any pain. Mascarin will help me. Then I
shall apply, on the proper part, a piece of flannel steeped in a certain
liquid which is an invention of my own. I am not a fool, as you may have
discovered before this; and in a drawer at home is a piece of flannel
cut so as exactly to resemble the irregular outline of a scar of the
kind you describe, and a few little bits here and there will do the rest
of the work artistically. When the liquid has effected its work, which
will be in ten minutes, I shall remove it, and apply an ointment,
another invention of my own, to the wound; then I shall restore Paul to
his senses, and go to dinner.”

Mascarin rubbed his hands with delight.

“But you forget that a certain space of time is required to give a scar
the appearance of not having been recent,” objected Catenac.

“Let me speak,” broke in the doctor. “If we only needed time--six
months, say, or a year--we should postpone our concluding act until
then; but I, Hortebise, assure you that in two months, thanks to another
discovery of my own--will show you a scar that will pass muster, not
perhaps before a fellow-practitioner, but certainly before the Duke.”

Catenac’s sunken eyes blazed as he thought of the prospective millions.

“May the devil fly away with all scruples!” cried he. “My friends, I am
yours soul and body; you may rely on your devoted Catenac.”

The doctor and Mascarin exchanged a look of triumph.

“Of course we share and share alike,” observed the lawyer. “It is true
that I come in rather late; but the part I play is a delicate and an
important one, and you can do nothing without me.”

“You shall have your share,” answered Mascarin evasively.

“One word more,” said the lawyer. “Do you think that the Duke has kept
nothing back? The infant was hardly seen by him or the Duchess; but Jean
saw it, and he, though very old and infirm, would come forward at any
moment to defend the name and honor of the Champdoce family.”

“Well, and what then?”

“Jean, you know, was against the substitution of another child. May he
not have foreseen the chance of such a case as this arising?”

Mascarin looked grave. “I have thought of that before,” returned he;
“but what can be done?”

“I will find out,” said Catenac. “Jean has the most implicit confidence
in me, and I will question him.”

The cold calmness of the lawyer had vanished, and Catenac only displayed
the zealous eagerness of the man who, admitted at a late hour into an
enterprise which he imagines will be lucrative, burns to do as much as
he can to further it.

“But,” added he, as an after-thought, “how can we be certain that there
is no one to recognize Paul?”

“I can answer for that; his poverty had isolated him from all but a
woman named Rose, and I took care that she should be sent to the prison
of St. Lazare. At one time I was a little anxious, as I heard that Paul
had a patron; but he, as I have found out, was the Count de Mussidan,
the murderer of Montlouis, who, as you may have guessed, was Paul’s
father.”

“We have nothing, then, to fear from that quarter,” said the doctor.

“Nothing; and while you get on with your work, I will hurry on Paul’s
marriage with Rigal’s daughter. But this will not prevent my busying
myself in another quarter; for before a month Henri de Croisenois will
have floated his Company, and become the husband of Sabine de Mussidan.”

“I think that it is about time for dinner,” remarked Hortebise, and,
turning to the _protégé_ of the association, he added, “Come, Paul.”

But Paul made no movement, and then for the first time it was seen that
the poor boy had fainted, and they had to sprinkle cold water upon him
before he regained consciousness.

“Surely,” remarked the doctor, “it is not the idea of a trifling
operation that you will not feel which has so frightened you?”

Paul shook his head. “It is not that,” said he.

“What, then, is it?”

“Simply that the real man exists; I know him, and know where he lives.”

“What do you mean?” they cried.

“I know him, I tell you--the son of the Duke de Champdoce.”

“Let us hear all!” cried Mascarin, who was the first to come to his
senses. “Explain yourself.”

“Simply this. I know such a young man, and it was the thought of this
that made me feel so ill. He is thirty-three. He was at the Foundling
Hospital; he left it at the age of twelve and a half years; and he has
just such a scald on his shoulder, which he got when he was apprenticed
to a tanner.”

“And where,” asked Mascarin quickly, “is this same young man? What is
his name, and what does he do for a living?”

“He is a painter; his name is Andre, and he lives--”

A blasphemous oath from Mascarin interrupted him. “This is the third
time,” said he fiercely, “that this cursed fellow has crossed our path;
but I swear that it shall be the last.”

Hortebise and Catenac were livid with alarm.

“What do you intend to do?” asked they.

“I shall do nothing,” answered he; “but you know that this Andre,
in addition to being a painter, is an ornamental sculptor and house
decorator, and so is often on lofty scaffolds. Have you never heard that
accidents frequently happen to that class of people?”



CHAPTER XXI.

A MELANCHOLY MASHER.

When Mascarin spoke of suppressing the man who stood in his way as
easily as if he was alluding to extinguishing a candle, he was not
aware that there was one circumstance which considerably enhanced the
difficulty of his task, for Andre had been forewarned, and this note of
warning had been sounded on the day on which he had received that
letter from Sabine, in which she spoke in such despairing terms of her
approaching marriage, which she had been compelled to agree to to
save the honor of her family. This feeling was strengthened by a long
conversation he had had with M. de Breulh-Faverlay and the Viscountess
de Bois Arden, in which it was unanimously decided that the Count
and Countess de Mussidan were victims of some plot of which Henri de
Croisenois was certainly one of the promoters. He had no conception on
what side to look for the danger, but he had an instinctive feeling that
it was impending. He prepared, therefore, to act on the defensive. It
was not only his life that was in danger, but his love and his future
happiness. M. de Breulh-Faverlay had also serious apprehensions for the
safety of a man for whom he entertained so great a respect and regard.

“I would lay a heavy wager,” said he, “that we have to do with some
villainous blackmailers, and the difficulty of the business is, that
we must do the work ourselves, for we dare not invite the aid of the
police. We have no proof to offer, and the police will not stir a foot
on mere suppositions, and we should not earn the thanks of those we are
desirous of assisting if we called the attention of the law to certain
acts in their past lives; for who can say what the terrible secret is,
that some vile wretch holds over the heads of M. and Madame de Mussidan?
And it is quite on the cards that the Count and the Countess might be
compelled to join the blackmailers and oppose us. We must act with the
greatest prudence and caution. Remember, that if you are out at night,
you must avoid dark corners, for it would be the easiest thing in the
world to put a knife into your back.”

The conclusion that was arrived at, at this interview, was that for
the present Andre and De Breulh should cease to see each other so
frequently. They felt convinced that a watch had been set on them, and
that their intimacy would certainly be notified to De Croisenois; and of
course they had every desire to cause him to imagine that they were
not acting in any way together. The arrangement, therefore, that they
entered into was that each should act from his own point of vantage
against Henri de Croisenois, and that when necessary they should meet
in the evening to compare notes in a small _café_ in the Champs Elysees,
not far from the house in which Andre was at work.

His courage was still as high as ever, but the first symptoms of
rashness had vanished. He was a born diplomatist, and fully realized
that cunning and treachery must be met by similar weapons. He must not
break his engagement to M. Gandelu; but how could he superintend the
workmen and keep an eye on Croisenois at the same time? Money was
absolutely necessary, and yet he felt a strange disinclination to accept
a loan from M. de Breulh. If he were to throw up his work, it would
naturally create suspicion.

M. Gandelu had a shrewd head, and Andre, remembering the old man’s
kindness to him on all occasions, determined to confide the matter to
him, and with this object he called on him the next morning as the
clock was striking nine. His surprise was extreme when he saw Gaston de
Gandelu in the courtyard. He was just the same looking Gaston, the lover
of Madame de Chantemille, to the outward eye, but some grave calamity
had evidently entirely changed the inner man. He was smoking his cigar
with an air of desperation, and seemed to be utterly weary of the world
and its belongings.

At the moment Andre entered the young man caught sight of him.

“Halloo!” said he; “here is my artistic friend. I lay ten to one that
you have come to ask my father to do you a favor.”

“You are quite right; is he at home?”

“The governor is in the sulks; he has shut himself up, and will not see
me.”

“You are joking.”

“Not I; the old man is a regular despot, and I am sick of everything.”

Noticing that one of the grooms was listening, Gaston had sufficient
sense to draw Andre a little on one side.

“Do you know,” asked he, “that the governor has docked my screw and vows
that he will advertise himself as not responsible for the debts of yours
truly; but I cannot think he will do so, for that would be a regular
smash-up for me. You haven’t such a trifle as ten thousand francs about
you that you could lend me, have you? I’d give twenty thousand for the
accommodation when I came of age.”

“I must say--,” began Andre.

“All right; never mind; I understand. If you had the ready, you wouldn’t
be hanging about here; but for all that, I must have the cash. Hang it
all, I signed bills to that amount payable to Verminet. Do you know the
fellow?”

“Not at all.”

“Where were you dragged up? Why, he is the head of the Mutual Loan
Society. The only nuisance is, that to make matters run a bit smooth, I
wrote down the wrong name. Do you tumble, eh?”

“But, great heavens! that is forgery,” said Andre, aghast.

“Not a bit, for I always intended to pay; besides, I wanted the money to
square Van Klopen. You know _him_, I suppose?”

“No.”

“Well, he is the chap to dress a girl. I had those costumes for Zora
from him; but it is out and out the governor’s fault. Why did he
drive me to desperation? Yes, it is all the old man’s doing. He wasn’t
satisfied with pitching into me, but he collared that poor, helpless
lamb and shut her up. She never did him any harm, and I call it a right
down cowardly and despicable act to hurt Zora.”

“Zora,” repeated Andre, who did not recognize the name.

“Yes, Zora; you know; you had a feed with us one day.”

“Yes, yes; you mean Rose.”

“That’s it; but I don’t like any one to call her by that ugly, common
name. Well, the governor has gone mad about her, and filed a complaint
against her of decoying a minor, as if I was a fellow any one could
decoy. Well, the end of it was, that she is now in the prison of St.
Lazare.”

The tears started to the young man’s eyes as he related this grievance.

“Poor Zora,” he added; “I was never mashed on a woman like I was on her.
And then what a splendid form she has! Why, the hairdresser said he had
never seen such hair in his life; and she is at St. Lazare. As soon as
the police came for her, her first thoughts were of me, and she shrieked
out, ‘Poor Gaston will kill himself when he hears of this.’ The cook
told me this, and added that her mistress’s sufferings were terrible.
And she is at St. Lazare. I tried to see her, but it was no go;” and
here the boy’s voice broke into a sob.

“Come,” said Andre, “keep up your spirits.”

“Ah! you shall see if, as soon as I am twenty-one, I don’t marry her.
I don’t put all the blame on the old man. He has been advised by his
lawyer, a beast by the name of Catenac. Do you know _him_?”

“No.”

“You don’t seem to know any one. Well, I shall send him a challenge
to-morrow. I have got my seconds all ready. By the way, would you like
to act for me? I can easily get rid of one of the others.”

“I have had no experience in such matters.”

“Ah, then you would be of no use. My seconds must put him into a regular
blue funk.”

“In that case--”

“No; I know what you are going to say: you mean that I had best look out
for a military swell; but, after all, the matter lies in a nutshell. I
am the insulted party, and draw pistols at ten paces. If that frightens
him, he will make the governor drop all this rubbish.”

Had his mind not been so much occupied, this rhodomontade on Gaston’s
part would have amused Andre very much, but now he asked himself what
would be the quickest way to escape from him.

Just at this moment a servant emerged from the house.

“Sir,” said he, addressing Andre, “my master has seen you from his
window, and begs that you will go up to him at once.”

“I will be with him immediately,” answered Andre; and, holding out his
hand to Gaston, he took leave of him with a few words of encouragement.



CHAPTER XXII.

A GENTLEMAN IN DIFFICULTIES.

When Andre had got rid of the young man, and had been ushered into M.
Gandelu’s presence, the change in the gentleman’s appearance struck him
with horror. His eyes were red and swollen as if he had been weeping,
but as soon as he caught sight of Andre his face brightened, and he
welcomed him warmly.

“Oh, it does me good to see you, and I bless the fortunate chance that
has brought you here to-day.”

“It is not a very fortunate chance,” answered Andre, as he shook his
head sadly.

For the first time Gandelu noticed the air of gravity which marked the
young man, and the shade of sorrow upon his brow.

“What ails you, Andre?” asked he.

“A great misfortune is hanging over me.”

“What do you mean?”

“The naked truth and this misfortune may bring death and despair to me.”

“I am your friend, my dear boy,” said the old man, “and would gladly be
of service to you. Tell me if I can be of any use?”

“I come to you to-day to ask a favor at your hands.”

“And you thought of the old man, then? I thank you for doing so. Give me
your hand; I like to feel the grasp of an honest man’s hand; it warms my
heart.”

“It is the secret of my life that I am going to confide to you,” said
he, with some solemnity.

M. Gandelu made no reply, but struck his clenched fist upon his breast,
as though to show that any secret confided to him would be locked up in
the safe security of his heart.

Then Andre hesitated no longer, and, with the exception of giving names,
told the whole story of his love, his ambitions, and his hopes, and gave
a clear account of how matters stood.

“How can I help you?” asked M. Gandelu.

“Allow me,” said Andre, “to hand over the work with which you have
intrusted me to one of my friends. I will retain the responsibility, but
will merely act as one of the workmen. This, to a certain extent, will
give me my liberty, while at the same time I shall be earning a little
money, which is just now of vast importance to me.”

“Is that what you call a favor?”

“Certainly, and a very great one, too.”

Gandelu rose hastily, and, opening an iron safe which stood in one
corner of the room, and taking from it a bundle of banknotes, he placed
them on the table before Andre with an expressive look, which meant,
“Take what you desire.”

The unlooked-for kindness of this man, who forgot all his own sorrows
in his anxiety to relieve the necessities of another, affected Andre
deeply.

“I do not need money,” began he.

With a wave of his hand Gandelu inspired silence. “Take these twenty
thousand francs,” said he, “and then I can tell you why I asked you to
come upstairs.”

A refusal would have wounded the old man deeply, and so Andre took the
proffered loan.

Gandelu resumed his seat, and remained in gloomy silence for some time.

“My dear boy,” said he, in a voice broken by emotion, “a day or two back
you saw something of the trouble that I am laboring under. I have no
longer any respect or esteem for that wretched fool, my son, Pierre.”

Andre had already guessed that he had been incensed with reference to
something connected with Gaston.

“Your son has behaved very foolishly,” said he; “but remember he is very
young.”

A sad smile passed over the old man’s face.

“My son is old in vice,” replied he. “I have thought the matter over
only too plainly. Yesterday he declared that he would kill himself. An
absurd threat. Up to this time I have been culpably weak, and it is no
use now to act in an opposite direction. The unhappy boy is infatuated
with a degraded woman named Rose, and I have had her locked up; but I
have made up my mind to let her out again, and also to pay his debts. It
is weak folly, I allow; but what am I to do? I am his father after all;
and while I cannot respect her, I must love him. He has almost broken my
heart, but it was his to do as he liked with.”

Andre made no reply, and Gandelu went on.

“I have not deceived myself; my son is ruined. I can but stand by
and wait for the end. If this Rose is not everything that is bad, her
influence may be of some use to him. But I want some one to undertake
these negotiations, and I had hopes, Andre, that you would have been
able to do so.”

Andre felt that all his efforts ought to be devoted to the interests of
Sabine, but at the same time he could not leave the kind old man to the
mercy of others, and by a display of absolute heroism he determined to
accede to the broken-hearted father’s desires and briefly told him that
he was at his service. Gandelu thanked him warmly, and Andre seating
himself at the table, the two men entered into a long discussion as to
the best means to be adopted. It was finally decided that Andre should
act with freedom and according to his own instincts, and that M. Gandelu
should, to actual appearance, remain firm in the course he had entered
upon, and should only be induced, by Andre’s intercession, to adopt
milder measures. The result justified their anticipations, for Gaston
was even more crushed and downcast than Andre had imagined, and it was
in an agony of suspense that he awaited the return of the young painter.
As soon as he saw him descending the steps he sprang forward to greet
him.

“Well,” said he, in a tone of eager inquiry.

“Your father,” returned Andre, “is terribly angry with you, but I hope
to be able to induce him to do something for you.”

“Will he set Zora at liberty?”

“Perhaps he will; but first he must have something more from you than
promises--he must have stable guarantees.”

At these words Gaston’s face fell. “Guarantees,” answered he sulkily.
“Is not my word of honor enough? What sort of guarantees does he
require?”

“That I cannot tell you, and you must find out for yourself; but I will
do all I can for you.”

Gaston gazed upon Andre in surprise.

“Do you mean to tell me,” asked he, “that you can do pretty well what
you like with the governor?”

“Not exactly; but surely you can see that I have a good deal of
influence over him. If you want a proof of this, see, here is the money
to take up these bills you told me of.”

“What, Verminet’s?”

“I suppose so. I am speaking of those to which you were mad enough to
forge another man’s name.”

Foolish as the boy was, this act of his had caused him many a sleepless
night, and he had reflected very often how he could possibly escape from
the consequence of his act of rashness.

“Give me the money,” cried he.

Andre shook his head, however. “Forgive me,” said he, “but this money
does not quit my hand until the bills are handed over to me. Your
father’s orders on this point are decided; but the sooner we settle the
affair the better.”

“That is too bad; the governor is as sly as a fox; but he must have his
own way, I suppose, so come on. Only just wait till I slip on a coat
more suitable to my position than this lounging suit.”

He rushed away, and was back again in ten minutes as neat as a new pin,
and full of gayety and good spirits.

“We can walk,” said he, putting his arm through Andre’s. “We have to go
to the Rue St. Anne.”

Verminet had his office in this street--the office of the Mutual Loan
Society, of which he was the managing director. The house, in spite of
its grandiloquent title, was of excessively shabby exterior. The Mutual
Loan Society was frequented by those who, having lost their credit,
wished to obtain a fresh amount, and who, having no money, wanted to
borrow some.

Verminet’s plan of financial operations was perfectly simple. A
tradesman on the verge of bankruptcy would come to him, Verminet would
look into his case and make him sign bills for the sum he required,
handing him in exchange bills drawn by other tradesman in quite as
serious a predicament as himself, and pocketed a commission of two per
cent. upon both the transactions. Verminet obtained clients from the
simple fact that an embarrassed tradesman is utterly reckless, cares not
what he signs, and will clutch at a straw to keep his head above water.
But there were many other transactions carried on at the office of the
Mutual Loan Society, for its largest means of income was drawn from even
less respectable sources, and it was alleged that many of these bogus
bills which are occasionally cashed by some respectable bankers were
manufactured there. At any rate, Verminet managed to make money somehow.



CHAPTER XXIII.

RINGING THE CHANGES.

Andre, who was gifted with plenty of intelligence, at once judged of the
kind of business done by the Mutual Loan Society by the dinginess of
the brass plate on the door and the generally dilapidated aspect of the
house.

“I don’t like the look of it at all,” said he.

“It does not go in for show,” answered Gaston, affecting an air of
wisdom, “but it is deemed handy sometimes. It does all sorts of business
that you would never think of. A real downy card is Verminet.”

Andre could easily believe this, for, of course, there could be but one
opinion concerning the character of a man who could have induced a mere
simpleton like Gaston to affix a forged signature to the bills which he
had discounted. He made no remark, however, but entered the house,
with the interior arrangements of which Gaston appeared to be perfectly
familiar. They passed through a dirty, ill-smelling passage, went across
a courtyard, cold and damp as a cell, and ascended a flight of stairs
with a grimy balustrade. On the second floor Gaston made a halt before
a door upon which several names were painted. They passed through into a
large and lofty room. The paper on the walls of this delectable chamber
was torn and spotted, and a light railing ran along it, behind which sat
two or three clerks, whose chief occupation appeared to be consuming the
breakfast which they had brought with them to the office. The heat of
the stove, which was burning in one corner of the room, the general
mouldiness of the atmosphere, and the smell of the coarse food, were
sufficient to turn the stomach of any one coming in from the fresh air.

“Where is M. Verminet?” asked Gaston authoritatively.

“Engaged,” replied one of the clerks, without pausing to empty his mouth
before he replied.

“Don’t you talk to me like that. What do I care whether he is engaged or
not? Tell him that Gaston de Gandelu desires to see him at once.”

The clerk was evidently impressed by his visitor’s manner, and, taking
the card which was handed to him, made his exit through a door at the
other end of the room.

Gaston was delighted at this first victory, and glanced at Andre with a
triumphant smile.

The clerk came back almost at once. “M. Verminet,” cried he, “has a
client with him just now. He begs that you will excuse him for a few
minutes, when he will see you;” and evidently anxious to be civil to the
gorgeously attired youths before him, he added, “My master is just now
engaged with M. de Croisenois.”

“Aha,” cried Gaston; “I will lay you ten to one that the dear Marquis
will be delighted to see me.”

Andre started on hearing this name, and his cheek crimsoned. The man
whom he most hated in this world; the wretch who, by his possession of
some compromising secret, was forcing Sabine into a detested marriage;
the villain whom he, M. de Breulh, and Madame de Bois Arden had sworn to
overreach, was within a few paces of him, and that now he should see him
face to face. Their eyes would meet, and he would hear the tones of the
scoundrel’s voice. His rage and agitation were so intense that it was
with the utmost difficulty that he concealed it. Luckily for him, Gaston
was not paying the slightest attention to his companion; for having, at
the clerk’s invitation, taken a chair, he assumed an imposing attitude,
which struck the shabby young man behind the railing with the deepest
admiration.

“I suppose,” said he, in a loud voice, “that you know my dear friend,
the Marquis?”

Andre made some reply, which Gaston interpreted as a negative.

“Really,” said he, “you know _no_ one, as I told you before. Where have
you lived? But you must have heard of him? Henri de Croisenois is one of
my most intimate friends. He owes me over fifty louis that I won of him
one night at baccarat.”

Andre was now certain that he had estimated Verminet’s character
correctly, and the relations of the Marquis de Croisenois with this very
equivocal personage assumed a meaning of great significance to him. He
felt now that he had gained a clue, a beacon blazed out before him,
and he saw his way more clearly into the difficult windings of this
labyrinth of iniquity which he knew that he must penetrate before he
gained the secret he longed for.

He felt like a child playing the game called “Magic Music,” when, as the
seeker nears the hiding place of the article of which he is in search,
the strains of the piano swell higher and higher. He now found that the
boy whose master he had become, knew, or said he knew, a good deal of
this marquis. Why should he not gain some information from him?

“Are you really intimate with the Marquis de Croisenois?” asked he.

“I should rather think I was,” returned Gandelu the younger. “You will
see that precious sharp. I know all about him, and who the girl is that
he is ruining himself for, but I mustn’t talk about that; mum’s the
word, you know.”

At that moment the door opened, and the Marquis appeared, followed by
Verminet.

Henri de Croisenois was attired in the most fashionable manner, and
formed an utter contrast to the flashy dress of Gaston. He was smoking a
cigar, and mechanically tapping his boots with an elegant walking cane.
In a moment the features and figure of the Viscount were indelibly
photographed upon Andre’s brain. He particularly noticed his eyes,
which had in them a half-concealed look of terror, and his face bore the
haunted expression of a person who expects some terrible blow to fall
upon him at any moment.

At a little distance the Marquis still seemed young, but a closer
inspection showed that the man looked even older than he really was, so
worn and haggard were his mouth and eyes. Nights at the gaming-table and
the anxiety as to where the fresh supplies should come from to furnish
the means to prolong his life of debauchery had told heavily upon him.
To-day, however, he seemed to be in the best temper imaginable, and
in the most cheerful manner he addressed a few words to Verminet, in
conclusion of the conversation that had been going on in the inner
office.

“It is settled then,” remarked he, “that I am to have nothing more to do
with a business with which neither of us has any real concern?”

“Just so,” answered Verminet.

“Very well, then; but remember that any mistake you may make in the
other affair will be attended with the most serious results.”

This caution seemed to suggest some new idea to Verminet, for he said
something in a low voice to his client at which they both laughed.

Gaston was fidgeting about, very uneasy at the Marquis having paid no
attention to him, and he now advanced with a magnificent salutation
and a friendly wave of the hand. If the Marquis was charmed at meeting
Gandelu, he concealed his delight in a most wonderful manner. He seemed
surprised, but not agreeably so; he bent his head, and he extended his
gloved hand with a negligent, “Ah, pleased to see you.” Then without
taking any more notice of Gaston, he turned on his heel and continued
his conversation with Verminet.

“The worst part is over,” said he, “and therefore no time is to be lost.
You must see Mascarin and Martin Rigal, the banker, to-day.”

At these words Andre started. Were these people Croisenois’ accomplices?
Certainly he had accomplices on the brain just now, and their names
remained deeply engraved on the tablets of his memory.

“Tantaine was here this morning,” observed Verminet, “and told me that
his master wanted to see me at four this afternoon. Van Klopen will be
there also. Shall I say a word to him about your fine friend?”

“‘Pon my soul,” remarked the Marquis, shrugging his shoulders, “I had
nearly forgotten her. There will be a tremendous fuss made, for she will
be wanting all sorts of things. Speak to Van Klopen certainly, but do
not bind yourself. Remember that I do not care a bit for the fair Sara.”

“Quite so; I understand,” answered Verminet; “but keep things quiet, and
do not have any open disturbances.”

“Of course not. Good morning,” and with a bow to the managing director
and a nod to Gaston, he lunged out of the office, not condescending to
take the slightest notice of Andre. Verminet invited Andre and Gaston
into his sanctum, and, taking a seat, motioned to them to do the same.
Verminet was a decided contrast to his office, which was shabby and
dirty, for his dress did his tailor credit, and he appeared to be clean.
He was neither old nor young, and carried his years well. He was fresh
and plump, wore his whiskers and hair cut in the English fashion, while
his sunken eyes had no more expression in them than those of a fish.

Gandelu was in a hurry to begin.

“Let us get to business,” said he. “Last week you lent me some money.”

“Just so. Do you want any more?”

“No; I want to return my bills.”

A cloud passed over Verminet’s face.

“The first does not fall due until the 15th,” remarked he.

“No matter; I have the money with me, and I will pay it on you handing
over the bills to me.”

“I can’t do it.”

“And why so, pray?”

“The bills have passed out of my hands.”

Gaston could scarcely credit his ears, nor believe in the truth of this
last statement, and was certainly upset, now knowing what to do.

“But,” stammered he, “you promised, when I signed those bills, that they
should never go out of your hands.”

“I don’t say I did not; but one can’t always keep to one’s promise. I
was forced to part with them. I wanted money, and so had to discount
them.”

Andre was not at all surprised, for he had anticipated some such
difficulty; and seeing that Gaston had entirely lost his head, he broke
in on the conversation.

“Excuse me, sir,” remarked he; “but it seems to me that there are
certain circumstances in this case which should have made you keep your
promise.”

Verminet stared at him.

“Who have I the honor of speaking to?” asked he, instead of making a
direct reply.

“I am a friend of M. de Gandelu’s,” returned Andre, thinking it best not
to give any name.

“A confidential friend?”

“Entirely so. He had, I think, ten thousand francs from you.”

“Pardon me, five thousand.”

Andre turned toward his companion in some surprise.

Gaston grew crimson.

“What is the meaning of this?” asked the artist.

“Can’t you see?” whispered Gaston. “I had ten because I wanted the other
five for Zora.”

“Oh, indeed,” returned Andre, with a slight uplifting of his eyebrows.
“Well, then, M. Verminet, it was five thousand francs that you lent
to my young friend here. That was right enough; but what do you say to
inducing him to forge a signature?”

“I! I do such a thing?” answered Verminet. “Why, I did not know that the
signature was not genuine.”

This insolent denial aroused the unhappy Gaston from his state of
stupor.

“This is too much, a deuced deal too much,” cried he. “Did you not
yourself tell me that, for your own security, you must insist upon
another name in addition to mine? Did you not give me a letter, and say,
‘Write a signature like the one at the bottom of this, it is that of
Martin Rigal, the banker in the Rue Montmartre’?”

“An utterly false accusation, without a shadow of proof; and remember
that a libel uttered in the presence of a third party is punishable by
law.”

“And yet, sir,” continued Andre, “you did not hesitate for a moment in
discounting these bills. Have you calculated what terrible results may
come of this breach of faith on your part?--what will happen if this
forged signature is presented to M. Martin Rigal?”

“Very unlikely. Gandelu is the drawer, Rigal merely the endorser.
Bills, when due, are always presented to the drawer,” returned Verminet
laconically.

Evidently a trap had been laid for Gaston, but the reason was still
buried in obscurity.

“Then,” remarked Andre, “we have but one course to pursue: we must trace
those notes to the hands in which they now are, and take them up.”

“Quite right.”

“But to enable us to do so, you must first let us know the name of the
party who discounted them.”

“I don’t know; I have forgotten,” answered Verminet, with a careless
wave of his hand.

“Then,” returned Andre, in a low, deep voice of concentrated fury, “let
me advise you, for your own sake, to make an immediate call upon your
powers of memory.”

“Do you threaten me?”

“And if you do not succeed in remembering the name or names, the
consequences may be more serious than you seem to anticipate.”

Verminet saw that the young painter was in dangerous earnest, and rose
from his chair, but Andre was too quick for him.

“No,” said he, placing his back against the door; “you will not leave
this room until you have done what I require.”

For fully ten minutes the men stood gazing at each other. Verminet
was green with terror, while Andre’s face, though pale, was firm and
determined.

“If the scoundrel makes any resistance,” said he to himself, “I will
fling him out of the window.”

“The man is a perfect athlete,” thought Verminet, “and looks as if he
would stick at nothing.”

Seeing that he had better give in, the managing director took up a bulky
ledger, and began to turn over the leaves with trembling fingers.

Andre saw that he was holding it upside-down.

“There it is,” cried Verminet at last.

“Bills for five thousand francs. Gandelu and Rigal, booked for discount
to Van Klopen, ladies’ tailor.”

Andre was silent.

Why was it that Verminet had suggested Rigal’s signature as the one he
ought to imitate? And why had he handed the bills over to Van Klopen?
Was it mere chance that had arranged it all? He did not believe it, but
felt sure that some secret tie united them all together, Verminet, Van
Klopen, Rigal, and the Marquis de Croisenois.

“Do you want anything more?” asked the manager of the Mutual Loan
Society.

“Are the bills in Van Klopen’s hands?”

“I can’t say.”

“Never mind, he will have to tell me where they are, if he has not got
them,” returned Andre.

They left the house, and as soon as they were again in the street Andre
took his companion’s arm, and hurried him off in the direction of the
Rue de Grammont.

“I don’t want to give this thief, Verminet, time to warn Van Klopen of
what has taken place; I had rather fall upon him with the suddenness of
an earthquake. Come, let us go to his establishment at once.”



CHAPTER XXIV.

THE VANISHING BILLS.

Had Andre known a little more of the man he had to deal with, he would
have learned that no one could fall like an earthquake upon Van Klopen.
Shut up in the sanctum where he composed the numberless costumes
that were the wonder and delight of Paris, Van Klopen made as careful
arrangements to secure himself from the interview as the Turk does to
guard the approaches to his seraglio; and so Andre and Gandelu were
accosted in the entrance hall by his stately footmen, clad in gorgeous
liveries, glittering with gold.

“M. van Klopen is of the utmost importance,” asserted Andre.

“Our master is composing.”

Entreaties, threats, and even a bribe of one hundred francs were alike
useless; and Andre, seeing that he was about to be checkmated, was half
tempted to take the men by the collar and hurl them on one side, but he
calmed himself, and, already repenting of his violence at Verminet’s, he
determined on a course of submission, and so meekly followed the footmen
into the famous waiting-room, styled by Van Klopen his purgatory.
The footmen, however, had spoken the truth, for several ladies of the
highest rank and standing were awaiting the return of this _arbiter
elegantiarum_. All of them turned as the young men entered--all save
one, who was gazing out of the window, drawing with her pretty fingers
on the window panes. Andre recognized her in an instant as Madame de
Bois Arden.

“Is it possible?” thought he. “Can the Countess have returned here after
what has occurred?”

Gaston felt that five charming pairs of eyes were fixed upon him, and
studied to assume his most graceful posture.

After a brief time given to arrangement, Andre grew disgusted.

“I wish that she would look round,” said he to himself. “I think she
would feel rather ashamed. I will say a word to her.”

He rose from his chair, and, without thinking how terribly he might
compromise the lady, he took up a position at her side. She was,
however, intently watching something that was going on in the street,
and did not turn her head.

“Madame,” said he.

She started, and, as she turned and recognized Andre, she uttered a
little cry of surprise.

“Great heavens! is that you?”

“Yes, it is I.”

“And here? I dare say that my presence in this place surprises you,” she
went on, “and that I have a short memory, and no feelings of pride.”

Andre made no reply, and his silence was a sufficient rejoinder to the
question.

“You do me a great injustice,” muttered the Countess. “I am here because
De Breulh told me that in your interests I ought to pardon Van Klopen,
and go to him again as I used to do; so you see, M. Andre, that it is
never safe to judge by appearance, and a woman more than anything else.”

“Will you forgive me?” asked Andre earnestly.

The lady interrupted him by a little wave of her hand, invisible to all
save to him, which clearly said,--

“Take care; we are not alone.”

She once more turned her eyes towards the street, and he mechanically
did the same. By this means their faces were hidden from observation.

“De Breulh,” went on the lady, “has heard a good deal about De
Croisenois, and, as no doubt you can guess, but very little to his
credit, and quite enough to justify any father in refusing him his
daughter’s hand; but in this case it is evident to me that De Mussidan
is yielding to a secret pressure. We must ferret out some hidden crime
in De Croisenois’ past which will force him to withdraw his proposal.”

“I shall find one,” muttered Andre.

“But remember there is no time to be lost. According to our agreement, I
treat him in the most charming manner, and he thinks that I am entirely
devoted to his interests, and to-morrow I have arranged to introduce him
to the Count and Countess at the Hotel de Mussidan, where the Count and
Countess have agreed to receive him.”

Andre started at this news.

“I saw,” continued the lady, “that you were quite right in the opinion
you had formed, for in the first place the common danger has almost
reconciled the Count and Countess affectionately to each other, though
it is notorious that they have always lived in the most unhappy manner.
Their faces are careworn and full of anxiety, and they watch every
movement of Sabine with eager eyes. I think that they look upon her as
a means of safety, but shudder at the sacrifice she is making on their
account.”

“And Sabine?”

“Her conduct is perfectly sublime, and she is ready to consummate the
sacrifice without a murmur. Her self-sacrificing devotion is perfectly
admirable; but what is more admirable still is the way in which she
conceals the suffering that she endures from her parents. Noble-hearted
girl! she is calm and silent, but she has always been so. She has grown
thinner, and perhaps her cheek is a trifle paler, but her forehead
was burning and seemed to scorch my lips as I kissed her. With this
exception, however, there was nothing else about her that would betray
her tortures. Modeste, her maid, told me, moreover, that when night came
she seemed utterly worn out, and the poor girl, with tears in her eyes,
declared ‘that her dear mistress was killing herself.’”

Andre’s eyes overflowed with tears.

“What have I done to deserve such love?” asked he.

A door suddenly opened, and Andre and the Viscountess turned hastily at
the sound. It was Van Klopen who came in, crying, according to his usual
custom,--

“Well, and whose turn is it next?”

When, however, he saw Gaston, his face grew white, and it was with a
smile that he stepped towards him, motioning back the lady whose turn it
was, and who protested loudly against this injustice.

“Ah, M. de Gandelu,” said he, “you have come, I suppose, to bespeak some
fresh toilettes for that exquisite creature, Zora de Chantemille?”

“Not to-day,” returned Gaston. “Zora is a little indisposed.”

Andre, however, who had arranged the narrative that he was about to pour
into the ears of the famous Van Klopen, was in too much haste to permit
of any unnecessary delay.

“We have come here,” said he hurriedly, “upon a matter of some moment.
My friend, M. Gaston de Gandelu, is about to leave Paris for some
months, and, before doing so, is anxious to settle all outstanding
accounts, and retire all his bills, which may not yet have fallen due.”

“Have I any bills of M. de Gandelu?” said Van Klopen slowly. “Ah, yes,
I remember that I had some now. Yes, five bills of one thousand francs
each, drawn by Gandelu, and accepted by Martin Rigal. I received them
from the Mutual Loan Society, but they are no longer in my hands.”

“Is that the case?” murmured Gaston, growing sick with apprehension.

“Yes, I sent them to my cloth merchants at St. Etienne, Rollon and
Company.”

Van Klopen was a clever scoundrel, but he sometimes lacked the necessary
perception of when he had said enough; and this was proved to-day, for,
agitated by the steady gaze that Andre kept upon him, he added,--

“If you do not believe my word, I can show you the acknowledgment that I
received from that firm.”

“It is unnecessary,” replied Andre. “Your statement is quite
sufficient.”

“I should prefer to let you see the letter.”

“No, thank you,” replied Andre, not for a moment duped by the game that
was being played. “Pray take no more trouble. We shall, I presume, find
that the bills are at St. Etienne. There is no use in taking any more
trouble about them, and we will wait until they arrive at maturity. I
have the honor to wish you good morning.”

And with these words he dragged away Gaston, who was actually about to
consult Van Klopen as to the most becoming costume for Zora to appear in
on leaving the prison of St. Lazare. When they were a few doors from the
man-milliner’s, Andre stopped and wrote down the names of Van Klopen’s
cloth merchants. Gaston was now quite at his ease.

“I think,” remarked he, “that Van Klopen is a sharp fellow; he knows
that I am to be relied on.”

“Where do you think your bills are?”

“At St. Etienne’s, of course.”

The perfect innocence of the boy elicited from Andre a gesture of
impatient commiseration.

“Listen to me,” said he, “and see if you can comprehend the awful
position in which you have placed yourself.”

“I am listening, my dear fellow; pray go on.”

“You drew these bills through Verminet because Van Klopen would not give
you credit.”

“Exactly so.”

“How, then, do you account for the fact that this man, who was at first
disinclined to trust you, should without rhyme or reason, offer to
supply you now as he did to-day?”

“The deuce! That never struck me. It does seem queer. Does he want to
play me a nasty trick? But which of them is it--Verminet or Van Klopen?”

“It is plain to me that the pair of them have entered into a pleasant
little plot to blackmail you.”

Young Gandelu did not at all like this turn, and he exclaimed,--

“Blackmail me, indeed! why, I know my way about better than that. They
won’t get much out of me, I can tell you.”

Andre shrugged his shoulders.

“Then,” said he, “just tell me what you intend to say to Verminet when
he comes to you upon the day your bills fall due, and says to you, ‘Give
me one hundred thousand francs for these five little bits of paper, or I
go straight to your father with them’?”

“I should say, of course--ah, well, I really do not know what I should
say.”

“You could say nothing, except that you had been imposed on in the most
infamous way. You would plead for time, and Verminet would give it to
you if you would execute a deed insuring him one hundred thousand francs
on the day you came of age.”

“A hundred thousand devils are all the rogue would get from me. That’s
the way I do things, do you see? If people try and ride roughshod over
me, I merely hit out, and then just look out for broken bones. Pay this
chap? Not I! I know the governor would make an almighty shine, but I’ll
choose that sooner than be had like that.”

He was quite serious but could only put his feelings into the language
he usually spoke.

“I think,” answered Andre, “that your father would forgive this
imprudence, but that it will be even harder for him to do so than it was
to send a doctor to number the hours he had to live. He will forgive you
because he is your father, and because he loves you; but Verminet, when
he finds that the threat to go to your father does not appall you, will
menace you with criminal proceedings.”

“Hulloo!” said Gandelu, stopping short. “I say, that is very poor fun,”
 gasped he.

“There is no fun in it, for such fun, when brought to the notice of a
court of justice, goes by the ugly name of forgery, and forgery means a
swinging heavy sentence.”

Gaston turned pale, and trembled from head to foot.

“Tried and sentenced,” faltered he. “No, I don’t believe you, but I hold
no honors and will turn up my cards.” He quite forgot that he was in the
public street, and was talking at the top of his shrill falsetto voice,
and gesticulating violently.

“The poor old governor, I might have made him so happy, and, after all,
I have only been a torment to him. Ah, could I but begin once more; but
then the cards are dealt, and I must go on with the game, and I have
made a nice muddle of the whole thing before I am twenty years of age;
but no criminal courts for me, no, the easiest way out of it is a pistol
shot, for I am an honest man’s son, and I will not bring more disgrace
on him than I have already done.”

“Do you really mean what you say?” asked Andre.

“Of course I do. I can be firm enough sometimes.”

“Then we will not despair yet,” answered the young painter. “I think
that we shall be able to settle this ugly business, but you cannot be
too cautious. Keep indoors, and remember that I may have urgent need of
you at almost any time of day or night.”

“I agree, but remember this, Zora is not to be forgotten.”

“Don’t fret over that; I will call and see her to-morrow. And now,
farewell for to-day, as I have not an instant to lose,” and with these
words Andre hurried off.

Andre’s reason for haste was that he had caught a few words addressed by
Verminet to Croisenois--“I shall see Mascarin at four o’clock.” And
he determined to loiter about the Rue St. Anne, and watch the Managing
Director when he came out, and so find out who this Mascarin was, who he
was certain was mixed up in the plot. He darted down the Rue de Grammont
like an arrow from a bow, and as the clock in a neighboring belfry
chimed half-past three, he was in the Rue St. Anne. There was a small
wine-shop almost opposite to the office of the Mutual Loan Society,
and there Andre ensconced himself and made a frugal meal, while he was
waiting for Verminet’s appearance, and just as he had finished his light
refreshment he saw the man he wanted come out of the office, and crept
cautiously after him like a Red Indian on the trail of his enemy.



CHAPTER XXV.

THE SPY.

As Verminet swaggered down the street he had the air of a successful
man, of a capitalist, in short, and the Managing Director of a highly
lucrative concern. Andre had no difficulty in following his man, though
detective’s business was quite new to him, which is no such easy matter,
although every one thinks that he can become one. Andre kept his man in
sight, and was astonished at the numerous acquaintances that Verminet
seemed to have. Occasionally he said to himself, “Perhaps I am mistaken
after all, for fancy is a bad pair of spectacles to see through. This
man may be honest, and I have let my imagination lead me astray.”

Meanwhile, Verminet who had reached the Boulevard Poisonniere, assumed
a totally different air, throwing off his old manner as he cast away his
cigar. When he had reached the Rue Montorgueil he turned underneath a
large archway. Verminet had gone into the office of M. B. Mascarin, and
that person simply kept a Servants’ Registry Office for domestics of
both sexes. In spite of his surprise, however, he determined to wait
for Verminet to come out; and, not to give himself the air of loitering
about the place, he crossed the road and appeared to be interested in
watching three workmen who were engaged in fixing the revolving shutters
to a new shop window. Luckily for the young painter he had not to wait
a very long while, for in less than a quarter of an hour Verminet came
out, accompanied by two men. The one was tall and thin, and wore a pair
of spectacles with colored glasses, while the other was stout and ruddy,
with the unmistakable air of a man of the world about him. Andre would
have given the twenty thousand francs which he still had in his pocket
if he could have heard a single word of their conversation. He was
moving skilfully forward so as to place himself within earshot, when not
two feet from him he heard a shrill whistle twice repeated. There was
something so strange and curious in the sound of this whistle that Andre
looked round and noticed that the three men whom he was watching had
been also attracted by it. The tall man with the colored glasses glanced
suspiciously around him, and then after a nod to his companions turned
and re-entered the office, while Verminet and the other walked away arm
in arm. Andre was undecided; should he try and discover who these two
men were? Near the entrance he saw a lad selling hot chestnuts. “Ah!”
 said he, “the little chestnut seller will always be there; but I may
lose the others if I stay here.” He followed the two men as quickly as
possible. They did not go very far, and speedily entered a fine house in
the Rue Montmartre. Here Andre was for a moment puzzled, as he did not
know to whom they were paying a visit, but noticing an inscription on
the wall of “Cashier’s Office on the first floor,” he exclaimed,--

“Ah! it is to the banker’s they have gone!”

He questioned a man coming downstairs and heard that M. Martin Rigal,
the banker, had his offices and residence there.

“I have struck a vein of good luck to-day,” thought he; “and now if my
little friend the chestnut seller can only tell me the names of these
men, I have done a good day’s work. I _do_ hope that he has not gone.”

The boy was still there, and he had two customers standing by the
chafing-dish which contained the glowing charcoal, and a working lad
in cap and blouse was arguing so hotly with the lad that they did not
notice Andre’s appearance.

“You can stow that chat,” said the boy; “I have told your father the
price I would take. You want my station and stock-in-trade. Hand over
two hundred and fifty francs, and they are yours.”

“But my dad will only give two hundred,” returned the other.

“Then he don’t need give nothing, for he won’t get ‘em,” answered the
chestnut vender sharply. “Two hundred francs for a pitch like this! Why,
I have sometimes taken ten francs and more, and that ain’t a lie, on the
word of Toto Chupin.”

Andre was tickled with this strange designation, and addressed himself
to the lad who bore it.

“My good boy,” said he, “I think you were here an hour ago. Did you see
anything of three gentlemen who came out of the house and stood talking
together for a short time?”

The lad turned sharply round and examined his questioner from tip to toe
with an air of the most supreme impertinence; and then, in a tone which
matched his look, replied,--

“What does it signify to you who they are? Mind your own business, and
be off!”

Andre had had some little experience of this delightful class of street
arab, of which Toto Chupin was so favorable a specimen, and knew their
habits, customs, and language.

“Come, my chicken,” said he, “spit it out, it won’t blister your tongue,
to answer a man who asks a civil question.”

“Well, then, I saw ‘em, sharp enough, and what then?”

“Why, that I should like to have their names if they have such an
article belonging to ‘em!”

Toto raised his cap and scratched his head, as if to stimulate his
brains, and as he brushed up his thick head of dirty yellow hair, he
eyed Andre cunningly.

“And suppose I know the blokes’ names and tells ‘em out to you, what
will you stand?” asked he.

“Ten sous.”

The delightful youth puffed out his cheeks, then expelled the pent-up
wind by a sudden slap, as a mark of his disgust at the meanness of the
offer.

“Pull up your braces, my lord,” said he sarcastically, “or you’ll be
losing the contents of your breeches pockets. Ten sous, indeed! Perhaps
you’d like me to lend ‘em to yer?”

Andre smiled pleasantly.

“Did you think, my little man, that I was going to offer you twenty
thousand shiners?” asked he.

“Won again!” cried Toto; “I laid myself a new hat that you weren’t a
fool, and I have collared the stakes.”

“Why do you think I am not a fool?”

“Because a fool would have begun by offering me five francs and gone up
slick to ten, while you began at a modest figure.”

The painter smiled.

“But you were too old a bird to be caught like that,” continued the
lad; and as he spoke, he stopped, and contracted his brow as if in deep
perplexity. Of course he was acquainted with the names, but ought he
to give them? Instantly he scented an enemy. Harmless people did not
usually ask questions of itinerant chestnut venders, and to open
his mouth might be to injure Mascarin, Beaumarchef, or the guileless
Tantaine.

This last thought determined the lad.

“Keep your ten sous, my pippin,” said the boy; “I’ll tell you what you
want to know all gratis and for nothing, because I’ve taken a real fancy
to the cut of your mug. The tall chap was Mascarin, the fat un Doctor
Hortebise, and t’other--stop, let me think it out in my knowledge box;
ah! I have it, he was Verminet.”

Andre was so delighted that, drawing from his pocket a five-franc piece,
he tossed it to the boy.

“Thanks, my noble lord,” said Chupin, and was about to add something
more in a similar vein, when he glanced down the street. His look
changed in an instant, and he fixed his eyes upon the painter’s face
with a very strange expression.

“What is the matter, my lad?” asked Andre, surprised at this sudden
change.

“Nothing,” answered Chupin; “nothing at all; only as you seem a
decentish sort of chap, I should recommend you to keep your wits about
you, and to look out for squalls.”

“Eh, what do you mean?”

“I mean--why--be careful, of course. Hang me if I exactly know what I
do mean. It is just an idea that came to me all of a jump. But there, be
off; I ain’t going to say another word.”

With much difficulty Andre repressed his astonishment. He saw that
this young scamp was the possessor of many secrets which might be of
inestimable value to him; but he also saw that he was determined to hold
his tongue, and that it would at present be a waste of time to try and
get anything out of him; and an empty cab passing at this moment, Andre
hailed it, and told the coachman to drive fast to the Champs Elysees. In
obedience to the warning that he had just received from Toto, he did not
give the name of the _café_ where he was to meet De Breulh, for he made
up his mind to be careful, yes, extremely careful. He recollected the
two odd whistles which had seemed to make Mascarin wince, and which
certainly broke off the conference of the three men, and he remembered
that it was after a glance down the street that Toto had become less
communicative and had given him that curt warning. “By heaven,” said he,
as the recollection of a story he had read not long ago dawned on
him, “I am being followed.” He lowered the front glass of the cab, and
attracted the coachman’s attention by pulling him by the sleeve.

“Listen to me,” said he, as the man turned, “and do not slacken your
speed. Here, take your five francs in advance.”

“But look here----”

“Listen to me. Go as sharp as you can to the Rue de Matignon; turn down
it, and, as you do, go a bit slower; then drive on like lightning, and
when you are in the Champs Elysees do what you like, for your cab will
be empty.”

The driver chuckled.

“Aha,” said he; “I see you are being followed, and you want to give ‘em
leg bail.”

“Yes, yes; you are right.”

“Then listen to me. Take care when you jump, and don’t do it on the
pavement, for t’other is the safest.”

Andre succeeded in alighting safely, and turned down a narrow court
before his pursuer had entered the street; but it was vain for the young
painter to lurk in a doorway, for after five minutes had elapsed there
was nothing to be seen, and no spy had made his appearance.

“I have been over-cautious,” muttered he.

More than a quarter of an hour had elapsed, and Andre felt that he
might leave his hiding-place, and go in quest of De Breulh; and as he
approached the spot chosen for their meeting-place, he saw his friend’s
carriage, and near it was the owner, smoking a cigar. The two men caught
sight of each other almost at the same moment. De Breulh advanced to
greet the young man with extended hand.

“I have been waiting for you for the last twenty minutes,” said he.

Andre commenced to apologize, but his friend checked him.

“Never mind,” returned he; “I know that you must have had some excellent
reasons; but, to tell you the honest truth, I had become rather nervous
about you.”

“Nervous! and why, pray?”

“Do you not recollect what I said the other evening? De Croisenois is a
double-dyed scoundrel.”

Andre remained silent, and his friend, putting his arm affectionately
through his, continued,--

“Let us walk,” said he; “it is better than sitting down in the _café_.
I believe De Croisenois capable of anything. He had the prospect before
him of a large fortune,--that of his brother George; but this he has
already anticipated. A man in a position like this is not to be trifled
with.”

“I do not fear him.”

“But I do. I am, however, a little relieved by the fact that he has
never seen you.”

The painter shook his head.

“Not only has he seen me, but I half believe that he suspects my
designs.”

“Impossible!”

“But I am sure that I have been followed to-day. I have no actual proof,
but still I am fully convinced that it was so.”

And Andre recounted all that had occurred during the day.

“You are certainly being watched,” answered De Breulh, “and every step
that you take will be known to your enemies, and at this very moment
perhaps eyes are upon us.”

As he spoke he glanced uneasily around; but it was quite dark, and he
could see no one.

“We will give the spies a little gentle exercise,” said he, “and if we
dine together they will find it hard to discover the place.”

De Breulh’s coachman was dozing on the driving-seat. His master aroused
him, and whispered some order in his ear. The two young men then got in,
and the carriage started at a quick pace.

“What do you think of this expedient?” asked De Breulh. “We shall go at
this pace for the next hour. We will then alight at the corner of the
Chaussee d’Autin, and be free for the rest of the night, and those who
wish to follow us to-night must have good eyes and legs.”

All came to pass as De Breulh had arranged; but as he jumped out he saw
a dark form slip from behind the carriage and mingle with the crowd on
the Boulevard.

“By heavens,” said he; “that was a man. I thought that I was throwing a
spy off the track, and I was in reality only treating him to a drive.”

To make sure, he took off his glove and felt the springs of the
carriage.

“See,” said he, “they are still warm from the contact with a human
body.”

The young painter was silent, but all was now explained: while he jumped
from the cab, his tracker had been carried away upon it. This discovery
saddened the dinner, and a little after ten Andre left his friend and
returned home.



CHAPTER XXVI.

MASCARIN MOVES.

The Viscountess de Bois Arden had not been wrong when she told Andre
in Van Klopen’s establishment that community of sorrow had brought the
Count and Countess of Mussidan nearer together, and that Sabine had
made up her mind to sacrifice herself for the honor of the family.
Unfortunately, however, this change in the relations of husband and wife
had not taken place immediately; for after her interview with Doctor
Hortebise, Diana’s first impulse had not been to go to her husband, but
to write to Norbert, who was as much compromised by the correspondence
as she herself. Her first letter did not elicit a reply. She wrote a
second, and then a third, in which, though she did not go into details,
she let the Duke know that she was the victim of a dark intrigue, and
that a deadly peril was hanging over her daughter’s head. This last
letter was brought back to her by the messenger, without any envelope,
and across it Norbert had written,--

“The weapon which you have used against me has now been turned against
yourself. Heaven is just.”

These words started up in letters of fire before her eyes as the presage
of coming misfortune, and telling her that the hour of retribution had
now come, and that she must be prepared to suffer, as an atonement for
her crimes. Then it was that she felt all was lost, and she must go
to her husband for aid, unless she desired that copies of the stolen
letters should be sent to him; and in a little boudoir, adjoining
Sabine’s own room, she opened her heart and told her husband all. She
performed it with all the skill of a woman who, without descending to
falsehood, contrives to conceal the truth. But she could not hide
the share that she had taken, both in the death of the late Duke of
Champdoce and the disappearance of George de Croisenois.

The Count’s brain reeled. He called up to his memory what Diana had been
when he first saw and loved her at Laurebourg: how pure and modest she
looked! what virginal candor sat upon her brow! and yet she was even
then doing her best to urge on a son to murder his father.

De Mussidan had had hideous doubts concerning the relations of Norbert
and Diana, both before and after marriage; but his wife firmly denied
this at the moment when she was revealing the other guilty secrets of
her past life. He had believed that Sabine was not his child, and now he
had to reproach himself with the indifference he had displayed towards
her.

He made no answer to the terrible revelation that was poured into his
ears; but when the Countess had concluded, he rose and left the room,
stretching out his hands and grasping the walls for support, like a
drunken man.

The Count and Countess believed that Sabine had slept through this
interview, but they were mistaken, for Sabine had heard all those fatal
words--“ruin, dishonor, and despair!” At first she scarcely understood.
Were not these words merely the offspring of her delirium? She strove
to shake it off, but too soon she knew that the whispered words were
sad realities, and she lay on her bed quivering with terror. Much of the
conversation escaped her, but she heard enough. Her mother’s past sins
were to be exposed if the daughter did not marry a man entirely unknown
to her--the Marquis de Croisenois. She knew that her torments would not
be of very long duration, for to part with her love for Andre would be
to part with life itself. She made up her mind to live until she had
saved her parents’ honor by the sacrifice of herself, and then she would
be free to accept the calm repose of the grave.

But the terrible revelation bore its fruits, for her fever came back,
and a relapse was the result. But youth and a sound constitution gained
the day, and when she was convalescent her will was as strong as ever.

Her first act was to write the letter to her lover which had driven him
to the verge of distraction; and then, fearing lest her father might, in
his agony and remorse, be driven to some rash act, she went to him and
told him that she knew all.

“I never loved M. de Breulh,” said she with a pitiful smile, “and
therefore the sacrifice is not so great after all.”

The Count was not for a moment the dupe of the generous-souled girl,
but he did not dare to brave the scandal of the death of Montlouis,
and still less the exposure of his wife’s conduct. Time was passing,
however, and the miscreants in whose power they were made no signs of
life. Hortebise did not appear any more, and there were moments when
the miserable Diana actually ventured to hope. “Have they forgotten us?”
 thought she.

Alas! no; they were people who never forgot.

The Champdoce affair had been satisfactorily arranged, and every
precaution had been taken to prevent the detection of Paul as an
impostor, and engaged as he had been, Mascarin had no time to turn
his attention to the marriage of Sabine and De Croisenois. The famous
Limited Company, with the Marquis as chairman, had, too, to be started,
the shares of which were to be taken up by the unhappy victims of
the blackmailers; but first some decided steps must be taken with the
Mussidans, and Tantaine was dispatched on this errand.

This amiable individual, though he was going into such very excellent
society, did not consider it necessary to make any improvement in his
attire. This was the reason why the footman, upon seeing such a shabby
visitor and hearing him ask for the Count or Countess, did not hesitate
to reply, with a sneer, that his master and mistress had been out for
some months, and were not likely to return for a week or two. This fact
did not disconcert the wily man, for drawing one of Mascarin’s cards
from his pocket, he begged the kind gentleman to take it upstairs, when
he was sure that he would at once be sent for.

De Mussidan, when he read the name on the card, turned ghastly pale.

“Show him into the library,” said he curtly.

Florestan left the room, and the Count mutely handed the card to his
wife, but she had no need to read it.

“I can tell what it is,” gasped she.

“The day for settling accounts has come,” said the Count, “and this name
is the fatal sign.”

The Countess flung herself upon her knees, and taking the hand that hung
placidly by his side, pressed her lips tenderly to it.

“Forgive me, Octave!” she muttered. “Will you not forgive me? I am a
miserable wretch, and why did not Heaven punish me for the sins that I
have committed, and not make others expiate my offences?”

The Count put her gently aside. He suffered intensely, and yet no word
of reproach escaped his lips against the woman who had ruined his whole
life.

“And Sabine,” she went on, “must she, a De Mussidan, marry one of these
wretched scoundrels?”

Sabine was the only one in the room who preserved her calmness; she had
so schooled herself that her distress of mind was not apparent to the
outward eye.

“Do not make yourselves miserable,” said she, with a faint smile; “how
do we know that M. de Croisenois may not make me an excellent husband
after all?”

The Count gazed upon his daughter with a look of the fondest affection
and gratitude.

“Dearest Sabine!” murmured he. Her fortitude had restored his
self-command. “Let us be outwardly resigned,” said he, “whatever our
feelings may be. Time may do much for us, and at the very church door we
may find means of escape.”



CHAPTER XXVII.

A CRUEL SLUR.

Florestan had conducted Tantaine to the sumptuous library, in which the
Count had received Mascarin’s visit; and, to pass away the time, the old
man took a mental inventory of the contents of the room. He tried the
texture of the curtains, looked at the handsome bindings of the books,
and admired the magnificent bronzes on the mantelpiece.

“Aha,” muttered he, as he tried the springs of a luxurious armchair,
“everything is of the best, and when matters are settled, I half think
that I should like a resting-place just like this----”

He checked himself, for the door opened, and the Count made his
appearance, calm and dignified, but very pale. Tantaine made a low bow,
pressing his greasy hat against his breast.

“Your humble servant to command,” said he.

The Count had come to a sudden halt.

“Excuse me,” said he, “but did you send up a card asking for an
interview?”

“I am not Mascarin certainly, but I used that highly respectable
gentleman’s name, because I knew that my own was totally unknown to you.
I am Tantaine, Adrien Tantaine.”

M. de Mussidan gazed with extreme surprise upon the squalid individual
before him. His mild and benevolent face inspired confidence, and yet he
doubted him.

“I have come on the same business,” pursued the old man. “I have been
ordered to tell you that it must be hurried on.”

The Count hastily closed the door and locked it; the manner of this man
made him feel even too plainly the ignominy of his position.

“I understand,” answered he. “But how is it that you have come, and not
the other one?”

“He intended to come; but at the last moment he drew back; Mascarin, you
see, has a great deal to lose, while I----” He paused, and holding up
the tattered tails of his coat, turned round, as though to exhibit his
shabby attire. “All my property is on my back,” continued he.

“Then I can treat with you?” asked the Count.

Tantaine nodded his head. “Yes, Count, I have the missing leaves from
the Baron’s journal, and also, well--I suppose you know everything, all
of your wife’s correspondence.”

“Enough,” answered the Count, unable to hide his disgust. “Sit down.”

“Now, Count, I will go to the point--are you going to put the police on
us?”

“I have said that I would do nothing of the kind.”

“Then we can get to business.”

“Yes, if----”

The old man shrugged his shoulders.

“There is no ‘if’ in the case,” returned he. “We state our conditions,
for acceptance or rejection.”

These words were uttered in a tone of such extreme insolence that the
Count was strongly tempted to hurl the extortionate scoundrel from the
window, but he contrived to restrain his passion.

“Let us hear the conditions then,” said he impatiently.

Tantaine extracted from some hidden recess of his coat a much-worn
pocketbook, and drew from it a paper.

“Here are our conditions,” returned he slowly. “The Count de Mussidan
promises to give the hand of his daughter to Henri Marquis de
Croisenois. He will give his daughter a wedding portion of six hundred
thousand francs, and promises that the marriage shall take place without
delay. The Marquis de Croisenois will be formally introduced at your
house, and he must be cordially received. Four days afterwards he must
be asked to dinner. On the fifteenth day from that M. de Mussidan will
give a grand ball in honor of the signing of the marriage contract. The
leaves from the diary and the whole of the correspondence will be handed
to M. de Mussidan as soon as the civil ceremony is completed.”

With firmly compressed lips and clenched hands, the Count sat listening
to these conditions.

“And who can tell me,” said he, “that you will keep your engagements,
and that these papers will be restored to me at all?”

Tantaine looked at him with a air of pity.

“Your own good sense,” answered he. “What more could we expect to get
out of you than your daughter and your money?”

The Count did not answer, but paced up and down the room, eyeing the
ambassador keenly, and endeavoring to detect some weak point in his
manner of cynicism and audacity. Then speaking in the calm tone of a man
who had made up his mind, he said,--

“You hold me as in a vice, and I admit myself vanquished. Stringent as
your conditions are, I accept them.”

“That is the right style of way to talk in,” remarked Tantaine
cheerfully.

“Then,” continued the Count, with a ray of hope gleaming in his face,
“why should I give my daughter to De Croisenois at all?--surely this
is utterly unnecessary. What you want is simply six hundred thousand
francs; well, you can have them, and leave me Sabine.”

He paused and waited for the reply, believing that the day was his; but
he was wrong.

“That would not be the same thing at all,” answered Tantaine. “We should
not gain our ends by such means.”

“I can do more,” said the Count. “Give me six months, and I will add a
million to the sum I have already offered.”

Tantaine did not appear impressed by the magnitude of this offer. “I
think,” remarked he, “that it will be better to close this interview,
which, I confess, is becoming a little annoying. You agreed to accept
the conditions. Are you still in that mind?”

The Count bowed. He could not trust himself to speak.

“Then,” went on Tantaine, “I will take my leave. Remember, that as you
fulfil your engagement, so we will keep to ours.”

He had laid his hand on the handle of the door, when the Count said,--

“Another word, if you please. I can answer for myself and Madame de
Mussidan, but how about my daughter?”

Tantaine’s face changed. “What do you mean?” asked he.

“My daughter may refuse to accept M. de Croisenois.”

“Why should she? He is good-looking, pleasant, and agreeable.”

“Still she may refuse him.”

“If mademoiselle makes any objection,” said the old man in peremptory
accents, “you must let me see her for a few minutes, and after that you
will have no further difficulty with her.”

“Why, what could you have to say to my daughter?”

“I should say----”

“Well, what would you say?”

“I should say that if she loves any one, it is not M. de Breulh.” He
endeavored to pass through the half-opened door, but the Count closed it
violently.

“You shall not leave this room,” cried he, “until you have explained
this insulting remark.”

“I had no intention of offending you,” answered Tantaine humbly.
“I only----” He paused, and then, with an air of sarcasm which sat
strangely upon a person of his appearance, went on, “I am aware that
the heiress of a noble family may do many things without having her
reputation compromised, when girls in a lower social grade would be
forever lost by the commission of any one of them; and I am sure if the
family of M. de Breulh knew that the young lady to whom he was engaged
had been in the habit of passing her afternoons alone with a young man
in his studio----”

He paused, and hastily drew a revolver, for it seemed to him as if the
Count were about to throw himself upon him. “Softly, softly, if you
please,” cried he. “Blows and insults are fatal mistakes. I have better
information than yourself, that is all. I have more than ten times seen
your daughter enter a house in the Rue Tour d’Auvergne, and asking for
M. Andre, creep silently up the staircase.”

The Count felt that he was choking. He tore off his cravat, and cried
wildly, “Proofs! Give me proofs!”

During the last five minutes Tantaine had shifted his ground so
skilfully that the heavy library table now stood between himself and the
Count, and he was comparatively safe behind this extemporized defence.

“Proofs?” answered he. “Do you think that I carry them about with me? In
a week I could give you the lovers’ correspondence. That, you will say,
is too long to wait; but you can set your doubts at rest at once. If you
go to the address I will give you before eight to-morrow morning, and
enter the rooms occupied by M. Andre, you will find the portrait
of Mademoiselle Sabine carefully concealed from view behind a green
curtain, and a very good portrait it is. I presume you will admit that
it could not have been executed without a sitting.”

“Leave this,” cried the Count, “without a moment’s delay.”

Tantaine did not wait for a repetition of these words. He passed through
the doorway, and as soon as he was outside he called out in cheerful
accents. “Do not forget the address, Number 45, Rue Tour d’Auvergne,
name of Andre, and mind and be there before eight a.m.”

The Count made a rush at him on hearing this last insult, but he was
too late, for Tantaine slammed the door, and was in the hall before the
infuriated master of the house could open it. Tantaine had resumed
all his airs of humility, and took off his hat to the footmen as he
descended the steps. “Yes,” muttered he, as he walked along, “the idea
was a happy one. Andre knows that he is watched, and will be careful;
and now that M. de Mussidan is aware that his sweet, pure daughter
has had a lover, he will be only too happy to accept the Marquis de
Croisenois as his son-in-law.” Tantaine believed that Sabine was more
culpable than she really had been, for the idea of pure and honorable
love had never entered his brain.



CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE TEMPTER.

By this time Tantaine was in the Champs Elysees, and stared anxiously
around. “If my Toto makes no mistake,” muttered he, “surely my order was
plain enough.”

The old man got very cross as he at last perceived the missing lad
conversing with the proprietor of a pie-stall, having evidently been
doing a little jawing with him.

“Toto,” he called, “Toto, come here.”

Toto Chupin heard him, for he looked round, but he did not move, for he
was certainly much interested in the conversation he was carrying on.
Tantaine shouted again, and this time more angrily than before, and
Toto, reluctantly leaving his companion, came slowly up to his patron.

“You have been a nice time getting here,” said the lad sulkily. “I was
just going to cut it. Ain’t you well that you make such a row? If you
ain’t, I’d better go for a doctor.

“I am in a tremendous hurry, Toto.”

“Yes, and so is the postman when he is behind time. I’m busy too.”

“What, with the man you have just left?”

“Yes; he is a sharper chap than I am. How much do you earn every day,
Daddy Tantaine? Well, that chap makes his thirty or forty francs every
night, and does precious little for it. I should like a business like
that, and I think that I shall secure one soon.”

“Have patience. I thought that you were going into business with those
two young men you were drinking beer with at the Grand Turk?”

Toto uttered a shrill cry of anger at these words. “Business with them?”
 shrieked he; “they are regular clever night thieves.”

“Have they done you any harm, my poor lad?”

“Yes; they have utterly ruined me. Luckily, I saw Mascarin yesterday,
and he set me up in the hot-chestnut line. He ain’t a bad one, is
Mascarin.”

Tantaine curled his lip disdainfully. “Not a bad fellow, I dare say, as
long as you don’t ask him for anything.”

Toto was so surprised at hearing Tantaine abuse Mascarin, that he was
unable to utter a word.

“Ah, you may look surprised,” continued the old man, “but when a man is
rolling in riches, and leaves an old friend to starve, then he is not
what I call a real good fellow. Now, Toto, you are a bright lad, and so
I don’t mind letting you know that I am only waiting for a good chance
to drop Mascarin, and set up on my own account. Work for yourself, my
boy.”

“I know that; but it is a good deal easier to say than to do.”

“You have tried then?”

“Yes, I have; but I came to grief over it. You know all about it as well
as I do, for don’t tell me you didn’t hear every word I said that night
you were hunting up Caroline Schimmel. However, I’ll tell you. One day
when I saw a lady who looked rather nervous get out of a cab, I followed
her. I was decently togged out, so I rang at the door. I was so sure
that I was going to make a haul that I would not have taken ninety-nine
francs for the hundred that I expected to make. Well, I rang, a girl
opened the door, and in I went. What an ass I made of myself! I found a
great brute of a man there, who thrashed me within an inch of my life,
and then kicked me downstairs. See, he made his mark rather more plainly
than I liked.” And removing his cap, the boy showed several bruises
about his forehead.

During this conversation Tantaine and the lad had been walking slowly
up the Champs Elysees, and had by this time arrived just opposite M.
Gandelu’s house, where Andre was at work. Tantaine sat down on a bench.

“Let us rest a bit,” said he; “I am tired out; and now let me tell you,
my lad, that your tale only shows me that it is experience you want.
Now, I have any amount of that, and I was really the prime mover in most
of Mascarin’s schemes. If I were to start on my own account, I should
be driving in my carriage in twelve months. The only thing against my
success is my age, for I am getting to be an old man. Why, even now I
have a matter in my hands that is simply splendid. I have had half the
money down, but I want a smart young fellow to pull it through.”

“Why couldn’t I be the smart young fellow?” asked Toto.

Tantaine shook his head. “You are as much too young as I am too old,”
 answered he. “At your age you are too apt to be frightened, and would
shrink back at the critical time. Besides, I have a conscience.”

“And so have I,” exclaimed Toto; “and it’s grown like your own, old man;
it can be stretched for miles and folded up into nothing.”

“Well, we may be able to do something,” returned Tantaine, as, drawing
out a ragged check pocket-handkerchief, he wiped his glasses.

“Listen to me, my lad; I’ll put what we call a supposititious case to
you. You hate those two fellows who have robbed you, for I suppose that
is what you meant; well, suppose you knew that they were at work all day
on a high scaffold like that one opposite to us, what would you do?”

Toto scratched his head, and remarked after a pause,--

“If that crack-jawed idea you talk of was true,” answered he, “those gay
lads might as well make their wills, for I’d step up the scaffolding
at night and just saw the planks that they are in the habit of clapping
their toes on, half through, and when one of the mates stepped on it,
why, there would be a bit of a smash, eh, Daddy Tantaine?”

“Not so bad, not so bad for a lad of your years,” said the old man with
an approving smile.

Toto’s bosom swelled with pride.

“Besides,” he continued, “I would arrange matters so well that not a
soul would think that I had done the trick.”

“The more I hear you speak, Chupin,” answered Tantaine, “the more I
believe you are the lad I want, and I am sure that we shall make heaps
of money together.”

“I am cock sure of that too.”

“You can use carpenters’ tools, I think you once told me?”

“Yes.”

“Well,” continued Tantaine, “let me tell you then that I know an old
man with any amount of money, and there is a fellow whom he hates and
detests, a young chap who ran off with the girl he loved.”

“The old bloke must have been jolly wild.”

“Well, to tell the truth, he wasn’t a bit pleased. Now it so happens
that this gay young dog spends ten hours a day at least on that very
scaffolding opposite to us. The old fellow, who has his head screwed on
the right way, had the very same idea as yours, but he is too old and
too stout to do the trick for himself; and, to cut the matter short, he
would give five thousand francs to the persons who would carry out his
idea. Just think, two thousand francs for a few cuts of a saw!”

The boy was violently agitated, but Tantaine pretended not to notice it.

“First, my lad,” said he, “I must explain to you in what measure the
old gentleman’s plans are different from yours. If we did not take care,
some other poor devil might break his neck, but I have hit on a dodge to
avoid all this.”

“I ain’t curious, but I should like to hear it.”

Tantaine smiled blandly.

“Listen! Do you see high up; that little shed built of planks? That is
used by the carvers and stone-cutters. Well, this little house, a couple
of hundred feet above us, has a kind of a window; well, if this window
and the planks below it were cut nearly through, any one leaning against
it would be very likely to fall into the street and perhaps to hurt
himself.”

Chupin nodded.

“Now, suppose,” went on Tantaine, “that the enemy of our old gentleman
was in that little shed, all at once he hears a woman shriek, ‘Help! It
is I you love; help me!’ what would this young fellow do? Why, he would
recognize the voice, rush to the window, lean out, and as the woodwork
and supports had been cut away, he would----Well, do you see now?”

Chupin hesitated for a moment.

“I don’t say I won’t,” muttered he; “but, look here, will the old chap
pay down smart?”

“Yes, and besides, did I not tell you that he had given half down?”

The boy’s eyes glistened as the old man unpinned the tattered lining
of his pocket, and holding the pin between his teeth, pulled out the
banknotes, each one for a thousand francs. Chupin’s heart rose at the
sight of this wealth.

“Is one of those for me?” asked he. Tantaine held the note towards
the boy, who shuddered at the touch of the crisp paper and kissed the
precious object in a paroxysm of pleasure. He then started from his
seat, and regardless of the astonishment of the passers-by, executed a
wild dance of triumph.

All was soon settled. Toto was to creep into the unfinished building by
night, and not to leave it until he had completed his work. Tantaine,
who had a thought for everything, told the boy what sort of a saw to
employ, and gave him the address of a man who supplied the best class
instruments.

“You must remember, my dear lad,” said he, “not to leave behind you any
traces of your work which may cause suspicion. One grain of sawdust
on the floor might spoil the whole game. Take a dark lantern with you,
grease your saw, and rasp out the tooth-nicks of the saw when you have
finished your work.”

Toto listened to the old man in surprise; he had never thought that he
was of so practical a turn. He promised that he would be careful, and
imagining that he had received all his directions, rose to leave; but
the old man still detained him.

“Here,” said he, “suppose you tell me a little about Caroline Schimmel.
You told Beaumarchef that she said I had made her scream, and that when
she caught me, I should have a bad time of it, eh?”

“You weren’t my partner then,” returned the lad with an impudent laugh;
“and I wanted to give you a bit of a fright. The truth is, that you made
the poor old girl so drunk that she has had to go to the hospital.”

Tantaine was overjoyed at this news, and, rising from his seat, said,
“Where are you living now?”

“Nowhere in particular. Yesterday I slept in a stable, but there isn’t
room for all my furniture there, so I must shift.”

“Would you like to have my room for a day or two?” asked Tantaine,
chuckling at the boy’s jest. “I have moved from there, but the attic is
mine for another fortnight yet.”

“I’m gone; where is it?”

“You know well enough, in the Hotel de Perou, Rue de la Hachette. Then
I will send a line to the landlady;” and tearing a leaf from his
pocketbook, he scrawled on it a few words, saying that young relative of
his, M. Chupin, was to have his room.

This letter, together with his banknote, Toto carefully tied up in the
corner of his neckerchief, and as he crossed the street the old man
watched him for a moment, and then stood gazing at the workmen on the
scaffolding. Just then Gandelu and his son came out, and the contractor
paused to give a few instructions. For a few seconds Gaston and Chupin
stood side by side, and a strange smile flitted across Tantaine’s face
as he noted this. “Both children of Paris,” muttered he, “and both
striking examples of the boasted civilization. The dandy struts along
the pavement, while the street arab plays in the gutter.”

But he had no time to spend in philosophical speculations, as the
omnibus that he required appeared, and entering it, in another half-hour
he entered Paul Violaine’s lodgings in the Rue Montmartre.

The portress, Mother Brigaut, was at her post as Tantaine entered the
courtyard and asked,--

“And how is our young gentleman to-day?”

“Better, sir, ever so much better; I made him a lovely bowl of soup
yesterday, and he drank up every drop of it. He looks like a real king
this morning, and the doctor sent in a dozen of wine to-day, which will,
I am sure, effect a perfect cure.”

With a smile and a nod Tantaine was making his way to the stairs, when
Mother Brigaut prevented his progress.

“Some one was here yesterday,” remarked she, “asking about M. Paul.”

“What sort of a looking person was it?”

“Oh, a man like any other, nothing in particular about him, but he
wasn’t a gentleman, for after keeping me for fully fifteen minutes
talking and talking, he only gave me a five-franc piece.”

The description was not one that would lead to a recognition of the
person, and Tantaine asked in tones of extreme annoyance,--

“Did you not notice anything particular about the man?”

“Yes, he had on gold spectacles with the mountings as fine as a hair,
and a watch chain as thick and heavy as I have ever seen.”

“And is that all?”

“Yes,” answered she. “Oh! there was one thing more--the person knows
that you come here.”

“Does he? Why do you think so?”

“Because all the time he was talking to me he was in a rare fidget, and
always kept his eyes on the door.”

“Thanks, Mother Brigaut; mind and keep a sharp lookout,” returned
Tantaine, as he slowly ascended the stairs.

Every now and then he paused to think. “Who upon earth can this fellow
be?” asked he of himself. He reviewed the whole question--chances,
probabilities, and risks, not one was neglected, but all in vain.

“A thousand devils!” growled he; “are the police at my heels?”

His nerves were terribly shaken, and he strove in vain to regain his
customary audacity. By this time he had reached the door of Paul’s room,
and, on his ringing, the door was at once opened; but at the sight of
this woman he started back, with a cry of angry surprise; for it was a
female figure that stood before him, a young girl--Flavia, the daughter
of Martin Rigal, the banker.

The keen eyes of Tantaine showed him that Flavia’s visit had not been
of long duration. She had removed her hat and jacket, and was holding in
her hand a piece of fancy work.

“Whom do you wish to see, sir?” asked she.

The old man strove to speak, but his lips would not frame a single
sentence. A band of steel seemed to be compressing his throat, and he
appeared like a man about to be seized with an apoplectic fit.

Flavia gazed upon the shabby-looking visitor with an expression of
intense disgust. It seemed to her that she had seen him somewhere; in
fact, there was an inexplicable manner about him which entirely puzzled
her.

“I want to speak to M. Paul,” said the old man in a low, hoarse whisper;
“he is expecting me.”

“Then come in; but just now his doctor is with him.”

She threw open the door more widely, and stepped back, so that the
greasy garments of the visitor might not touch her dress. He passed her
with an abject bow, and crossed the little sitting-room with the air of
a man who perfectly understands his way. He did not knock at the door
of the bedroom, but went straight in; there a singular spectacle at once
arrested his attention. Paul, with a very pale face, was seated on the
bed, while Hortebise was attentively examining his bare shoulder. The
whole of Paul’s right arm and shoulder was a large open wound, which
seemed to have been caused by a burn or scald, and must have been
extremely painful. The doctor was bending over him, applying a cooling
lotion to the injured place with a small piece of sponge. He turned
sharply round on Daddy Tantaine’s entrance; and so accustomed were these
men to read each other’s faces at a glance that Hortebise saw at once
what had happened; for Tantaine’s expression plainly said, “Is Flavia
mad to be here?” while the eyes of Hortebise answered, “She may be, but
I could not help it.”

Paul turned, too, and greeted the old man with an exclamation of
delight.

“Come here,” said he merrily, “and just see to what a wretched state I
have been reduced between the doctor and M. Mascarin.”

Tantaine examined the wound carefully. “Are you quite sure,” asked he,
“that not only will it deceive the Duke, who will see but with our eyes,
but also those of his wife, and perhaps of his medical man?”

“We will hoodwink the lot of them.”

“And how long must we wait,” asked the old man, “until the place skins
over, and assumes the appearance of having been there from childhood?”

“In a month’s time Paul can be introduced to the Duke de Champdoce.”

“Are you speaking seriously?”

“Listen to me. The scar will not be quite natural then, but I intend to
subject it to various other modes of treatment.”

The dressing was now over, and Paul’s shirt being readjusted, he was
permitted to lie down again.

“I am quite willing to remain here forever,” said he, “as long as I
am allowed to retain the services of the nurse that I have in the next
room, and who, I am sure, is waiting with the greatest eagerness for
your departure.”

Hortebise fumed, and cast a glance at Paul which seemed to say, “Be
silent;” but the conceited young man paid no heed to it.

“How long has this charming nurse been with you?” asked Tantaine in an
unnatural voice.

“Ever since I have been in bed,” returned Paul with the air of a gay
young fellow. “I wrote a note that I was unable to go over to her, so
she came to me. I sent my letter at nine o’clock, and at ten minutes
past she was with me.”

The diplomatic doctor slipped behind Tantaine, and made violent gestures
to endeavor to persuade Paul to keep silence, but all was in vain.

“M. Martin Rigal,” continued the vain young fool, “passes the greater
part of his life in his private office. As soon as he gets up he goes
there, and is not seen for the rest of the day. Flavia can therefore do
entirely as she likes. As soon as she knows that her worthy father is
deep in his ledgers, she puts on her hat and runs round to me, and no
one could have a kinder and a prettier visitor than she is.”

The doctor was hard at work at his danger signals, but it was useless.
Paul saw them, but did not comprehend their meaning; and Tantaine rubbed
his glasses savagely.

“You are perhaps deceiving yourself a little,” said he at last.

“And why? You know that Flavia loves me, poor girl. I ought to marry
her, and of course I shall; but still, if I do not do so--well, you
know, I need say no more.”

“You wretched scoundrel!” exclaimed the usually placid Tantaine. His
manner was so fierce and threatening that Paul shifted his position to
one nearer the wall.

It was impossible for Tantaine to say another word, for Hortebise placed
his hand upon his lips, and dragged him from the room.



CHAPTER XXIX.

THE TAFILA COPPER MINES, LIMITED.

Paul could not for the life of him imagine why Tantaine had left the
room in apparently so angry a mood. He had certainly spoken of Flavia
in a most improper manner; for the very weakness of which she had been
guilty should have caused him to treat her with tender deference and
respect. He could understand the anger of Hortebise, who was Rigal’s
friend; but what on earth had Tantaine in common with the wealthy banker
and his daughter? Forgetful of the pain which the smallest movement upon
his part produced, Paul sat up in his bed, and listened with intense
eagerness, hoping to catch what was going on in the next room; but he
could hear nothing through the thick walls and the closed door.

“What can they be doing?” asked he. “What fresh plot are they
contriving?”

Daddy Tantaine and Hortebise passed out of the room hastily, but when
they reached the staircase they stood still. The doctor wore the same
smiling expression of face, and he endeavored to calm his companion, who
appeared to be on the verge of desperation.

“Have courage,” whispered he; “what is the use of giving way to passion?
You cannot help this; it is too late now. Besides, even if you could,
you would not, as you know very well, indeed!”

The old man was moving his spectacles, not to wipe his glasses, but his
eyes.

“Ah!” moaned he, “now I can enter into the feelings of M. de Mussidan
when I proved to him that his daughter had a lover. I have been hard and
pitiless, and I am cruelly punished.”

“My old friend, you must not attach too much importance to what you have
heard. Paul is a mere boy, and, of course, a boaster.”

“Paul is a miserably cowardly dog,” answered the old man in a fierce
undertone. “Paul does not love the girl as she loves him; but what he
says is true, only too true, I can feel. Between her father and her
lover she would not hesitate for a moment. Ah! unhappy girl, what a
terrible future lies before her.”

He stopped himself abruptly.

“I cannot speak to her myself,” resumed he; “do you, doctor, strive and
make her have reason.”

Hortebise shrugged his shoulders. “I will see what my powers of oratory
can do,” answered he; “but you are not quite yourself to-day. Remember
that a chance word will betray the secret of our lives.”

“Go at once, and I swear to you that, happen what may, I will be calm.”

The doctor went back into Paul’s room, while Tantaine sat down on the
topmost stair, his face buried in his hands.

Mademoiselle Flavia was just going to Paul, when the doctor again
appeared.

“What, back again?” asked she petulantly. “I thought that you had been
far away by this time.”

“I want to say something to you,” answered he, “and something of a
rather serious nature. You must not elevate those charming eyebrows. I
see you guess what I am going to say, and you are right. I am come to
tell you that this is not the proper place for Mademoiselle Rigal.”

“I know that.”

This unexpected reply, made with the calmest air in the world, utterly
disconcerted the smiling doctor.

“It seems to me----” began he.

“That I ought not to be here; but then, you see, I place duty before
cold, worldly dictates. Paul is very ill, and has no one to take care of
him except his affianced bride; for has not my father given his consent
to our union?”

“Flavia, listen to the experience of a man of the world. The nature
of men is such that they never forgive a woman for compromising her
reputation, even though it be in their own favor. Do you know what
people will say twenty-four hours after your marriage? Why, that you had
been his mistress for weeks before, and that it was only the knowledge
of that fact that inclined your father to consent to the alliance.”

Flavia’s face grew crimson. “Very well,” said she, “I will obey, and
never say again that I was obstinate; but let me say one word to Paul,
and then I will leave him.”

The doctor retired, not guessing that this obedience arose from the
sudden suspicion which had arisen in Flavia’s mind. “It is done,” said
he, as he rejoined Tantaine on the stairs; “let us hasten, for she will
follow us at once.”

By the time that Tantaine got into the street, he seemed to have
recovered a certain amount of his self-command. “We have succeeded,”
 said he, “but we shall have to work hard, and this marriage must be
hastened by every means in our power. It can be celebrated now without
any risk, for in twelve hours the only obstacle that stands between that
youth there and the colossal fortune of the Champdoce will have vanished
away.”

Though he had expected something of the kind, the face of the doctor
grew very pale.

“What, Andre?” faltered he.

“Andre is in great danger, doctor, and may not survive to-morrow, and a
portion of the work necessary to this end will be done to-night by our
young friend Toto Chupin.”

“By that young scamp? Why, only the other day you laughed when I
suggested employing him.”

“I shall this time kill two birds with one stone. Once an investigation
is made--let us speak plainly--into Andre’s death, there will be some
inquiry made as to a certain window frame that has been sawed through,
and suspicion will fall upon Toto Chupin, who will have been seen
lurking about the spot. It will be proved that he purchased a saw, and
that he changed just before a note for one thousand francs; he will be
found hiding in a garret in the Hotel de Perou.”

The doctor looked aghast. “Are you mad?” cried he. “Toto will accuse
you.”

“Very likely, but by that time poor old Tantaine will be dead and
buried. Then Mascarin will disappear, our faithful Beaumarchef will be
in the United States, and we can afford to laugh at the police.”

“It seems like a success,” said the doctor, “but push on for mercy’s
sake; all these delays and fluctuations will make me seriously ill.”

The two worthy associates held this conversation in a doorway, anxious
to be sure that Flavia had kept her promise. In a brief space of time
they saw her come out of the house and move in the direction of her
father’s bank.

“Now,” said Tantaine, “I can go in peace, doctor; farewell for the
present;” and without waiting for a reply he was walking rapidly away
when he was stopped by Beaumarchef, who came up breathless and barred
his passage.

“I was looking for you,” cried he; “the Marquis de Croisenois is in the
office and is swearing at me like anything.”

“Go back to the office and tell the Marquis that the master will soon be
with him;” and thus speaking, Tantaine disappeared down a court by the
side of Martin Rigal’s house.

The Marquis was striding up and down the office, every now and then
discharging a rumbling cannonade of oaths. “Fine business people,”
 remarked he, “to make an appointment and then not to keep it!” He
checked himself; for the door of the inner office slowly opened, and
Mascarin appeared on the threshold. “Punctuality,” said he, “does not
consist in coming _before_, but _at_ the time appointed.”

The Marquis was cowed at once, and followed Mascarin into the sanctum
and watched him with curious gaze as the redoubtable head of the
association seemed to be searching for something among the papers on his
desk. When Mascarin had found what he was in search of, he turned and
addressed the Marquis.

“I desired to see you,” said he, “with reference to the great financial
enterprise which you are to launch almost immediately.”

“Yes; I understand that we must discuss it, fully understand it, and
feel our way.”

Mascarin uttered a contemptuous whistle.

“Do you think,” asked he, “that I am the kind of person to stand
and wait while you feel your way? Because if you do, the sooner you
undeceive yourself the better. Things that I take in hand are carried
out like a flash of lightning. You have been playing while I and Catenac
have been working, and nothing remains to be done but to act.”

“Act! What do you mean?”

“I mean that offices have been taken in the Rue Vivienne, that the
articles of association have been drawn up, the directors chosen,
and the Company registered. The printer brought the prospectus here
yesterday; you can begin sending them out to-morrow.”

“But----”

“Read it for yourself,” said Mascarin, handing a printed paper to him.
“Read, and then, perhaps, you will be convinced.”

Croisenois, in a dazed sort of manner, accepted the paper and read it
aloud.

COPPER MINES OF TAFILA, ALGERIA.

Chairman: THE MARQUIS HENRI DE CROISENOIS.

Capital: Four Million Francs.

This company does not appeal to that rash class of speculators who are
willing to incur great risks for the sake of obtaining for a time heavy
dividends.

The shareholders in the Tafila Copper Mining Company, Limited, must not
look for a dividend of more than six, or at the utmost seven, per cent.

“Well,” interrupted Mascarin, “what do you think of this for a
beginning?”

“It seems fair enough,” answered De Croisenois, “but suppose others than
those whose names you have in your black list take shares, what do you
say we are to do then?”

“We should simply decline to allot shares to them, that is all. See the
Article XX. in the Articles of Association. ‘The Board of Directors may
decline to allot shares to applicants without giving any reason for so
doing.’”

“And suppose,” continued the Marquis, “that one of our own people
dispose of his share, may we not find our new shareholder a thorn in our
side?”

“Article XXI. ‘No transfer of stock is valid, unless passed by the Board
of Directors, and recorded in the books of the Company,’” read out
Mascarin.

“And how will the game be brought to a conclusion?”

“Easily enough. You will advertise one morning that two-thirds of the
capital having been unsuccessfully sunk in the enterprise, you are
compelled to apply for a winding-up of the Company under Article XVII.
Six months afterwards you will announce that the liquidation of
the Company has, after all expenses have been paid, left no balance
whatsoever. Then you wash your hands of the whole thing, and the matter
is at an end.”

Croisenois felt that he had no ground to stand upon, but he ventured on
one more objection.

“It seems rather a strange thing to launch this enterprise at the
present moment. May it not interfere with my marriage prospects? and may
not the Count de Mussidan decline to give me his daughter and risk her
dowry in this manner? One moment, I--”

The agent sneered and cut short the tergiversations of the Marquis.

“You mean, I suppose,” said he, “that when once you are safely married
and have received Mademoiselle Sabine’s dowry, you will take leave
of us. Not so, my dear young friend; and if this is your idea, put it
aside, for it is utter nonsense. I should hold you then as I do now.”

The Marquis saw that any further struggle would be of no avail, and gave
in.

* * * * *

That evening, when M. Martin Rigal emerged from his private office, his
daughter Flavia was more than usually demonstrative in her tokens of
affection. “How fondly I love you, my dearest father!” said she, as
she rained kisses on his cheeks. “How good you are to me!” but on this
occasion the banker was too much preoccupied to ask his daughter the
reason for this extreme tenderness on her part.



CHAPTER XXX.

THE VEILED PORTRAIT.

The danger with which Andre was menaced was most terrible, and the
importance of the game he was playing made him feel that he had
everything to fear from the boldness and audacity of his enemies. He
knew this, and he also knew that spies dogged all his movements. What
could be wanted but a favorable opportunity to assassinate him. But even
this knowledge did not make him hesitate for an instant, and all his
caution was fully exercised, for he felt that should he perish, Sabine
would be inevitably lost. On her account he acted with a prudence which
was certainly not one of his general characteristics. He was quite aware
that he might put himself under the protection of the police, but this
he knew would be to imperil the honor of the Mussidan family. He was
sure that with time and patience he should be able to unravel the
plots of the villains who were at work. But he had not time to do so by
degrees. No, he must make a bold dash at once. The hideous sacrifice of
which Sabine was to be the victim was being hurried on, and it seemed to
him as if his very existence was being carried away by the hours as
they flitted by. He went over recent events carefully one by one, and
he strove to piece them together as a child does the portions of a
dissected map. He wanted to find out the one common interest that bound
all these plotters together--Verminet, Van Klopen, Mascarin, Hortebise,
and Martin Rigal. As he submitted all this strange combination of
persons to the test, the thought of Gaston de Gandelu came across his
mind.

“Is it not curious,” thought he, “that this unhappy boy should be the
victim of the cruel band of miscreants who are trying to destroy us? It
is strange, very strange.”

Suddenly he started to his feet, for a fresh idea had flashed across
his brain--a thought that was as yet but crude and undefined, but which
seemed to bear the promise of hope and deliverance. It seemed to him
that the affair of young Gandelu was closely connected with his own,
that they were part and parcel of the same dark plot, and that these
bills with their forged acceptance had more to do with him than he had
ever imagined. How it was that he and Gaston could be connected he could
not for a moment guess; yet now he would have cheerfully sworn that
such was the case. Who was it that had informed the father of the son’s
conduct? Why, Catenac. Who had advised that proceedings should be taken
against Rose, _alias_ Zora? Why, Catenac again; and this same man, in
addition to acting for Gandelu, it seems, was also the confidential
solicitor of the Marquis de Croisenois and Verminet. Perhaps he had only
obeyed their instructions. All this was very vague and unsatisfactory,
but it might be something to go upon, and who could say what conclusion
careful inquiry might not lead him to? and Andre determined to carry on
his investigations, and endeavor to find the hidden links that connected
this chain of rascality together. He had taken up a pencil with the view
of making a few notes, when he heard a knock at his door. He glanced at
the clock; it was not yet nine.

“Come in,” cried he as he rose.

The door was thrown open, and the young artist started as he recognized
in his early visitor the father of Sabine. It was after a sleepless
night that the Count had decided to take the present step. He was
terribly agitated, but had had time to prepare himself for this
all-important interview.

“You will, I trust, pardon me, sir,” said he, “for making such an early
call upon you, but I thought that I should be sure to find you at this
hour, and much wanted to see you.”

Andre bowed.

In the space of one brief instant a thousand suppositions, each one more
unlikely than the other, coursed through his brain. Why had the Count
called? Who could have given him his address? And was the visit friendly
or hostile?

“I am a great admirer of paintings,” began the Count, “and one of my
friends upon whose taste I can rely has spoken to me in the warmest
terms of your talent. This I trust will explain the liberty I have
taken. Curiosity drove me to----”

He paused for a moment, and then added,--

“My name is the Marquis de Bevron.”

The concealment of the Count’s real name showed Andre that the visit was
not entirely a friendly one, and Andre replied,--

“I am only too pleased to receive your visit. Unfortunately just now I
have nothing ready, only a few rough sketches in short. Would you like
to see them?”

The Count replied eagerly in the affirmative. He was terribly
embarrassed under his fictitious name, and shrank before the honest,
open gaze of the young artist, and his mental disturbance was completed
by seeing in one corner of the room the picture covered with a green
cloth, which Tantaine had alluded to. It was evident that the old
villain had told the truth, and that his daughter’s portrait was
concealed behind this wrapper. She had evidently been here--had spent
hours here, and whose fault was it? She had but listened to the voice of
her heart, and had sought that affection abroad which she was unable to
obtain at home. As the Count gazed upon the young man before him, he was
forced to admit that Mademoiselle Sabine had not fixed her affections on
an unworthy object, for at the very first glance he had been struck with
the manly beauty of the young artist, and the clear intelligence of his
face.

“Ah,” thought Andre, “you come to me under a name that is not your
own, and I will respect your wish to remain unknown, but I will take
advantage of it by letting you know things which I should not dare say
to your face.”

Great as was Andre’s preoccupation, he could not fail to notice that his
visitor’s eyes sought the veiled picture with strange persistency. While
M. de Mussidan was looking at the various sketches on the walls, Andre
had time to recover all his self-command.

“Let me congratulate you, sir,” remarked the Count, as he returned to
the spot where the painter was standing. “My friend’s admiration was
well founded. I am sorry, however, that you have nothing finished to
show me. You say that you have nothing, I believe?”

“Nothing, Marquis.”

“Not even that picture whose frame I can distinguish through the serge
curtain that covers it?”

Andre blushed, though he had been expecting the question from the
commencement.

“Excuse me,” answered he; “that picture is certainly finished, but it is
not on view.”

The Count was now sure that Tantaine’s statement was correct.

“I suppose that it is some woman’s portrait,” remarked the false
Marquis.

“You are quite correct.”

Both men were much agitated at this moment, and avoided meeting each
other’s eyes.

The Count, however, had made up his mind that he would go on to the end.

“Ah, you are in love, I see!” remarked he with a forced laugh. “All
great artists have depicted the charms of their mistresses on canvas.”

“Stop,” cried Andre with an angry glance in his eyes. “The picture you
refer to is the portrait of the purest and most innocent girl in the
world. I shall love her all my life; but, if possible, my respect for
her is greater than my love. I should consider myself a most degraded
wretch, had I ever whispered in her ear a word that her mother might not
have listened to.”

A feeling of the most instantaneous relief thrilled through M. de
Mussidan’s heart.

“You will pardon me,” suggested he blandly, “but when one sees a
portrait in a studio, the inference is that a sitting or two has taken
place?”

“You are right. She came here secretly, and without the knowledge of her
family, at the risk of her honor and reputation, thus affording me the
strongest proof of her love. It was cruel of me,” continued the young
artist, “to accept this proof of her entire devotion, and yet not only
did I accept it, but I pleaded for it on my bended knee, for how else
was I to hear the music of her voice, or gladden my eyes with her
beauty? We love each other, but a gulf wider than the stormy sea divides
us. She is an heiress, come of a proud and haughty line of nobles, while
I----”

Andre paused, waiting for some words wither of encouragement or censure;
but the Count remained silent, and the young man continued,--

“Do you know who I am? A poor foundling, placed in the Hospital of
Vendome, the illicit offspring of some poor betrayed girl. I started in
the world with twenty francs in my pocket, and found my way to Paris;
since then I have earned my bread by my daily work. You only see here
the more brilliant side of my life; for an artist here--I am a common
work-man elsewhere.”

If M. de Mussidan remained silent, it was from extreme admiration of the
noble character, which was so unexpectedly revealed to him, and he was
endeavoring to conceal it.

“She knows all this,” pursued Andre, “and yet she loves me. It was here,
in this very room, that she vowed that she could never be the wife
of another. Not a month ago, a gentleman, well born, wealthy, and
fascinating, with every characteristic that a woman could love, was a
suitor for her hand. She went boldly to him, told him the story of our
love, and, like a noble-hearted gentleman, he withdrew at once, and
to-day is my best and kindest friend. Now, Marquis, would you like to
see this young girl’s picture?”

“Yes,” answered the Count, “and I shall feel deeply grateful to you for
such a mark of confidence.”

Andre went to the picture, but as he touched the curtain he turned
quickly towards his visitor.

“No,” said he, “I can no longer continue this farce; it is unworthy of
me.”

M. de Mussidan turned pale.

“I am about to see Sabine de Mussidan’s portrait. Draw the curtain.”

Andre obeyed, and for a moment the Count stood entranced before the work
of genius that met his eyes.

“It is she!” said the father. “Her very smile; the same soft light in
her eyes. It is exquisite!”

Misfortune is a harsh teacher; some weeks ago he would have smiled
superciliously at the mere idea of granting his daughter’s hand to a
struggling artist, for then he thought only of M. de Breulh, but now
he would have esteemed it a precious boon had he been allowed to choose
Andre as Sabine’s husband. But Henri de Croisenois stood in the way,
and as this idea flashed across the Count’s mind he gave a perceptible
start. He was sure from the excessive calmness of the young man that he
must be well acquainted with all recent events. He asked the question,
and Andre, in the most open manner, told him all he knew. The generosity
of M. de Breulh, the kindness of Madame Bois Arden, his suspicions, his
inquiries, his projects, and his hopes. M. de Mussidan gazed once more
upon his daughter’s portrait, and then taking the hand of the young
painter, said,--

“M. Andre, if ever we can free ourselves from those miscreants, whose
daggers are pointed at our hearts, Sabine shall be your wife.”



CHAPTER XXXI.

GASTON’S DILEMMA.

Yes, Sabine might yet be his, but between the lovers stood the forms of
Croisenois and his associates. But now he felt strong enough to contend
with them all.

“To work!” said he, “to work!”

Just then, however, he heard a sound of ringing laughter outside his
door. He could distinguish a woman’s voice, and also a man’s, speaking
in high, shrill tones. All at once his door burst open, and a hurricane
of silks, velvets, feathers, and lace whirled in. With extreme surprise,
the young artist recognized the beautiful features of Rose, _alias_ Zora
de Chantemille. Gaston de Gandelu followed her, and at once began,--

“Here we are,” said he, “all right again. Did you expect to see us?”

“Not in the least.”

“Ah! well, it is a little surprise of the governor’s. On my word, I
really will be a dutiful son for the future. To-day, the good old boy
came into my room, and said, ‘This morning I took the necessary steps to
release the person in whom you are interested. Go and meet her.’ What do
you think of that? So off I ran to find Zora, and here we are.”

Andre did not pay much attention to Gaston, but was engaged in watching
Zora, who was looking round the studio. She went up to Sabine’s
portrait, and was about to draw the curtain, when Andre exclaimed,--

“Excuse me,” said he; “I must put this picture to dry.” And as the
portrait stood on a moveable easel, he wheeled it into the adjoining
room.

“And now,” said Gaston, “I want you to come and breakfast with us to
celebrate Zora’s happy release.”

“I am much obliged to you, but it is impossible. I must get on with my
work.”

“Yes, yes; work is an excellent thing, but just now you must go and
dress.”

“I assure you that it is quite out of the question. I cannot leave the
studio yet.”

Gaston paused for a moment in deep thought.

“I have it,” said he triumphantly. “You will not come to breakfast; then
breakfast shall come to you. I am off to order it.”

Andre ran after him, but Gaston was too quick, and he returned to the
studio in anything but an amiable temper. Zora noticed his evident
annoyance.

“He always goes on in this absurd way,” said she, with a shrug of her
pretty shoulders, “and thinks himself so clever and witty, bah!”

Her tone disclosed such contempt for Gaston that Andre looked at her in
perplexed surprise.

“What do you look so astonished at? It is easy to see you do not know
much of him. All his friends are just like him; if you listen to them
for half an hour at a stretch, you get regularly sick. When I think of
the terrible evenings that I have spent in their company, I feel ready
to die with yawning;” and as she spoke, she suited the action to the
word. “Ah! if he really loved me!” added she.

“Love you! Why, he adores you.”

Zora made a little gesture of contempt which Toto Chupin might have
envied.

“Do you think so?” said she. “Do you know what it is he loves in me?
When people pass me they cry out, ‘Isn’t she good style?’ and then the
idiot is as pleased as Punch; but if I had on a cotton gown, he would
think nothing of me.”

Rose had evidently learned a good ideal, as her beauty had never been so
radiant. She was one glow of health and strength.

“Then my name was not good enough for him,” she went on. “His
aristocratic lips could not bring themselves to utter such a common name
as Rose, so he christened me Zora, a regular puppy dog’s name. He has
plenty of money, but money is not everything after all. Paul had no
money, and yet I loved him a thousand times better. On my word, I have
almost forgotten how to laugh, and yet I used to be as merry as the day
was long.”

“Why did you leave Paul then?”

“Well, you see, I wanted to experience what a woman feels when she has
a Cashmere shawl on, so one fine morning I took wing. But there, who
knows? Paul would very likely have left me one day. There was some
one who was doing his best to separate us, an old blackguard called
Tantaine, who lived in the same house.”

“Ah!” answered he cautiously. “What interest could he have had in
separating you?”

“I don’t know,” answered the girl, assuming a serious air; “but I am
sure he was trying it on. A fellow doesn’t hand over banknotes for
nothing, and I saw him give one for five hundred francs to Paul; and
more than that, he promised him that he should make a great fortune
through a friend of his called Mascarin.”

Andre started. He remembered the visit that Paul had made him, on the
pretext of restoring the twenty francs he had borrowed, and at which
he had boasted that he had an income of a thousand francs a month, and
might make more, though he had not said how this was to be done. “I
think that Paul has forgotten me. I saw him once at Van Klopen’s, and he
never attempted to say a word to me. He was certainly with that Mascarin
at the time.”

Andre could only draw one conclusion from this, either that Paul was
protected by the band of conspirators, or else that he formed one of it.
In that case he was useful to them; while Rose, who was in their way,
was persecuted by them. Andre’s mind came to this conclusion in
an instant. It seemed to him that if Catenac had been desirous of
imprisoning Rose, it was because she was in the way, and her presence
disturbed certain combinations. Before, however, he could work out his
line of deduction, Gaston’s shrill voice was heard upon the stairs, and
in another moment he made his appearance.

“Place for the banquet,” said he; “make way for the lordly feast.”

Two waiters followed him, bearing a number of covered dishes on trays.
At another time Andre would have been very angry at this invasion, and
at the prospect of a breakfast that would last two or three hours and
utterly change everything; but now he was inclined to bless Gaston for
his happy idea, and, with the assistance of Rose, he speedily cleared a
large table for the reception of the viands.

Gaston did nothing, but talked continually.

“And now I must tell you the joke of the day. Henri de Croisenois, one
of my dearest friends, has absolutely launched a Company.”

Andre nearly let fall a bottle, which he was about to place upon the
table.

“Who told you this?” asked he quickly.

“Who told me? Why, a great big flaming poster. Tafila Copper Mines;
capital, four millions. And my esteemed friend, Henri, has not a
five-franc piece to keep the devil out of his pocket.”

The face of the young artist expressed such blank surprise that Gaston
burst into a loud laugh.

“You look just as I did when I read it. Henri de Croisenois, the
chairman of a Company! Why, if you had been elected Pope, I should not
have been more surprised. Tafila Copper Mines! What a joke! The shares
are five hundred francs.”

The waiters had now retired, and Gaston urged his friends to take their
places at the table, and all seemed merry as a marriage bell; but many a
gay commencement has a stormy ending.

Gaston, whose shallow brain could not stand the copious draughts of wine
with which he washed down his repast, began all at once to overwhelm
Zora with bitter reproaches at her not being able to comprehend how a
man like him, who was destined to play a serious part in society, could
have been led away, as he had been, by a person like her.

Gaston had a tongue which was never at a loss either to praise or blame,
and Zora was equally ready to retort, and defended herself with such
acrimony that the lad, knowing himself to be in fault, entirely lost the
small remnant of temper which he still possessed, and dashed out of the
room, declaring that he never wished to set eyes upon Zora again, and
that she might keep all the presents that he had lavished upon her for
all he cared.

His departure was hailed with delight by Andre, who, now that he was
left alone with Zora, hoped to derive some further information from her,
and especially a distinct description of Paul, whom he felt that he
must now reckon among his adversaries. But his hopes were destined to
be frustrated, for Zora was so filled with anger and excitement that she
refused to listen to another word; and putting on her hat and mantle,
with scarcely a glance at the mirror, rushed out of the studio with
the utmost speed, declaring that she would seek out Paul, and make him
revenge the insults that Gaston had put on her.

All this passed so rapidly that the young painter felt as if a tornado
had passed through his humble dwelling; but as peace and calm returned,
he began to see that Providence had directly interposed in his favor,
and had sent Rose and Gaston to his place to furnish him with fresh and
important facts. All that Rose had said, incomplete as her statement
was, had thrown a ray of light upon an intrigue which, up till now, had
been shaded in the thickest gloom. The relations of Paul with Mascarin
explained why Catenac had been so anxious to have Rose imprisoned, and
also seemed to hint vaguely at the reason for the extraction of the
forged signatures from the simple Gaston. What could be the meaning
of the Company started by De Croisenois at the very moment when he was
about to celebrate his union with Sabine?

Andre desired to see the advertisement of the Company for himself; and
without stopping to change his blouse, ran downstairs to the corner
of the street, where Gaston had told him that the announcement of the
Company was placarded up. He found it there, in a most conspicuous
position, with all its advantages most temptingly set forth. Nothing
was wanting; and there was even a woodcut of Tafila, in Algiers, which
represented the copper mines in full working operation; while at the
top, the name of the chairman, the Marquis de Croisenois, stood out in
letters some six inches in height.

Andre stood gazing at this wonderful production for fully five minutes,
when all at once a gleam of prudence flashed across his mind.

“I am a fool,” said he to himself. “How do I know how many watchful eyes
are now fixed on me, reading on my countenance my designs regarding this
matter and its leading spirit?”

Upon his return to his room, he sat for more than an hour, turning over
the whole affair in his mind, and at length he flattered himself that
he had hit upon an expedient. Behind the house in which he lodged was a
large garden, belonging to some public institution, the front of which
was in the Rue Laval. A wall of about seven feet in height divided these
grounds from the premises in the Rue de la Tour d’Auvergne. Why should
he not go out by the way of these ornamental grounds and so elude the
vigilance of the spies who might be in waiting at the front of the
house?

“I can,” thought he, “alter my appearance so much that I shall not
be recognized. I need not return here to sleep. I can ask a bed from
Vignol, who will help me in every possible way.”

This Vignol was the friend to whom, at Andre’s request, M. Gandelu had
given the superintendence of the works at his new house in the Champs
Elysees.

“I shall,” continued he, “by this means escape entirely from De
Croisenois and his emissaries, and can watch their game without their
having any suspicion of my doing so. For the time being, of course, I
must give up seeing those who have been helping me,--De Breulh, Gandelu,
Madame de Bois Arden, and M. de Mussidan; that, however, cannot be
avoided. I can use the post, and by it will inform them all of the step
that I have taken.”

It was dark before he had finished his letters, and, of course, it was
too late to try anything that day; consequently he went out, posted his
letters, and dined at the nearest restaurant.

On his return home, he proceeded to arrange his disguise. He had it
ready, among his clothes: a blue blouse, a pair of check trousers,
well-worn shoes, and a shabby cap, were all that he required, and he
then applied himself to the task of altering his face. He first shaved
off his beard. Then he twisted down two locks of hair, which he managed
to make rest on his forehead. Then he commenced applying some coloring
to his face with a paint-brush; but this he found to be an extremely
difficult business, and it was not for a long while that he was
satisfied with the results that he had produced. He then knotted an old
handkerchief round his neck, and clapped his cap on one side, with the
peak slanting over one eye. Then he took a last glance in the glass,
and felt that he had rendered himself absolutely unrecognizable. He was
about to impart a few finishing touches, when a knock came at his door.
He was not expecting any one at such an hour, nine o’clock; for the
waiters from the restaurant had already removed the remains of the
feast.

“Who is there?” cried he.

“It is I,” replied a weak voice; “I, Gaston de Gandelu.”

Andre decided that he had no cause to distrust the lad, and so he opened
his door.

“Has M. Andre gone out?” asked the poor boy faintly. “I though I heard
his voice.”

Gaston had not penetrated his disguise, and this was Andre’s first
triumph; but he saw now that he must alter his voice, as well as his
face.

“Don’t you know me?” asked he.

It was evident that young Gaston had received some terrible shock; for
it could not have been the quarrel in the morning that had reduced him
to this abject state of prostration.

“What has gone wrong with you?” asked Andre kindly.

“I have come to bid you farewell; I am going to shoot myself in half an
hour.”

“Have you gone mad?”

“Not in the least,” answered Gaston, passing his hand across his
forehead in a distracted manner; “but those infernal bills have turned
up. I was just leaving the dining-room, after having treated the
governor to my company, when the butler whispered in my ear that
there was a man outside who wanted to see me. I went out and found a
dirty-looking old scamp, with his coat collar turned up round the nape
of his neck.”

“Did he say that his name was Tantaine?” exclaimed Andre.

“Ah! was that his name? Well, it doesn’t matter. He told me in the most
friendly manner that the holder of my bills had determined to place them
in the hands of the police to-morrow at twelve o’clock, but that there
was still a way for me to escape.”

“And this was to take Rose out of France with you,” said Andre quickly.

Gaston was overwhelmed with surprise.

“Who the deuce told you that?” asked he.

“No one; I guessed it; for it was only the conclusion of the plan
which they had initiated when you were induced to forge Martin Rigal’s
signature. Well, what did you say?”

“That the idea was a ridiculous one, and that I would not stir a yard.
They shall find out that I can be obstinate, too; besides, I can see
their little game. As soon as I am out of the way they will go to the
governor and bleed him.”

But Andre was not listening to him. What was best to be done? To advise
Gaston to go and take Rose with him was to deprive himself of a great
element of success; and to permit him to kill himself was, of course,
out of the question.

“Just attend to me,” said he at last; “I have an idea which I will tell
you as soon as we are out of this house; but for reasons which are too
long to go into at present it is necessary for me to get into the street
without going through the door. You will, therefore, go away, and as the
clock strikes twelve you will ring at the gateway of 29, Rue de Laval.
When it is opened, ask some trivial question of the porter; and when
you leave, take care that you do not close the gate. I shall be in the
garden of the house and will slip out and join you.”

The plan succeeded admirably, and in ten minutes Gaston and Andre were
walking along the boulevards.



CHAPTER XXXII.

M. LECOQ.

The Marquis de Croisenois lived in a fine new house on the Boulevard
Malesherbes near the church of St. Augustine, and in a suite of rooms
the rental of which was four thousand francs per annum. He had collected
together sufficient relics of his former splendor to dazzle the eyes of
the superficial observer. The apartment and the furniture stood in the
name of his body-servant, while his horse and brougham were by the same
fiction supposed to be the property of his coachman, for even in the
midst of his ruin the Marquis de Croisenois could not go on foot like
common people.

The Marquis had two servants only in his modest establishment--a
coachman, who did a certain amount of indoor work, and a valet, who knew
enough of cookery to prepare a bachelor breakfast. This valet Mascarin
had seen once, and the man had then produced so unpleasant an impression
on the astute proprietor of the Servants’ Registry Office that he had
set every means at work to discover who he was and from whence he
came. Croisenois said that he had taken him into his service on the
recommendation of an English baronet of his acquaintance, a certain Sir
Richard Wakefield. The man was a Frenchman, but he had resided for some
time in England, for he spoke that language with tolerable fluency.
Andre knew nothing of these details, but he had heard of the existence
of the valet from M. de Breulh, when he had asked where the Marquis
lived.

At eight o’clock on the morning after he had surreptitiously left his
home in the manner described, Andre took up his position in a small
wine-shop not far from the abode of the Marquis de Croisenois. He had
done this designedly, for he knew enough of the manner and customs of
Parisian society to know that this was the hour usually selected by
domestics in fashionable quarters to come out for a gossip while their
masters were still in bed. Andre had more confidence in himself than
heretofore, for he had succeeded in saving Gaston; and these were
the means he had employed. After much trouble, and even by the use of
threats, he had persuaded the boy to return to his father’s house. He
had gone with him; and though it was two in the morning, he had not
hesitated to arouse M. Gandelu, senior, and tell him how his son had
been led on to commit the forgery, and how he threatened to commit
suicide.

The poor old man was much moved.

“Tell him to come to me at once,” said he, “and let him know that we two
will save him.”

Andre had not far to go, for Gaston was waiting in the next room in an
agony of suspense.

As soon as he came into the old man’s presence he fell upon his knees,
with many promises of amendment for the future.

“I do not believe,” remarked old Gandelu, “that these miscreants will
venture to carry their threats into execution and place the matter in
the hands of the police; but for all that, my son must not remain in
a state of suspense. I will file a complaint against the Mutual Loan
Society before twelve to-day, and we will see how an association will be
dealt with that lends money to minors and urges them to forge signatures
as security. It will, however, be as well for my son to leave for
Belgium by the first train this morning; but, as you will see, he will
not remain very many days.”

Andre remained for the rest of the hours of darkness at the kind old
man’s house, and it was in Gaston’s room that he renewed his “make-up”
 before leaving. The future looked very bright to him as he walked gayly
up the Boulevard Malesherbes. The wine-shop in which he had taken up his
position was admirably adapted for keeping watch on De Croisenois, for
he could not avoid seeing all who came in and went out of the house;
and as there was no other wine-shop in the neighborhood, Andre felt
sure that all the servants in the vicinity, and those of the Marquis, of
course, among the number, would come there in the course of the morning;
so that here he could get into conversation with them, offer them a
glass of wine, and, perhaps, get some information from them. The
room was large and airy, and was full of customers, most of whom were
servants. Andre was racking his brain for a means of getting into
conversation with the proprietor, when two new-comers entered the room.
These men were in full livery, while all the other servants had on
morning jackets. As soon as they entered, an old man, with a calm
expression of face, who was struggling perseveringly with a tough
beefsteak at the same table as that by which Andre was seated,
observed,--

“Ah! here comes the De Croisenois’ lot.”

“If they would only sit here,” thought Andre, “by the side of this
fellow, who evidently knows them, I could hear all they said.”

By good luck they did so, begging that they might be served at once, as
they were in a tremendous hurry.

“What is the haste this morning?” asked the old man who had recognized
them.

“I have to drive the master to his office, for he has one now. He is
chairman of a Copper Mining Company, and a fine thing it is, too. If you
have any money laid by, M. Benoit, this is a grand chance for you.”

Benoit shook his head gravely.

“All is not gold that glitters,” said he sententiously; “nor, on the
other hand, are things as bad as they are painted.”

Benoit was evidently a prudent man, and was not likely to commit
himself.

“But if your master is going out, you, M. Mouret, will be free, and we
can have a game at cards together.”

“No, sir,” answered the valet.

“What! are you engaged too?”

“Yes; I have to carry a bouquet of flowers to the young lady my master
is engaged to. I have seen the young lady; she seems to be rather
haughty.”

The man, who wore an enormously high and stiff collar, was absolutely
speaking of Sabine, and Andre could have twisted his neck with pleasure.

“Let us hope,” remarked the coachman, as he hastily swallowed his
breakfast, “that the Marquis does not intend to invest his wife’s dowry
in this new venture of his.”

The men then ceased to speak of their master, and began to busy
themselves with their own affairs, and went out again without alluding
to him any further, leaving Andre to reflect what a difficult business
the detective line was.

The customers looked upon him with distrustful eyes, for it must be
confessed that his appearance was decidedly against him, and he had not
yet acquired the necessary art of seeing and hearing while affecting to
be doing neither; and it was easy for the dullest observer to be certain
that it was not for the sake of obtaining a breakfast that he had
entered the establishment. Andre had penetration enough to see the
effect he had produced, and he became more and more embarrassed. He had
finished his meal now and had lighted a cigar, and had ordered a small
glass of brandy. Nearly all the customers had withdrawn, leaving only
five or six, who were playing cards at a table near the door. Andre
was anxious to see Croisenois enter his carriage, and so he lingered,
ordering another glass of brandy as an excuse.

He had just been served, when a man, whose dress very much resembled his
own, lounged into the wine-shop. He was a tall, clumsily built fellow,
with an insolent expression upon his beardless face. His coat and cap
were in an equally dilapidated condition; and in the squeaky voice of
the rough, he ordered a plate of beef and half a bottle of wine, and,
as he brushed past Andre, upset his glass of brandy. The artist made no
remark, though he felt quite sure that this act was intentional, as the
fellow laughed impudently when he saw the damage that he had done. When
his breakfast was served, he carelessly spit upon Andre’s boots. The
insult was so apparent that Andre began to reflect.

“Had he not succeeded in eluding his spies, as he thought that he had
done? And was it not quite possible that this man had been sent to pick
a quarrel with him, and deal him a disabling, or even a fatal blow?”

Prudence counselled him to leave the place at once, but he felt that he
could not go until he had found out the real truth. There seemed to be
but little doubt on the matter, however; for as the fellow cut up his
meat, he jerked every bit of skin and gristle into his neighbor’s lap;
then, after finishing up his wine, he managed to upset the few drops
remaining on to Andre’s arm and shoulder. This was the finishing stroke.

“Please, remember,” remarked Andre calmly, “that there is some one at
the table besides yourself.”

“Do you think I’m blind, mate?” returned the fellow brutally. “Mind your
own business, or----” And to conclude the sentence, he shook his fist
threateningly in the young man’s face.

Andre started to his feet, and, with a well-directed blow in the chest,
sent the fellow rolling under the table.

At the sound of the scuffle, the card-players turned round, and saw
Andre standing erect, with quivering lips and eyes flashing with rage,
while his antagonist was lying on the floor among the overturned chairs.

“Come, come! No squabbling here!” remarked one of the players.

The fellow scrambled to his feet, and made a savage rush at the young
man, who, using his right foot skilfully, tripped his antagonist up,
and sent him again rolling on the ground. It was most adroitly done, and
secured the applause of the lookers-on, who now complained no longer,
and were evidently interested in the scene.

Again the rough came up, but Andre contented himself with standing on
the defensive. Some tables, a stool, and a glass were injured, and at
last the proprietor came upon the scene of action.

“Get out of this,” cried he, “and take care that I don’t see your faces
here again.”

At these words, the rough burst out into a torrent of foul language.

“Don’t put up with his cheek,” said one of the customers; “give him in
charge at once.”

Hardly, however, had the manager started to summon the police, than, as
if by magic, a body of them appeared; and Andre found himself walking
down the boulevard between a couple, while his late antagonist followed
in the safe custody of two more. To have attempted any resistance would
have been utter folly, and the young man resigned himself to what he
felt he could not help. But as he went on, he reflected on the strange
scene through which he had just passed. All had gone on so rapidly that
he could hardly recall the events to his memory. He was, however, quite
sure that this unprovoked assault concealed some motive with which at
present he was unacquainted.

The police led their prisoners through the doorway of a dingy-looking
old house, and then Andre saw that he was not at the regular
police-station. The whole party entered an office, where a
superintendent and two clerks were at work. The ruffian who had
assaulted Andre changed his manner directly he entered the office; he
threw his tattered cap upon a bench, passed his fingers through his
hair, and shook hands with the superintendent; he then turned to Andre.

“Permit me, sir,” said he, “to compliment you on being so handy with
your fists. You precious nearly did for me, I can tell you.”

At that moment a door opened at the other end of the room, and a voice
was heard to say, “Send them in.”

Andre and his late antagonist soon found themselves in an office
evidently sacred to some one high up in the police. At a desk near the
window was seated a man, with a rather distinguished air, wearing a
white necktie and a pair of gold glasses.

“Have the goodness to take a seat,” said this gentleman, addressing
Andre with the most perfect urbanity.

He took a chair, half stupefied by the strangeness of the whole affair,
and waited. Could he be awake, or was he dreaming? He could hardly tell.

“Before I say anything,” remarked the gentleman in the gold spectacles,
“I ought to apologize for a proceeding which is--well, what shall I call
it?--a little rough, perhaps; but it was necessary to make use of it to
obtain this interview with you. Really, however, I had no choice. You
are closely watched, and I did not wish the persons who had set spies on
you to have any knowledge of this conference.”

“Do you say I am watched?” stammered Andre.

“Yes, by a certain La Candele, as sharp a fellow at that kind of work as
you could find in Paris. Are you surprised at this?”

“Yes, for I had thought----”

The gentleman’s features softened into a benevolent smile.

“You thought,” he said, “that you had succeeded in throwing them off the
scent. So I had imagined this morning, when I saw you in your present
disguise. But permit me, my dear M. Andre, to assure you that there is
great room for improvement in it. I admit that a first attempt is always
to be looked on leniently; but it did not deceive La Candele, and even
at this distance I can plainly see your whole makeup; and what I can
see, of course, is patent to others.”

He rose from his seat, and came closer to Andre.

“Why on earth,” asked he, “should you daub all this color on your face,
which makes you look like an Indian warrior in his war-paint? Only two
colors are necessary to change the whole face--red and black--at the
eyebrows, the nostrils, and the corners of the mouth. Look here;” and
taking from his pocket a gold pencil-case, he corrected the faults in
the young artist’s work.

As soon as he had finished, Andre went up to the mirror over the
chimney-piece, and was surprised at the result.

“Now,” said the strange gentleman, “you see the futility of your
attempts. La Candele knew you at once. I wished to speak to you; so I
sent for Palot, one of my men, and instructed him to pick a quarrel with
you. The policemen arrested you, and we have met without any one being
at all the wiser. Be kind enough to efface my little corrections, as
they will be noticed in the street.”

Andre obeyed, and as he rubbed away with the corner of his handkerchief,
he vainly sought for some elucidation of this mystery.

The man with the gold spectacles had resumed his seat, and was
refreshing himself with a pinch of snuff.

“And now,” resumed he, “we will, if you please, have a little talk
together. As you see, I know you. Doctor Loulleux tells me that he knows
no one so high-minded and amiable as yourself. He declares that your
honor is without a stain, and your courage undoubted.”

“Ah! my dear sir!” interposed the painter, with a deep blush.

“Pray let me go on. M. Gandelu says that he would trust you with all he
possessed, while all your comrades, with Vignol at their head, have the
greatest respect and regard for you. So much for the present. As for
your future, two of the greatest ornaments of the artistic world say
that you will one day occupy a very high place in the profession. You
gain now about fifteen francs a day. Am I correct?”

“Certainly,” answered Andre, more bewildered than ever.

The gentleman smiled.

“Unfortunately,” he went on, “my information ends here, for the means of
inquiry possessed by the police are, of course, very limited. They can
only act upon facts, not on intentions, and so long as these are not
displayed in open acts, the hands of the police are tied. It is only
forty-eight hours since I heard of you for the first time, and I
have already your biography in my pocket. I hear that the day before
yesterday you were dining with M. de Breulh-Faverlay, and that this
morning you were walking with young Gandelu, and that La Candele was
following you like a shadow. These are all facts, but----”

He paused, and cast a keen glance upon Andre, then, in a slow and
measured voice, he continued,--

“But no one has been able to tell me why you dogged Verminet’s
footsteps, or why you went to Mascarin’s house, or why, finally,
you disguised yourself to keep a watch on the movements of the most
honorable the Marquis de Croisenois. It is the motive that we cannot
arrive at, for the facts are perfectly clear.”

Andre fidgeted uneasily in his chair beneath the spell of those magnetic
glasses, which seemed to draw the truth from him.

“I cannot tell you, sir,” faltered he at last, “for the secret is not
mine to divulge.”

“You will not trust me? Well, then, I must speak. Remember, all that
I have told you was the account of what I knew positively; but, in
addition to this, I have drawn my own inferences. You are watching De
Croisenois because he is going to marry a wealthy heiress.”

Andre blushed crimson.

“We assume, therefore, that you wish to prevent this marriage; and why,
pray? I have heard that Mademoiselle de Mussidan was formerly engaged
to M. de Breulh-Faverlay. How comes it that the Count and Countess de
Mussidan prefer a ruined spendthrift to a wealthy and strictly honorable
man? It is for you to answer this question. It is perfectly plain to me
that they hand over their daughter to De Croisenois under pressure
of some kind, and that means that a terrible secret exists with which
Croisenois threatens them.”

“Your deduction is wrong, sir,” exclaimed Andre eagerly, “and you are
quite wrong.”

“Very good,” was the calm reply. “Your emphatic denial shows that I am
in the right. I want no further proofs. M. de Mussidan paid you a visit
yesterday, and one of my agents reported that his face was much happier
on leaving you than when he was on his way to your house. I therefore
infer that you promised to release him from Croisenois’ persecutions,
and in return he promised you his daughter’s hand in marriage. This, of
course, explains your present disguise, and now tell me again that I am
wrong, if you dare.”

Andre would not lie, and therefore kept silence.

“And now,” continued the gentleman, “how about the secret? Did not the
Count tell it you? I do not know it; and yet I think that if I were to
search for it, I could find it. I can call to my mind certain crimes
which three generations of detective have striven to find out. Did you
ever hear that De Croisenois had an elder brother named George, who
disappeared in a most wonderful manner? What became of him? This very
George, twenty-three years back, was a friend of Madame de Mussidan’s.
Might not his disappearance have something to do with this marriage?”

“Are you the fiend himself?” cried the young man.

“I am M. Lecoq.”

Andre started back in absolute dread at the name of this celebrated
detective.

“M. Lecoq!” repeated he.

The vanity of the great detective was much flattered when he saw the
impression that his name had produced.

“And now, my dear M. Andre,” said he blandly, “now that you know who I
am, may I not hope that you will be more communicative?”

M. de Mussidan had not told his secret to the young artist, but he
had said enough for him to feel that the detective was correct in his
inference.

“Surely,” continued Lecoq, “we ought to be able to come to a more
definite understanding, and I think that my openness should elicit some
frankness on your side. I saw that you were watched by the very person
that I was watching. For three days my men have followed you, and to-day
I made up my mind that you could furnish me with the clue I am seeking.”

“I, sir?”

“For many years,” continued Lecoq, “I have been certain that an
organized association of blackmailers exists in Paris; family
differences, sin, shame, and sorrow are worked by these wretches like
veritable gold mines, and bring them in enormous annual revenues.”

“Ah,” returned Andre, “I expected something of this kind.”

“Of course, when I was quite sure of these facts,” continued Lecoq, “I
said to myself, ‘I will break up this gang;’ but it was easier said than
done. There is one very peculiar thing about blackmailing. Those who
carry it on are almost certain of doing so with impunity, for the
victims will pay and not complain. Yes, I tell you that I have often
found out these unhappy pigeons, but never could get one to speak.”

The detective was so indignant and acrimonious withal in his
indignation, that Andre could not repress a smile.

“Very soon,” continued Lecoq, “I recognized the futility of my attempts,
and the impossibility of reaching these scoundrels through their
victims, and then I determined to strike at the plunderers themselves,
but this was a scheme that took patience and time. I have waited my
chance for three years, and for eighteen months one of my men has been
in the service of the Marquis de Croisenois, and up to now this band
of villains has cost the government over ten thousand francs. That
superlative scoundrel, Mascarin, has put several white threads in my
hair. I believe him to be Tantaine; yes, and Martin Rigal too. The idea
of there being a means of communication between the banker’s house
in the Rue Montmartre and the Servants’ Registry Office in the Rue
Montorgueil only came into my head this morning. But this time they
have gone too far, and I have them. I know them all, from the chief,
Mascarin-Tantaine-Rigal, down to their lowest agent, Toto Chupin, and
Paul Violaine, the docile puppet of their will. We will get hold of the
whole gang, and neither Van Klopen nor Catenac will escape. Just now the
latter is travelling about with the Duke de Champdoce and a fellow named
Perpignan, and two of my sweet lads are close upon them, and send in
almost hourly reports of what is going on. My trap has a tempting bait,
the spring is strong, and we shall catch every one of them. And now do
you still hesitate to confide all you know to me? I swear on my honor
that I will respect as sacred what you tell me, no matter what may
occur.”

Andre yielded, as did every person who came under the influence of this
remarkable man and his strange and inexplicable fascination. If he
hid anything from him to-day, would not Lecoq be acquainted with it
to-morrow? And so, with the most perfect frankness, he told his story
and everything that he knew.

“Now,” cried Lecoq, “I see it all clearly. Aha, they want to force young
Gandelu to disappear with Rose, do they?”

Beneath his gold-rimmed spectacles his eyes flashed fiercely. He seemed
to be occupied in drawing out his plan of campaign.

“From this moment,” said he, “be at ease. In another month Mademoiselle
de Mussidan shall be your wife; this I promise you, and the promises of
Lecoq are never broken.”

He paused for an instant, as though to collect his thoughts, and then
continued,--

“I can answer for all, except for your life. So many are interested in
your disappearance from this world, that every effort will be made to
get rid of you. Do not cease your caution for an instant. Never eat
twice running at the same restaurant, throw away food that has the
slightest strange taste. Avoid crowds in the street; do not get into a
cab; never lean from a window before ascertaining that its supports are
solid; in a word, fear and suspect everything.”

For a moment longer Lecoq detained the young artist.

“Tell me,” said he, “have you the mark of a wound on your shoulder or
arm?”

“I have, sir; the scar of a very severe scald.”

“I thought so; yes, I was almost certain of it,” said Lecoq
thoughtfully; and as he conducted the young man to the door, he took
leave of him with the same words that Mascarin had often used to Paul,--

“Farewell for the present, Duke de Champdoce.”



CHAPTER XXXIII.

THROUGH THE AIR.

At these last words Andre turned round, but the door closed, and he
heard the key grate in the lock. He passed through the outer office,
where the superintendent, his two clerks, and his late adversary all
seemed to gaze upon him with a glance of admiration and esteem.

He gained the open street.

What did those last words of Lecoq mean? He was a foundling, it is true;
but what foundling has not had lofty aspirations, and felt that, for all
he knew, he might be the scion of some noble house.

As soon as Lecoq thought that the coast was clear, he opened the door,
and called the agent, Palot.

“My lad,” said the great man, “you saw that young man who went out just
now? He is a noble fellow, full of good feeling and honor. I look upon
him as my friend.”

Palot made a gesture signifying that henceforth his late antagonist was
as something sacred in his eyes.

“You will be his shadow,” pursued Lecoq, “and keep near enough to him to
rush to his aid at a moment of danger. That gang, of which Mascarin is
the head, want his life. You are my right-hand man, and I trust him to
you. I have warned him, but youth is rash; and you will scent danger
where he would never dream that it lurked. If there is any peril, dash
boldly forward, but endeavor to let no one find out who you are. If you
must speak to him--but only do so at the last extremity--whisper my name
in his ear, and he will know you have come from me. Remember, you are
answerable for him; but change your face. La Candele and the others must
not recognize in you the wine-shop bully; that would spoil all. What
have you on under that blouse, a _commissionaire’s_ dress?

“That will do; now change the face.”

Palot pulled out a small parcel from his pocket, from which he extracted
a red beard and wig, and, going to the mirror, adjusted them with
dexterous activity; and, in a few minutes, went up to his master, who
was waiting, saying,--

“How will this do?”

“Not bad, not bad,” returned Lecoq; “and now to your work.”

“Where shall I find him?” asked Palot.

“Somewhere near Mascarin’s den, for I advised him not to give up playing
the spy too suddenly.”

Palot was off like the wind, and when he reached the Rue Montmartre, he
caught sight of the person who had been intrusted to his care.

Andre was walking slowly along, thinking of Lecoq’s cautions, when a
young man, with his arm in a sling, overtook him, going in the same
direction as he was. Andre was sure that it was Paul, and as he knew
that he could not be recognized, he passed him in his turn, and saw that
it was indeed the Paul so much regretted by Zora.

“I will find out where he goes to,” thought Andre.

He followed, and saw him enter the house of M. Rigal. Two women were
gossiping near the door, and Andre heard one of them say,--

“That is the young fellow who is going to marry Flavia, the banker’s
daughter.”

Paul, therefore, was to marry the daughter of the chief of the gang.
Should he tell Lecoq this? But, of course, the detective knew it.

Time was passing, and Andre felt that he had but little space to gain
the house that Gandelu was building in the Champs Elysees, if he wished
to ask hospitality from his friend Vignol.

He found all the workmen there, and not one of them recognized him when
he asked for Vignol.

“He is engaged up there,” said one. “Take the staircase to the left.”

The chief part of the ornamental work was in front, and it was there
that the little hut which Tantaine had pointed out to Toto Chupin was
erected. Vignol was in it, and was utterly surprised when Andre made
himself known, for he did not recognize him under his strange disguise.

“It is nothing,” returned the young man cautiously, as Vignol paused for
an explanation; “only a little love affair.”

“Do you expect to win a girl’s heart by making such a guy of yourself?”
 asked his friend with a laugh.

“Hush! I will explain matters later on. Can you give me shelter for a
night or two?”

He stopped himself, turned terribly pale, and listened intently. He
fancied he had heard a woman’s scream, and his own name uttered.

“Andre, it is I--your Sabine; help!”

Quick as lightning Andre rushed to the window, opened it, and leaned out
to discover from whence those sounds came.

The young miscreant, Toto Chupin, had too fatally earned the note with
which Tantaine had bribed him. The whole of the front of the window gave
way with a loud crash, and Andre was hurled into space.

The hut was at least sixty feet from the pavement, and the fall was the
more appalling because the body of Andre struck some of the intervening
scaffolding first, and thence bounced off, until the unhappy young man
fell with a dull thud, bleeding and senseless in the street.

Nearly three hundred persons in the Champs Elysees witnessed this
hideous sight; for, at Vignol’s cry, every one had stopped, and, frozen
with horror, had not missed one detail of the grim tragedy.

In an instant a crowd was collected round the poor, inert mass of
humanity which lay motionless in a pool of blood. But two workmen,
roused by Vignol’s shrieks, were soon on the spot, and pushed their way
through the crowd of persons who were gazing with a morbid curiosity on
the man who had fallen from a height of sixty feet.

Andre gave no sign of life. His face was dreadfully bruised, his eyes
were closed, and a stream of blood poured from his mouth, as Vignol
raised his friend’s head upon his knee.

“He is dead!” cried the lookers on. “No one could survive such a fall.”

“Let us take him to the Hospital Beaujon!” exclaimed Vignol. “We are
close by there.”

An ambulance was speedily procured, and the workmen, placing their
insensible friend carefully in it, asked permission to carry him to the
hospital.

One curious event had excited the attention of some of the lookers on.
Just as Andre fell, a _commissaire_ had rushed forward and seized a
woman. She was one of the class of unfortunates who frequent the Champs
Elysees, and she it was who had uttered the cry that had lured Andre to
destruction. The woman made an effort to escape, but Palot, for it was
he, caught her arm.

“Not a word,” said he sternly. The wretched creature seemed in abject
terror, and obeyed him.

“Why did you cry out?” asked he.

“I do not know.”

“It is a lie!”

“No, it is true; a gentleman came up to me, and said, ‘Madame, if you
will cry out now, Andre, it is I--your Sabine; help! I will give you two
louis.’ Of course I agreed. He gave me the fifty francs, and I did as he
asked me.”

“What was this man like?”

“He was tall, old, and very shabby and dirty, with glasses on. I never
set eyes on him before.”

“Do you know,” returned the _commissaire_ sternly, “that the words
you have uttered have caused the death of the poor fellow who has just
fallen from the house?”

“Why did he not take more care?” asked she indifferently.

Palot, with an angry gesture, handed her over to a police-constable.

“Take her to the station-house,” said he, “and do not lose sight of her,
for she will be a most important witness at a trial that must soon come
on.”

“What the woman says is true,” muttered Palot. “She did not know what
she was doing, and it was Tantaine that gave her the two coins. He shall
pay for this; but certainly, if the whole gang are collared, it won’t
bring the poor young fellow to life.”

He had, however, not much time for reflection, for he had to gather up
every link of evidence. How was it that this accident had occurred? The
frame of the window had fallen out with Andre, and lay in fragments on
the pavement. He picked up one of the pieces, and at once saw what had
been done; the woodwork had been sawed almost in two, and the putty with
which the marks of the cuts had been concealed still clung to the wood.
Palot called one of the workmen, who appeared to be more intelligent
than his fellows, pointed out the marks to him, and bade him gather up
the fragments and put them in some place of security. This duty being
accomplished, Palot joined the crowd; but he was too late, for Andre had
been taken away to the hospital. He looked around to see if there was
any one from whom he could gain information, and suddenly perceived on a
bench some one whom he had often followed. It was Toto Chupin, no
longer clad in the squalid rags of a day or two back. He was dressed in
gorgeous array, but his face was livid, his eyes wild, and his lips kept
moving convulsively, for he was a victim to a novel sensation--the pangs
of remorse--and was meditating whether he should not go to the nearest
police-station and give himself up, so that he might revenge himself
on Tantaine, who had made him a murderer. For a moment the idea of
arresting Toto passed through Palot’s mind, but he, after a moment’s
thought, muttered,--

“No; that would never do. We should risk losing the whole gang. Besides,
he can’t get away. I may even have committed an error in arresting that
woman. My master will say that I am not to be trusted. He placed one of
his friends in my charge, and this is what has happened. I knew that the
young man’s life was in deadly peril, and yet I let him enter a house
in the course of erection; why, I might as well have cut his throat
myself.”

In a terrible state of anxiety, Palot presented himself at the hospital,
and asked for the young man who had just been brought in.

“You mean Number 17?” returned one of the assistant-surgeons. “He is in
a most critical state; we fear internal injuries, fracture of the skull,
and--in fact, we fear everything.”

It was two days before Andre recovered consciousness. It was midnight
when he first woke again to the realities of life. At a glance he
guessed where he was. He felt pain when he endeavored to turn over, but
he could move his legs and one arm.

“How long have I been here, I wonder?” he thought.

He tried to think, but he was weak, and thoughts would not come at his
command, and in a few seconds he dropped off to sleep again; and when
he awoke, it was broad day; the ward was full of life and motion, for
it was the hour of the house surgeon’s visit. He was a young man still,
with a cheerful face, followed by the band of students. He went from bed
to bed, explaining cases, and cheering up the sufferers. When Andre’s
turn came, the surgeon told him that his shoulder was put out, his arm
broken in two places, a bad cut on his head, while his body was one mass
of bruises; but, for all that, he was in luck to have got off so easily.
Andre listened to him with but a vague understanding of his meaning,
for, with the return of reason, the remembrance of Sabine had come, and
he asked himself what would become of her while he was confined to his
bed in the hospital. As this thought passed through his mind, he uttered
a faint groan. One of the students, a stout person, with red whiskers, a
white tie, and a rather shabby hat, who looked as if he had just arrived
from the country, stepped up to his bed, and leaning over the patient,
murmured, “Lecoq.” Andre opened his eyes wide at the name.

“M. Lecoq,” gasped he, wondering at the excellence of the disguise.

“Hush, who knows who is watching us? I come to give your mind ease,
which will do you more good than all the doctor’s stuff. Without in any
way committing you, I have seen M. de Mussidan, and have furnished him
with a valid excuse for postponing his daughter’s marriage for another
month. You must remain here; you could not be in a place of greater
security; but even here you cannot be too cautious. Eat nothing that is
no given you by some one who utters the word ‘Lecoq.’ M. Gandelu will
certainly call to see you. If you want to see or write to me, the
patient on your right will manage that; he is one of my men. You shall
have news every day; but be patient and prudent.”

“I can wait now,” answered the young man, “because I have hope.”

“Ah,” murmured Lecoq, as he moved softly away, “is not hope the true
secret of life and happiness?”



CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE DAY OF RECKONING.

M. Lecoq enjoined prudence and caution on Andre, and the utmost care
on the part of his agents, because he was fully aware of the skill and
cunning of the adversary with whom he had to cope.

“You should not talk or make a noise,” he would say, “when you are
fighting.”

He could now prove that the head of this association, the man who
concealed his identity under a threefold personality, was the instigator
of a murder. But he did not intend to make use of this discovery at
once, for he had sworn that he would take the whole gang, and his
proceedings had been so carefully conducted that his victims did not for
a moment suspect the net that was closing around them. The day after the
accident to Andre, Mascarin sent an anonymous communication to the head
of the police, giving up Toto as the author of the crime, and saying
where he could be found.

“Of course,” thought this wily plotter, “Toto will denounce Tantaine,
but that worthy man is dead and buried, and I think that even
the sharpest agents of the police will be unable to effect his
resurrection.”

Mascarin had carefully consumed in a large fire every particle of the
tattered garments that Tantaine had been in the habit of wearing, and
laughed merrily as he watched the columns of sombre smoke roll upwards.

“Look for him as much as you please,” laughed he. “Old Daddy Tantaine
has flown up the chimney.”

The next business was to suppress Mascarin; this was a more difficult
operation. Few would care to inquire about Tantaine, but Mascarin was
well known as the head of a prosperous business; his disappearance would
create a sensation, and the police would take up the matter. His best
course would be to conduct matters openly, and sell his business on
the plea of family affairs causing him to retire. He easily found a
purchaser, and in twenty-four hours the matter had been arranged.

The night before handing over the business to his successor Mascarin
had much to do. Assisted by Beaumarchef, he carried into Martin Rigal’s
private office the papers with which the Registry Office was crammed.
This removal was effected by means of a door marked by a panel between
Mascarin’s office and the banker’s private room; and when the last scrap
of paper had been removed, Mascarin pointed out a heap of bricks and a
supply of mortar to his faithful adherent.

“Wall up this door,” said he.

It was a long and wearisome task, but it was at length completed, and
by rubbing soot and dust over the new work it lost its appearance of
freshness. The evening before Beaumarchef had received twelve thousand
francs on the express condition that he would start at once for America,
and the leave-taking between him and the master he had so faithfully
served was a most affecting one. He knew hardly anything of the
diabolical plots going on around him, and was the only innocent person
in that house of crime.

Mascarin was in haste to depart; he had annihilated Tantaine in order
to free himself from Toto. Mascarin was about to disappear, and he
contemplated retaining his third personality, and in it to pass away the
remainder of his life honored and respected; but he must first induct
his successor into his business; and he went through the books with him,
and explained all the practical working of the machinery. This took him
nearly all day, and it was getting late when his luggage was put on a
cab which he had in waiting. A new plate had already been placed on the
door: “J. Robinet, late B. Mascarin.”

Knowing that he must carry out the deception completely, Mascarin drove
to the western railway station, and took a ticket for Rouen. He felt
rather uncomfortable, for he feared that he was being watched, and he
made up his mind not to leave a single trace behind him. At Rouen he
abandoned his luggage, which he had taken care should afford no clue
as to ownership, he also relinquished his beard and spectacles, and
returned to Paris as the well-known banker, Martin Rigal, the pretty
Flavia’s father, having, as he thought, obliterated Mascarin as
completely as he had done Tantaine; but he had not noticed in the train
with him a very dark young man with piercing eyes, who looked like the
traveller of some respectable commercial firm. As soon as he reached
his home, and had tenderly embraced his daughter, he went to the private
room of Martin Rigal, and opened it with the key that never left
his person, and then gazed at a large rough mass of brickwork which
disfigured one side of the room, and which was the remains of the wall
that erewhile had been so hastily erected in the Office of the Servants’
Registry.

“This won’t do,” muttered he; “it must be plastered, and then
repapered.”

He picked up the bits of brick and plaster that lay on the floor, and
threw them into the fire, and then pushed a large screen in front of the
rough brickwork. He had just finished his work when Hortebise entered
the room, with his perpetually smiling face.

“Now, you unbeliever,” cried Mascarin gaily, “is not fortune within our
grasp? Tantaine and Mascarin are dead, or rather, they never existed.
Beaumarchef is on his way to America, La Candele will be in London in a
week, and now we may enjoy our millions.”

“Heaven grant it,” said the doctor piously.

“Pooh, pooh! we have nothing more to fear, as you would have known had
you gone into the case as thoroughly as I have done. Who was the enemy
whom we had most need to dread? Why, Andre. He certainly is not dead,
but he is laid up for some weeks, and that is enough. Besides, he
has given up the game, for one of my men who managed to get into the
hospital says that he has not received a visitor or dispatched a letter
for the last fifteen days.”

“But he had friends.”

“Pshaw! friends always forget you! Why, where was M. de
Breulh-Faverlay?”

“It is the racing season, and he is a fixture in his stables.”

“Madame de Bois Arden?”

“The new fashions are sufficient for her giddy head.”

“M. Gandelu?”

“He has his son’s affairs to look after and there is no one else of any
consequence.”

“And how about young Gandelu?”

“Oh! he has yielded to Tantaine’s winning power, and has made it up with
Rose, and the turtle doves have taken wing for Florence.”

But the doctor was still dissatisfied. “I am uneasy about the
Mussidans,” said he.

“And pray why? De Croisenois has been very well received. I don’t say
that Mademoiselle Sabine has exactly jumped into his arms, but she
thanks him every evening for the flowers he sends in the morning, and
you can’t expect more than that.”

“I wish the Count had not put off the marriage. Why did he do so?”

“It annoys me, too; but we can’t have everything; set your mind at
rest.”

By this time the banker had contrived to reassure the doctor.

“Besides,” he added, “everything is going on well, even our Tafila
mines. I have taxed our people, according to their means, from one to
twenty thousand francs, and we are certain of a million.”

The doctor rubbed his hands, and a delicious prospect of enjoyments
stretched out before him.

“I have seen Catenac,” continued Martin Rigal. “He has returned from
Vendome, and the Duke de Champdoce is wild with hope and expectation,
and is on the path which he thinks will take him to his son.”

“And how about Perpignan?”

Mascarin laughed.

“Perpignan is just as much a dupe as the Duke is; he thinks absolutely
that he has discovered all the clues that I myself placed on his road.
Before, however, they have quite concluded their investigations,
Paul will be my daughter’s husband and Flavia the future Duchess of
Champdoce, with an income that a monarch might envy.”

He paused, for there was a light tap on the door, and Flavia entered.
She bowed to the doctor, and, with the graceful movement of a bird,
perched herself upon her father’s knee, and, throwing her arms round his
neck, kissed him again and again.

“This is a very nice little preface,” said the banker with a forced
smile. “The favor is granted in advance, for, of course, this means that
you have come to ask one.”

The girl shook her head, and returned in the tone of one addressing a
naughty child,--

“Oh, you bad papa! Am I in the habit of selling my kisses? I am sure
that I have only to ask and to have.”

“Of course not, only----”

“I came to tell you that dinner was ready, and that Paul and I are both
very hungry; and I only kissed you because I loved you; and if I had to
choose a father again, out of the whole it would be you.”

He smiled fondly.

“But for the last six weeks,” said he, “you have not loved me so well.”

“No,” returned she with charming simplicity, “not for so long--nearly
for fifteen days perhaps.”

“And yet it is more than a month since the good doctor brought a certain
young man to dinner.”

Flavia uttered a frank, girlish laugh.

“I love you dearly,” said she, “but especially for one thing.”

“And what is that, pray?”

“Ah! that is the secret; but I will tell it you for all that. It is only
within the last fortnight that I have found out how really good you have
been, and how much trouble you took in bringing Paul to me; but to think
that you should have to put on those ugly old clothes, that nasty beard
and those spectacles.”

At these words the banker started so abruptly to his feet that Flavia
nearly fell to the ground.

“What do you mean by this?” said he.

“Do you suppose a daughter does not know her father? You might deceive
others, but I--”

“Flavia, I do not comprehend your meaning.”

“Do you mean to tell me,” asked she, “that you did not come to Paul’s
rooms the day I was there?”

“Are you crazy? Listen to me.”

“No, I will not; you must not tell me fibs. I am not a fool; and when
you went out with the doctor, I listened at the door, and I heard a few
words you said; and that isn’t all, for when I got here, I hid myself
and I saw you come into this room.”

“But you said nothing to any one, Flavia?”

“No, certainly not.”

Rigal breathed a sigh of relief.

“Of course I do not count Paul,” continued the girl, “for he is the same
as myself.”

“Unhappy child!” exclaimed the banker in so furious a voice, and with
such a threatening gesture of the hand, that for the first time in her
life Flavia was afraid of her father.

“What have I done?” asked she, the tears springing to her eyes. “I only
said to Paul that we should be terribly ungrateful if we did not worship
him; for you don’t know what he does for us. Why, he even dresses up in
rags, and goes to see you.”

Hortebise, who up to this time had not said a word, now interfered.

“And what did Paul say?” asked he.

“Paul? Oh, nothing for a moment. Then he cried out, ‘I see it all now,’
and laughed as if he would have gone into a fit.”

“Did you not understand, my poor child, what this laugh means? Paul
thinks that you have been my accomplice, and believes that it was in
obedience to your orders that I went to look for him.”

“Well, and suppose he does?”

“A man like Paul never loves a woman who has run after him; and no
matter how great her beauty may be, will always consider that she has
thrown herself in his path. He will accept all her devotion, and make no
more return than a stone or a wooden idol would do. You cannot see this,
and God grant that it may be long before the bandage is removed from
your eyes. Can you not read the quality of this foolish boy, who has not
a manly instinct in him?”

“Enough!” she cried, “enough! I am not such a coward as to allow you to
insult my husband.”

He shuddered at the thought that his words might cost him his daughter’s
love, but Hortebise interposed by putting his arm round Flavia’s waist
and leading her from the room. When he returned, he observed,--

“I cannot understand your anger. It seems to me that all recrimination
is most indiscreet, for you can at any moment break off this marriage.”

“Do you think it is nothing for me to be at the mercy of that cowardly
wretch, Paul?”

“Not more so than you are by the foolish weakness of your daughter. Is
not Paul our accomplice? And are we any more compromised because he has
discovered the secret of your triple personality?”

“Ah! you have not a father’s feelings. Up till now Paul did not know
that I was Mascarin, and believed me to be the victim of blackmailers.
As a dupe he respected me, as an accomplice he will scorn me. This
disastrous marriage must be hastened.”

Paul and Flavia’s marriage took place at the end of the next week,
and Paul left his simple bachelor abode to take possession of the
magnificent suite of rooms prepared for him by the banker in his house
in the Rue Montmartre. The change was great, but Paul was no longer
surprised at anything. He did not feel the faintest tinge of remorse;
he only feared one thing, and that was that by some blunder he might
compromise his future, when the eventful day arrived which would give
him the social position and standing of heir to a dukedom.

When, however, the Duke de Champdoce came, accompanied by Perpignan,
the young imposter rose to the level of his masters, and played his part
with most consummate skill. The Duke, whose life had been one long scene
of misery, and who had so cruelly expiated the sins of his youth, seemed
to have become suddenly lenient; and had Paul obeyed him, he would
at once have established himself with his young wife at the Hotel de
Champdoce, but Martin Rigal put a veto upon this, for he was not quite
satisfied that his son-in-law was really the heir to the Champdoce
dukedom; and finally it was agreed that the Duke should come to
breakfast the next morning and take away Paul. Eleven was the hour
fixed, but the Duke appeared at the banker’s house at ten, where he,
Catenac, Hortebise, and Paul were assembled together in solemn conclave.

“Now, papa,” said Flavia, who kept her father on thorns by her gay and
frolicsome criticisms, “you will no longer blame me for falling in love
with a poor Bohemian, for you see that he is a Champdoce, and that his
father possesses millions.”

The Duke was now seated on the sofa, holding the hand of the young man
whom he believed to be his son tightly in his. The Duchess, to whom he
had given a hint of what was going on, had been taken seriously ill from
over-excitement, but had recovered herself a little, and the Duke was
describing this when he was suddenly interrupted by a series of full
and heavy blows struck upon the other side of the wall of the room.
A pickaxe was evidently at work. The whole house was shaken by the
violence of the attack, and a screen, which stood near the spot, was
thrown down.

The plotters gazed upon each other with pale and terror-stricken faces,
for it was evident that the fresh brick wall, the work of Mascarin and
Beaumarchef, was being destroyed. The Duke sat in perfect amazement, for
the alarm of his host and his friends was plainly evident. He could feel
Paul’s hand tremble in his, but could not understand why work evidently
going on in the next house could cause such feelings of alarm. Flavia
was the only one who had no suspicion, and she remarked, “Dear me! I
should like to know the meaning of this disturbance.”

“I will send and inquire,” said her father; but scarcely had he opened
the door than he retreated with a wild expression of terror in his
face, and his arms stretched out in front of him, as though to bar the
approach of some terrible spectre. In the doorway stood an eminently
respectable-looking gentleman, wearing a pair of gold-rimmed spectacles,
and behind him a commissary of police, girt with his official scarf,
while farther back still were half a dozen police officers.

“M. Lecoq,” cried the three confederates in one breath, while through
their minds flashed the same terrible idea--“We are lost.”

The celebrated detective advanced slowly into the room, curiously
watching the group collected there. There was an air of entire
satisfaction visible on his countenance.

“Aha!” he said, “I was right, it seems. I was sure that I was making no
mistake in rapping at the other side of the wall. I knew that it would
be heard in here.”

By this time, however, the banker had, to all outward appearance,
regained his self-command.

“What do you want here?” asked he insolently. “What is the meaning of
this intrusion?”

“This gentleman will explain,” returned Lecoq, stepping aside to make
way for the commissary of police to come forward. “But, to shorten
matters, I may tell you that I have obtained a warrant for your arrest,
Martin Rigal, _alias_ Tantaine, _alias_ Mascarin.”

“I don’t understand you!”

“Indeed. Do you think that Tantaine has cleaned his hands so completely
that not a drop of Andre’s blood clings to the fingers of Martin Rigal?”

“On my word, you are speaking in riddles.”

A bland smile passed over Lecoq’s face as, drawing a folded letter from
his pocket, he answered,--

“Perhaps you are acquainted with the handwriting of your daughter. Well,
then, listen to what she wrote not so very long ago to the very Paul who
is sitting on the sofa there.

“‘MY DEAREST PAUL,--

“‘We should be guilty of the deepest ingratitude if----’”

“Enough! Enough!” cried the banker in a hoarse voice. “Lost, lost, lost!
My own child has been my ruin!”

The calmest of the conspirators was now the one who was generally the
first to take alarm, and this was the genial Doctor Hortebise. When he
recognized Lecoq, he had gently opened his locket and taken from it
a small pellet of grayish-colored paste, and, holding it between his
fingers, had waited until his leader should declare that all hope was
gone.

In the meantime Lecoq turned towards Catenac.

“And you too are included in this warrant,” said he.

Catenac, perhaps owing to his legal training, made no reply to Lecoq,
but addressing the commissary, observed,--

“I am the victim of a most unpleasant mistake, but my position----”

“The warrant is quite regular,” returned the commissary. “You can see it
if you desire.”

“No, it is not necessary. I will only ask you to conduct me to the
magistrate who issued it, and in five minutes all will be explained.”

“Do you think so?” asked Lecoq in a quiet tone of sarcasm. “You have not
heard, I can see, of what took place yesterday. A laborer, in the course
of his work, discovers the remains of a newly-born infant, wrapped in
a silk handkerchief and a shawl. The police soon set inquiries on foot,
and have found the mother--a girl named Clarisse.”

Had not Lecoq suddenly grasped Catenac’s arm, the lawyer would have
flown at Martin Rigal’s throat.

“Villain, traitor!” panted he, “you have sold me!”

“My papers have been stolen,” faltered the banker.

He now saw that the blows struck upon the other side of the wall were
merely a trick, for Lecoq had thought that a little preliminary fright
would render them more amenable to reason.

Hortebise still looked on calmly; he knew that the game was lost.

“I belong to a respectable family,” thought he, “and I will not bring
dishonor upon it. I have no time to lose.”

As he spoke he placed the contents of the locket between his lips and
swallowed them.

“Ah,” murmured he, as he did so, “with my constitution and digestion, it
is really hard to end thus.”

No one had noticed the doctor’s movements, for Lecoq had moved the
screen, and was showing the commissary a hole which had been made in the
wall large enough for the body of a man to pass through. But a sudden
sound cut these investigations short, for Hortebise had fallen to the
ground, and was struggling in a series of terrible convulsions.

“How stupid of me not to have foreseen this,” exclaimed Lecoq. “He has
poisoned himself; let some one run for a doctor. Take him into another
room and lay him on a bed.”

While these orders were being carried out, Catenac was removed to a
cab which was in waiting, and Martin Rigal seemed to have lapsed into a
state of moody imbecility. Suddenly he started to his feet, crying,--

“My daughter Flavia! yes, her name is Flavia, what is to become of her?
She has no fortune, and she is married to a man who can never provide
for her. My child will perhaps starve. Oh, horrible thought!”

The man’s strong mind had evidently given way, and his love for his
child and the hideous future that lay before her had broken down
the barrier that divides reason from insanity. He was secured by the
officers, raving and struggling. When Lecoq was left alone with the
Duke, Paul and Flavia, he cast a glimpse of pity at the young girl,
who had crouched down in a corner, and evidently hardly understood the
terrible scene that had just passed.

“Your Grace,” said he, turning to the Duke, “you have been the victim of
a foul conspiracy; this young man is not your son; he is Paul Violaine,
and is the son of a poor woman who kept a petty haberdashery shop in the
provinces.”

The miserable young fool began to bluster, and attempted to deny this
statement; but Lecoq opened the door, and Rose appeared in a most
becoming costume. Paul now made no effort to continue his protestations,
but throwing himself on his knees, in whining accents confessed the
whole fraud and pleaded for mercy, promising to give evidence against
his accomplices.

“Do not despair, your Grace,” said Lecoq, as he conducted the Duke to
his carriage; “this certainly is not your son; but _I_ have found him,
and to-morrow, if you like, you shall be introduced to him.”



CHAPTER XXXV.

“EVERY MAN TO HIS OWN PLACE.”

Obedient to the wishes of M. Lecoq, Andre resigned himself to a lengthy
sojourn at the Hospital de Beaujon, and had even the courage to affect
that state of profound indifference that had deceived Mascarin. The
pretended sick man in the next bed to his told him all that had taken
place, but the days seemed to be interminable, and he was beginning
to lose patience, when one morning he received a letter which caused
a gleam of joy to pass through his heart. “All is right,” wrote Lecoq.
“Danger is at an end. Ask the house surgeon for leave to quit the
hospital. Dress yourself smartly. You will find me waiting at the
doors.--L.”

Andre was not quite convalescent, for he might have to wear his arm in a
sling for many weeks longer; but these considerations did not deter him.
He now dressed himself in a suit which he had sent for to his rooms, and
about nine o’clock he left the hospital.

He stood upon the steps inhaling deep draughts of the fresh air, and
then began to wonder where the strange personage was to whom he owed
his life. While he was deliberating what to do, an open carriage drew up
before the door of the hospital.

“You have come at last,” exclaimed Andre, rushing up to the gentleman
who alighted from it. “I was getting quite anxious.”

“I am about five minutes late,” returned Lecoq; “but I was detained,”
 and then, as Andre began to pour out his thanks, he added, “Get into the
carriage; I have a great deal to say to you.”

Andre obeyed, and as he did so, he detected something strange in the
expression of his companion’s face.

“What!” remarked Lecoq, “do you see by my face that I have something to
tell you? You are getting quite a keen observer. Well, I have, indeed,
for I have passed the night going through Mascarin’s papers, and I have
just gone through a painful scene--I may say, one of the most painful
that I have ever witnessed. The intellect of Mascarin,” said he, “has
given way under the tremendous pressure put upon it. The ruling passion
of the villain’s life was his love for his daughter. He imagines that
Flavia and Paul are without a franc and in want of bread; he thinks that
he continually hears his daughter crying to him for help. Then, on
his knees, he entreats the warder to let him out, if only for a day,
swearing that he will return as soon as he has succored his child. Then,
when his prayer is refused, he bursts into a frenzied rage and tears at
his door, howling like an infuriated animal; and this state may last to
the end of his life, and every minute in it be a space of intolerable
torture. Doctor Hortebise is dead; but the poison upon which he relied
betrayed him, and he suffered agonies for twenty-four hours. Catenac
will fight to the bitter end, but the proofs are against him, and
he will be convicted of infanticide. In Rigal’s papers I have found
evidence against Perpignan, Verminet and Van Klopen, who will all
certainly hear something about penal servitude. Nothing has been settled
yet about Toto Chupin, for it must be remembered that he came and gave
himself up.”

“And what about Croisenois?”

“His Company will be treated like any other attempt to extort money by
swindling, and the Marquis will be sent to prison for two months, and
the money paid for shares returned to the dupes, and that, I think, is
all that I have to tell you, except that by to-morrow M. Gandelu will
receive back the bills to which his son affixed a forged signature. And
now,” continued Lecoq, after a short pause, “the time has come for me to
tell you why, at our first interview, I saluted you as the heir of the
Duke de Champdoce. I had guessed your history, but it was only last
night I heard all the details.”

Then the detective gave a brief but concise account of the manuscript
that Paul had read aloud. He did not tell much, however, but passed
lightly over the acts of the Duke de Champdoce and Madame de Mussidan,
for he did not wish Andre to cease to respect either his father or the
mother of Sabine. The story was just concluded as the carriage drew up
at the corner of the Rue de Matignon.

“Get down here,” said Lecoq, “and mind and don’t hurt your arm.”

Andre obeyed mechanically.

“And now,” went on Lecoq, “listen to me. The Count and Countess de
Mussidan expect you to breakfast and here is the note they handed to
me for you. Come back to your studio by four o’clock, and I will
then introduce you to your father; but till then, remember, absolute
silence.”

Andre was completely bewildered with his unexpected happiness. He walked
instinctively to the Hotel de Mussidan and rang the bell. The intense
civility of the footmen removed any misgivings that he might have left,
and, as he entered the dining-room, he darted back, for face to face
with him was the portrait of Sabine which he had himself painted. At
that moment the Count came forward to meet him with extended hands.

“Diana,” said he to his wife, “this is our daughter’s future husband.”
 He then took Sabine’s hand, which he laid in Andre’s.

The young artist hardly dared raise his eyes to Sabine’s face; when he
did so, his heart grew very sad, for the poor girl was but a shadow of
her former self.

“You have suffered terribly,” said he tenderly.

“Yes,” answered she, “and I should have died had it lasted much longer.”

Andre had the greatest difficulty in refraining from telling his secret
to his beloved, and it was with even more difficulty that he tore
himself away at half-past three.

He had not been five minutes in his studio when there was a knock at
the door, and Lecoq entered, followed by an elderly gentleman of
aristocratic and haughty appearance. It was the Duke of Champdoce.

“This gentleman,” said the Duke, with a gesture of his hand towards
Lecoq, “will have told you that certain circumstances rendered it
expedient, according to my ideas, that I should not acknowledge you as
my heir, but my son. The fault that I then committed has been cruelly
expiated. I am not forty-eight; look at me.”

The Duke looked at least sixty.

“My sins,” continued the Duke, “still pursue me. To-day, in spite of all
my desires, I cannot claim you as my legitimate son, for the law only
permits me to give you my name and fortune by exercising the right of
adoption.”

Andre made no reply, and the Duke went on with evident hesitation,--

“You can certainly institute proceedings against me for the recovery of
your rights, but--”

“Ah!” interrupted the young man, “really, what sort of person do you
think I am? Do you believe me capable of dishonoring your name before I
assumed it?”

The Duke drew a deep breath of relief. Andre’s manner had checked
and restrained him, for it was frigid and glacial to a degree. What a
difference there was between the haughty mien of Andre and the gushing
effusiveness of Paul!

“Will you permit me,” asked Andre, “to address a few words to you?”

“A few words?”

“Yes. I do not like to use the word ‘conditions,’ but I think that you
will understand what I mean. My daily toil for bread gave me neither the
means nor the leisure which I required to cultivate my art, for that is
a profession that I could never give up.”

“You will be certainly your own master.”

Andre paused, as if to reflect.

“This is not all I had to say,” he continued at last. “I love and am
loved by a pure and beautiful girl; our marriage is arranged, and I
think--”

“I think,” broke in the Duke, “that you could not love any one who was
not a fit bride for a member of our family.”

“But I did not belong to this family yesterday. Be at ease, however, for
she is worthy of a Champdoce. I am engaged to Sabine de Mussidan.”

A deadly paleness overspread the Duke’s face as he heard this name.

“Never,” said he. “Never; I would rather see you dead at my feet.”

“And I would gladly suffer ten thousand deaths than give her up.”

“Suppose I refuse my consent? Suppose that I forbid----”

“You have no claim to exercise paternal authority over me; this can
only be purchased by years of tender care. Duke de Champdoce, I owe you
nothing. Leave me to myself, as you have hitherto done, and all will be
simplified.”

The Duke reflected. Must he give up his son, who had been restored to
him by such a series of almost miraculous chances, or must he see him
married to Diana’s daughter? Either alternative appeared to him to be
equally disagreeable.

“I will not yield on the point,” said he. “Besides, the Countess would
never give her consent. She hates me as much as I hate her.”

M. Lecoq, who had up to this moment looked on in silence, now thought it
time to interpose.

“I think,” remarked he blandly, “that I shall have no difficulty in
obtaining the consent of Madame de Mussidan.”

The Duke, at these words, threw open his arms.

“Come, my son!” said he. “All shall be as you desire.”

That night, Marie, Duchess de Champdoce, experienced happiness for the
first time in the affection and caresses of a son who had been so
long lost to her, and seemed to throw off the heavy burden that had so
heavily pressed her down beneath its own weight.

When Madame de Mussidan heard that Andre was Norbert’s son, she declared
that nothing could induce her to give her consent to his marriage with
her daughter; but among Mascarin’s papers Lecoq had discovered the
packet containing the compromising correspondence between the Duke de
Champdoce and herself. The detective handed this over to her, and, in
her gratitude, she promised to give up all further opposition to the
match.

Lecoq always denied that this act came under the head of blackmailing.

Andre and Sabine took up their residence after marriage at the Chateau
de Mussidan, which had been magnificently restored and decorated. They
seldom leave it, for they love it for its vicinity to the leafy groves,
in which they first learned that they had given their hearts to each
other. And Andre frequently points out the unfinished work on the
balcony, which was the occasion of his first visit to the Chateau de
Mussidan. He says that he will complete it as soon as he has time, but
it is doubtful whether he will ever find leisure to do this for a long
time, for before the new year comes there is every chance of there being
a baptism at the little chapel at Bevron.

