
Prologue

To every woman there comes a day (and that all too soon) when she
receives the first hint that Time, the harvester, has not passed her by
unnoticed. The waning of actual youth may have passed with but the
faintest regret, if any; regret for the lost bud being merged in the
triumph at the glory of the opening blossom. But the waning of womanhood
is another matter. Old age has no compensations to offer for those
delights that it steals away. At least, that is what I understand from
those who know, for I must still speak on the subject from hearsay,
having received from Father Time but the very faintest and most delicate
hint on the subject.

I was sitting at my dressing-table brushing out my hair, which is of a
docile habit, though a thought bulky, when amidst the black tress--blacker
than it used to be when I was a girl--I noticed a single white
hair. It was the first that I had seen, and I looked at it dubiously,
picking it out from its fellows to see if it were all white, and noticing
how like it was to a thread of glass. Should I pluck it out and pretend
that it was never there? Or should I, more thriftily--for a hair is a
hair after all, and enough of them will make a wig--should I dye it and
hush up its treason?

I smiled at the foolish thought. What a to-do about a single white hair!
I have seen girls in their twenties with snow-white hair and looking as
sweet as lavender. As to this one, I would think of it as a souvenir from
the troubled past rather than a harbinger of approaching age; and with
this I swept my brush over it and buried it even as I had buried those
sorrows and those dreadful experiences which might have left me
white-headed years before.

But that glassy thread, buried once more amid the black, left a legacy of
suggestion. Those hideous days were long past now. I could look back on
them unmoved--nay, with a certain serene interest. Suppose I should
write the history of them? Why not? To write is not necessarily to
publish. And if, perchance, no eye but mine shall see these lines until
the little taper of my life has burned down into its socket, then what
matters it to me whether praise or blame, sympathy or condemnation, be my
portion. Posterity has no gifts to offer that I need court its suffrages.

BOOK l--TRAGEDY

Chapter I--The Crack of Doom

THERE is no difficulty whatever in deciding upon the exact moment at
which to open this history. Into some lives the fateful and significant
creep by degrees, unnoticed till by the development of their consequences
the mind is aroused and memory is set, like a sleuth-hound, to retrace
the course of events and track the present to its origin in the past. Not
so has it been with mine. Serene, eventless, its quiet years had slipped
away unnumbered, from childhood to youth, from youth to womanhood, when,
at the appointed moment, the voice of Destiny rang out, trumpet-tongued;
and behold! in the twinkling of an eye all was changed.

"Happy," it has been said, "is the nation which has no history!" And
surely the same may be said with equal truth of individuals. So, at any
rate, experience teaches me; for the very moment wherein I may be said to
have begun to have a history saw a life-long peace shattered into a chaos
of misery and disaster.

How well I remember the day--yea, and the very moment--when the blow
fell, like a thunderbolt crashing down out of a cloudless sky. I had been
sitting in my little room upstairs, reading very studiously and pausing
now and again to think over what I had read. The book was Lecky's
"History of England in the Eighteenth Century," and the period on which I
was engaged was that of Queen Anne. And here, coming presently upon a
footnote containing a short quotation from "The Spectator," it occurred
to me that I should like to look over the original letter. Accordingly,
laying aside my book, I began to descend the stairs--very softly,
because I knew that my father had a visitor--possibly a client--with
him in his study. And when I came to the turn of the stair and saw that
the study door was ajar, I stepped more lightly still, though I stole
down quickly lest I should overhear what was being said.

The library, or book-room as we called it, was next to the study, and to
reach it I had to pass the half-opened door, which I did swiftly on
tip-toe, without hearing more than the vague murmur of conversation from
within. "The Spectators" stood on a shelf close to the door; a goodly row
clothed in rusty calf to which the worn gilt tooling imparted a certain
sumptuousness that had always seemed very pleasant to my eye. My hand was
on the third volume when I heard my father say:

"So that's how the matter stands."

I plucked the volume from the shelf, and, tucking it under my arm, stole
out of the book-room, intending to dart up the stairs before there should
be time for anything more to be said; but I had hardly crossed the
threshold, and was, in fact, exactly opposite the study door, when a
voice said very distinctly, though not at all loudly:

"Do you realise, Vardon, that this renders you liable to seven years'
penal servitude?"

At those terrible words I stopped as though I had been, in a moment,
turned into stone: stopped with my lips parted, my very breathing
arrested, clutching at the book under my arm, with no sign of life or
movement save the tumultuous thumping of my heart. There was what seemed
an interminable pause, and then my father replied: "Hardly, I think,
Otway. Technically, perhaps, it amounts to a misdemeanour--"

"Technically!" repeated Mr. Otway.

"Yes, technically. The absence of any intent to defraud modifies the
position considerably. Still, for the purpose of argument, we may admit
that it amounts to a misdemeanour."

"And," said Mr. Otway, "the maximum punishment of that misdemeanour is
seven years' penal servitude. As to your plea of absence of fraudulent
intent, you, as a lawyer of experience, must know well that judges are
not apt to be very sympathetic with trustees who misappropriate property
placed in their custody."

"Misappropriate!" my father exclaimed.

"Yes, Mr. Otway, I say misappropriate. What other word could you apply?
Here is a sum of money which has been placed in your custody. I come here
with the intention to receive that money from you on behalf of the
trustees, and you tell me that you haven't got it. You are not only
unable to produce it, but you are unable to give any date on which you
could produce it. And meanwhile it seems that you have applied it to your
own uses."

"I haven't spent it," my father objected. "The money is locked up for the
present, but it isn't lost."

"What is the use of saying that?" demanded Mr. Otway. "You haven't got
the money, and you can't give any satisfactory account of it. The plain
English of it is that you have used this trust money for your own private
purposes, and that when the trustors ask to have it restored to them, you
are unable to produce it."

To this my father made no immediate reply; and in the silence that ensued
I could hear my heart throbbing and the blood humming in the veins of my
neck. At length my father asked: "Well, Otway, what are you going to do?"

"Do!" repeated Mr. Otway. "What can I do? As a trustee, it is my duty to
get this money from you. I have to protect the interests of those whom I
represent. And if you have misapplied these funds--well, you must see
for yourself that I have no choice."

"You mean that you'll prosecute?"

"What else can I do? I can't introduce personal considerations into the
business of a trust; and even if I should decline to move in the matter,
the trustors themselves would undoubtedly take action."

Here there followed a silence which seemed to me of endless duration;
then Mr. Otway said, in a somewhat different tone: "There is just one way
for you out of this mess, Vardon."

"Indeed!" said my father.

"Yes. I am going to make you a proposal, and I may as well put it quite
bluntly. It is this. I am prepared to take over your liabilities, for the
time being, on condition that I marry your daughter. If you agree, then
on the day on which the marriage takes place, I pay into your bank the
sum of five thousand pounds, you giving me an undertaking to repay the
loan if and when you can."

"Have you any reason to suppose that my daughter wishes to marry you?" my
father asked.

"Not the slightest," replied Mr. Otway; "but I think it probable that, if
the case were put to her--"

"It is not going to be," my father interrupted. "I would rather go to gaol
than connive at the sacrifice of my daughter's happiness."

"You might have thought of her happiness a little sooner, Vardon," Mr.
Otway remarked. "We are not quite of an age, but she might easily find it
more agreeable to be the wife of an elderly man than the daughter of a
convict. At any rate, it would be only fair to give her the choice."

"It would be entirely unfair," my father retorted. "In effect, it would
be asking her to make the sacrifice, and she might be fool enough to
consent. And please bear in mind, Otway, that I am not a convict yet, and
possibly may never be one. There are certain conceivable alternatives,
you know."

"Oh," said Mr. Otway, "if you have resources that you have not mentioned,
that is quite another matter. I understood that you had none. And as to
sacrifice, there is no need to harp on that string so persistently. Your
daughter might be happy enough as my wife."

"What infernal nonsense you are talking!" my father exclaimed,
impatiently. "Do you suppose that Helen is a fool?"

"No, I certainly do not," Mr. Otway replied.

"Very well, then: what do you mean by her being happy as your wife? Here
am I, standing over a mine--"

"Of your own laying," interrupted Mr. Otway.

"Quite so; of my own laying. And here you come with a lighted match and
say to my daughter, in effect: 'My dear young lady, I am your devoted
lover. Be my wife--consent this very instant or I fire this mine and
blow you and your father to smithereens.' And then, you think, she would
settle down with you and live happy ever after. By the Lord, Otway, you
must be a devilish poor judge of character."

"I am quite willing to take the risk," said Mr. Otway.

"So you may be," my father retorted angrily, "but I'm not. I would rather
see the poor girl in her grave than know that she was chained for life to
a cold-blooded, blackmailing scoundrel--"

"Softly, Vardon!" Mr. Otway interrupted. "There is no need for that sort
of language. And perhaps we had better shut the door."

Here, as I drew back hastily into the book-room, quick footsteps crossed
the study floor and I heard the door close. The interruption brought me
back to some sense of my position; though, to be sure, what I had
overheard concerned me as much as it concerned anyone. Quickly slipping
the book back on the shelf, I ran on tip-toe past the study door and up
the stairs; and even then I was none too soon; for, as I halted on the
threshold of my room, the study door opened again and the two men strode
across the hail.

"You are taking a ridiculously wrong-headed view of the whole affair," I
heard Mr. Otway declare.

"Possibly," my father replied, stiffly. "And if I do, I am prepared to
take the consequences."

"Only the consequences won't fall on you alone," said Mr. Otway.

"Good afternoon," was the dry and final response. Then the hall door
slammed, and I heard my father walk slowly back to the study.

Chapter II--Atra Cura

As the study door closed, I sank into my easy chair with a sudden feeling
of faintness and bodily exhaustion. The momentary shock of horror and
amazement had passed, giving place to a numb and chilly dread that made
me feel sick and weak. Scraps of the astounding conversation that I had
heard came back to me, incoherently and yet with hideous distinctness,
like the whisperings of some malignant spirit. Disjointed words and
phrases repeated themselves again and again, almost meaninglessly, but
still with a vague undertone of menace.

And then, by degrees, as I sat gazing at the blurred pages of the book
that still lay open on the reading-stand, my thoughts grew less chaotic;
the words of that dreadful dialogue arranged themselves anew, and I began
with more distinctness to gather their meaning.

Seven years penal servitude!

That was the dreadful refrain of this song of doom that was being chanted
in my ear by the Spirit of Misfortune. And ruin--black, hideous ruin--for
my father and me was the burden of that refrain; no mere loss, no
paltry plunge into endurable poverty, but a descent into the bottomless
pit of social degradation, from which there could be no hope of
resurrection.

Nor was this the worst. For, gradually, as my thoughts began to arrange
themselves into a coherent sequence, I realised that it was not the
implied poverty and social disgrace that gave to that sentence its
dreadful import. Poverty might be overcome, and disgrace could be
endured; but when I thought of my father dragged away from me to be cast
into gaol; when, in my mind's eye, I saw him clothed in the horrible
livery of shame, wearing out his life within the prison walls and behind
the fast-bolted prison doors; the thought and the imagined sight were
unendurable. It was death--for him at least; for he was not a strong
man. And for me?

Here, of a sudden, there came back to me the rather enigmatical speech of
my father's, which I had heard without at the moment fully comprehending,
but which I now recalled with a shock of alarm.

"Please bear in mind, Otway, that I am not a convict yet, and possibly
may never be one. There are certain conceivable alternatives, you know."

The cryptic utterance had evidently puzzled Mr. Otway, who had clearly
misunderstood it as referring to some unknown resources. To me, no such
misunderstanding was possible. More than once my father had discussed
with me the ethics of suicide, on which subject he held somewhat
unorthodox opinions; and I now recalled with terrible distinction the
very definite statement that he had made on the occasion of our last
talks "For my part," he had said, "if I should ever find myself in such a
position that the continuance of life was less desirable than its
termination, I should not hesitate to take the appropriate measures for
exchanging the less desirable state for the more desirable."

In the face of such a statement, made, as I felt sure, in all sincerity
and with sober judgment, how could I entertain any doubt as to the
interpretation of that reference to "certain conceivable alternatives?"
To a man of culture and some position and none too robust in health, what
would be the aspect of life with its immediate future occupied by a
criminal prosecution ending in an inevitable conviction and a term of
penal servitude? Could the continuance of such a life be conceived as
desirable? Assuredly not.

And then imagination began to torture me by filling in with hideous
ingenuity the dreadful details. Now it was a pistol shot, heard in the
night, and a group of terrified servants huddled together in the
corridor. But no; that was not like my poor father. Such crude and bloody
methods appertain rather to the terror-stricken fugitive than to one who
is executing a considered and orderly retreat. Then I saw myself, in the
grey of the morning, tapping at his bedroom door: tapping--tapping--and
at last opening the door, or perhaps bursting it open. I saw the dim room
--Oh! How horribly plain and vivid it was! With the cold light of the
dawn glimmering through the blind, the curtained bed, the half-seen
figure, still and silent in the shadow. Horrible! Horrible!

And then, in instant, the scene changed. I saw a man in our hall a man in
uniform; a railway porter or inspector. I heard him tell, in a hushed,
embarrassed voice, of a strange and dreadful accident down on the
line...And yet again this awful phantasmagoria shifted the scene and showed
me a new picture: a search party, prowling with lantern around a chalk pit;
and anon a group of four men, treading softly and carrying something on a
hurdle.

"Dear God!" I gasped, with my hands pressed to my forehead, "must I
be--this awful thing! Is there no other way?"

And with that there fell on me a great calm. A chilly calm, bringing no
comfort, and yet, in a manner, a relief. For, perhaps, after all, there
was another way. It was true that my father had rejected Mr. Otway's
proposal, and such was my habit of implicit obedience that, with his
definite rejection of it, the alternative had, for me, ceased to exist.
But now, with the horror of this dreadful menace upon me, I recalled the
words that had been spoken, and asked myself if that avenue of escape
were really closed. As to my father, I had no doubt; he would never
consent; and even to raise the question might only be to precipitate the
catastrophe. But with regard to Mr. Otway the manner in which my father
had met and rejected his proposal seemed to close the subject finally. He
had called him a blackmailing scoundrel and used other injurious
expressions, which might make it difficult or, at least, uncomfortable to
reopen the question. Still that was a small matter. When one is walking
to the gallows, one does not boggle at an uncomfortable shoe.

As to my own inclinations, they were beside the mark. My father's life
and good name must be saved if it were possible; and it seemed that it
might be possible--at a price. Whether it were possible or not depended
on Mr. Otway.

I recalled what I knew of this man who had thus in a moment become the
arbiter of my father's fate and mine. My acquaintance with him was but
slight, though I had met him pretty frequently and had sometimes wondered
what his profession was, if he had any. I had assumed, from his evident
acquaintance with legal matters, that he was a lawyer. But he was not in
ordinary practice; and his business, whatever it was, seemed to involve a
good deal of travelling. That was all I knew about him. As to his
appearance, he was a huge, unwieldy man of a somewhat Jewish cast of
face, some years older, I should think, than my father; pleasant spoken
and genial in a somewhat heavy fashion, but quite uninteresting. Hitherto
I had neither liked nor disliked him. Now, it need hardly be said, I
regarded him with decided aversion; for if he were not, as my father had
said, "a blackmailing scoundrel," he had, at any rate, taken the meanest,
the most ungenerous advantage of my father's difficulties, to say nothing
of the callous, cynical indifference that he had shown in regard to me
and my wishes and interests.

It may seem a little odd that I found myself attaching no blame to my
father. Yet so it was. To me he appeared as merely the victim of
circumstances. No doubt he had done something indiscreet--perhaps
incorrect But discretion and correctness are not qualities that appeal to
a woman: whereas generosity--and my father was generous almost to a
fault--makes the most powerful appeal to feminine sympathies. As to his
honesty and good faith, I never doubted them for an instant; besides, he
had plainly said that no fraudulent intent could be ascribed to him. What
he had done I had not the least idea. Nor did I particularly care. It was
not the act, but it consequences with which I was concerned.

My meditations were interrupted at length by an apologetic tap at the
door, followed by the appearance of our housemaid.

"If you please, Miss Helen, shall I take Mr. Vardon's tea to the study,
or is he going to have it with you?"

The question brought me back from the region of tragedy and disaster in
which my thoughts had been straying, to the homely commonplaces of
everyday life.

"I'll just run down and ask him, Jessie," I answered; "and you needn't
wait. I'll come and tell you what he says."

I ran quickly down the stairs, but at the study door I paused with a
sudden revival of those terrors that had so lately assailed me. Suppose
he should open the subject and have something dreadful to tell me? Or
suppose that, even now, already--At the half-formed thought, I raised a
trembling hand, and, tapping lightly at the door, opened it and entered.
He was sitting at the table with a small pile of sealed and stamped
letters before him, and, as I stood, steadying my hand on the door knob,
he looked up with his customary smile of friendly welcome.

"Hail! O Dame of the azure hosen," said he, swinging round on his
revolving chair, "and how fares it with our liege lady, Queen Anne?"

"She is quite well, thank you," I replied.

"The Lord be praised!" he rejoined. "I seemed to have heard some rumour
of her untimely decease. A mere canard, it would seem; a fiction of these
confounded newspaper men. Or perchance I have been misled by the jocose
and boisterous Lecky."

The whimsical playfulness of speech, habitual as it was to him, impressed
me--perhaps for that very reason--with a vague uneasiness. It was not
what I had expected after that terrible conversation. The anti-climax to
my own tragic thoughts was too sudden; the descent to the ordinary too
uncomfortably steep. I perched myself on his knee, as I often did,
despite my rather excessive size, and passed my hand over his thin, grey
hair.

"Do you know," I said, clinging desperately to the common-place, "that
you are going bald? I can see the skin of your head quite plainly."

"And why not?" he demanded. "Did you think my hair grew out of my
cranium? But you won't see it long. I've heard of an infallible
hair-restorer."

"Indeed!"

"Yes, indeed! Guaranteed to grow a crop of ringlets on a bladder of lard.
We'll get a bottle and try it on the carpet broom; and if the result is
satisfactory--well, we'll just put Esau in his place in the second row."

"You are a very frivolous old person, Mr. Pater," said I. "Do you know
that?"

"I hope so," he replied. "And again I say, why not? When a man is too old
to play the fool, it is time to carry him to the bone-yard. Am I going to
have any tea?

"Of course you are. Will you have it here alone or shall we have tea
together?"

"What a question!" he exclaimed. "Am I in my dotage? Should I drink tea
in musty solitude when I might bask in the smiles of a lovely maiden?
Avaunt! No, I'll tell you what we'll do, Jimmy. I'll just telephone down
to the office and see if there is any silly nonsense there that may
distract me from serious pursuits, and, if there isn't, we'll have tea in
the workroom and then we'll polish off that coal-scuttle."

"Finish it! But there's quite a lot to do."

"Then we'll do the lot."

"But why this hurry? There's no particular reason for getting it finished
to-night, is there?

"I don't know that there is; but we've had the thing hanging about long
enough. Better get it finished and start on something else. Now you trot
off and see about tea while I ring up Jackson."

As he turned to the telephone, I hurried away to give instructions to the
maid and to set the workshop in order so that we might start without
delay on our evening's task, concerning which a few words of explanation
would seem to be called for.

My father was by nature designed to be a craftsman. He was never so happy
as when he was making something or in some way working with his hands;
and remarkably skilful hands they were, with an inborn capacity for the
dexterous manipulation of every kind of material, tool or appliance. And
to his natural skill he had added a vast amount of knowledge of methods
and processes. He was an excellent woodworker, an admirable mechanic, and
a quite passable potter. Our house abounded in the products of his
industry; stools, cupboards, clocks, fenders, earthen ware jars; even our
bicycles had been built, or, at least, "assembled" by him, and a bronze
knocker on our door had been finished by him from castings made in our
workshop. If his powers of design had been equal to his manual skill, he
would have been a first-class art craftsman. Unfortunately they were not.
Left to himself, his tendency was to aim at a neat trade finish, at
smooth surfaces and mechanical precision. But he knew his limitations,
and had been at great pains to have me instructed in the arts of design;
and, as I apparently had some natural aptitude in that direction, I was
able to help him by making sketches and working drawings and by
criticising the work as it progressed. But my duties did not stop at
that. In our happy, united life, I was his apprentice, his journeyman,
his assistant--or foreman, as he pleased to call me--and his constant
companion, in the house, in the workshop, and in our walks abroad.

As our maid, Jessie, laid the tea-tray on a vacant corner of the
work-bench, I examined our latest joint-production, a bronze
coal-scuttle, the design of which was based on a Roman helmet that I had
seen in the British Museum. There was a good deal more than an ordinary
evening's work to be done before it could be finished. A portion of the
embossed ornament on the foot required touching up, the foot itself had
to be brazed to the body and the handle had to be riveted to the lugs,
to say nothing of the "pickling," scouring, and oxidizing. It was a
colossal evening's work.

But it was not the magnitude of the task that troubled me, for I shared
my father's love of manual work. What had instantly impressed me with a
vague discomfort was the urgency of my father's desire to get this piece
of work finished and done with. That was not like him at all. Not only
had he the genuine craftsman's inexhaustible patience, but he had a habit
of keeping an apparently finished work on hand, that he might tinker at
it lovingly, smooth and polish it, and bring it to a state of even
greater completeness and finish.

Why, then, this strange urgency and impatience? And, as I asked myself
the question, all my fears came crowding back on me. Again there came
that dreadful sinking at the heart, that strangling terror of the
storm-cloud that hung over us, unseen but ready to burst and overwhelm us
in ruin at any moment.

But I had little time for these gloomy and disquieting thoughts. The
tinkling of the telephone bell in the study told me that my father had
finished his talk with his managing clerk, and a few moments later he
strode into the workshop and began taking off his coat.

"Where's your apron, Jimmy?" he asked (the pet name "Jimmy" had been
evolved out of an ancient fiction that my name was Jemima).

"There's no hurry, Pater, dear," said I. "Let a person have her tea in
peace. And do sit down like a Christian man."

He obediently perched himself on a stool as I handed him his tea, but in
less than a minute he was on his feet again, prowling, cup in hand,
around the end of the bench where the work lay.

"Wonder if I'd better anneal it a bit," he mused, picking up the bronze
foot and examining the unfinished space. "Mustn't make it too soft. Think
I will, though. We can hammer it up a little on the stake after it's
brazed on. That will harden it enough."

He laid the foot down, but only that he might apply a match to the great
gas blowpipe; and I watched him with a sinking heart as he stood with his
teacup in one hand, while with the other he held the foot, gripped in a
pair of tongs, in the roaring purple flame. What did it mean, this
strange, restless haste to finish what was, after all, but a work of
pleasure? Did it portend some change that he saw more clearly than I? Was
he, impelled by the craftsman's instinct, turning in this fashion a page
of the book of life? Or was it--Oh! dreadful thought!--was it that he
was deliberately writing "Finis" before closing the volume?

But whatever was in his secret mind, he chatted cheerfully as he worked,
and submitted to be fed with scraps of bread and butter and to have cups
of tea administered at intervals; yet still I noted that the chasing
hammer flew at unwonted speed, and the depth of the punch-marks on the
work that rested on the sand-bag told of an unusual weight in the blows.

"What a pity it is," he remarked, "that social prejudices prevent a
middle-class man from earning a livelihood with his hands. Now, here I
am, a third-rate solicitor perforce, whereas, if I followed my bent, I
should be a first-rate coppersmith. Shouldn't I?"

"Quite first-rate," I replied.

"Or even a silversmith," he continued, "if I could have my mate, Jim, to
do the art with a capital A while I did the work with a capital W. Hm?"

He looked up at me with a twinkle, and I took the opportunity to pop a
piece of bread and butter into his mouth, which occasioned a pause in the
conversation.

I had entertained faint--very faint--hopes that he might say something
to me about his difficulties. Not that I was inquisitive on the subject;
but, in view of a resolution that was slowly forming in my mind, I should
have liked to have some idea what his position really was. It seemed
pretty plain, however, that he did not intend to take me into his
confidence; notwithstanding which I decided in a tentative way to give
him an opening.

"Wasn't that Mr. Otway who was with you this afternoon?" I asked.

"Yes," he replied. "How did you know?"

"I heard his voice in the hall as you let him out," I answered, with
something of a gulp at the implied untruth.

The chasing hammer was arrested for a moment in mid air, and, as my
father's eye fixed itself reflectively on the punch that he held, I could
see that he was trying to remember what Mr. Otway had said in the hall.

"Yes," he replied, after a brief pause, "it was Mr. Otway. I should hardly
have thought you would have known his voice. Queer fellow, Otway. No
brains to speak of, but yet an excellent man of business in his way."

"What does he do--by way of profession, I mean?"

"The Lord knows. He was originally a solicitor, but he hasn't practised
for years. Now he is what is called a financier, which is a little vague,
but apparently profitable. And I think he does something in the way of
precious stones."

"Do you mean that he deals in them?"

"Yes, occasionally; at least, so I have heard. I know that he is
something of a connoisseur in stones, and that he had a collection, which
he sold some time ago. I have also heard--and I believe it is a fact--that
his name was originally Levy, and that he is one of the Chosen. But
why he changed his name I have no notion, unless it was an undesirable
one to present to the financial world."

I was half disposed to pursue my enquiries further, but as he finished
speaking, he once more began to ply the hammer with such furious energy
that I became quite uneasy.

"You mustn't exert yourself so much, Pater," I remarked. "Remember what
Dr. Sharpe said."

"Bah!" he replied. "Sharpe is an old woman. My heart is sound enough. At
any rate, it will last as long as the rest of me. An old fellow like me
cannot expect to go in for sprinting or high jumping, but there's no need
for him to live in splints and cotton wool."

"Nor to endanger his health by perfectly unnecessary exertion. Why on
earth are you in such a fever to get this thing finished?"

"I'm not in a fever, my dear," he answered; "I'm only tired of seeing
this thing lying about unfinished. You see, as it stands, it is only so
many pounds of old bronze, whereas a couple of hours' work turns it into
a valuable piece of furniture, fit to take a dignified place in the
catalogue when we are sold up. Just consider how finely it would read:

"'Handsome bronze scuttle, in form of Roman helmet, the work of the late
owner and his charming and talented daughter, capable of serving either
as a convenient receptacle for coal or as a becoming head-dress for a
person with a suitable cranium.' Don't you think that would sound rather
alluring?"

"Very," I replied; "but as we are not going to be sold up--"

The rest of my sentence was drowned in the din of the beaten metal as my
father returned to his hammering, and I only watched in mute discomfort
until this part of the work was done and the great brazing jet was once
more set a-roaring.

The work progressed apace, for my father was not only skilful and neat,
but could be very quick on occasion; and as I watched the completion of
stage after stage, I was conscious of a growing uneasiness, a vague fear
of seeing the work actually finished; as if this mere toy--for it was
little more--held some deep and tragic symbolism. I felt like one
looking on at the slow wasting of one of those waxen effigies which the
sorceresses of old prepared with magical rites for the destruction of
some victim, whose life should slowly wane and flicker away with the
wasting of the wax.

And meanwhile, above the roar of the blowpipe flame, my father's voice
sounded, now in a cheerful stave of song, and now in lively jest or
playful badinage. But yet he did not deceive me. Behind all this show of
high spirits was a sombre background that was never quite hidden. For the
eye of love is very keen and can see plainly, despite quip or joke or
jovial carol, when "Black Care rides behind the horseman."

What a miserable affair it was, this pitiful acting of two poor,
leaden-hearted mortals, each hiding from each the desperate resolve with
smiles and jests that were more bitter than tears! For I, too, had now
my secret, and must needs preserve it with such a show of gaiety as I
could muster by sheer effort of will. The resolution of which I have
spoken was growing--growing, even as the toy that we were making was
growing towards completion, and as I seemed to see, as if symbolized by
it, the sands of destiny trickling out before my eyes. So I, too, had my
part to play in this harrowing comedy.

Works which have consumed much time in the doing have a way of coming to
an end with disconcerting suddenness. When I mixed the acid for the
"pickle" in the great earthenware pan, it seemed that a great deal still
remained to be done, in spite of my father's feverish energy and swift
dexterity. And then, but a few minutes later, as it appeared to me,
behold the finished piece standing on the bench its embossed ornament
telling boldly against the sulphur-browned background, and my father
stretching himself and wiping the blackened oil from his hands; and it
was borne in on me that, with the final touch, his interest in the thing
had fallen dead.

"Nunc dimittis!" he murmured. "It's finished at last. 'Now lettest Thou
Thy servant depart in peace.' And that reminds me, Jim; don't the shops
keep open late to-night?"

"Some of them do," I replied.

"Good," said he. "Tell Jessie to bring up the supper while I'm washing.
I've got to make a business call to-night, and I want to get some things,
so we won't make it a ceremonious meal. Not that I want to put you on
short allowance, for I expect you are hungry after your Titanic labours.
You mustn't take any notice of me."

As he hurried away, I rang the bell, and, when I had given the necessary
instructions, I went up to my bedroom to remove the traces of the
evening's work and make myself presentable.

At the supper table my father preserved the same quiet gaiety of
manner--his usual manner, in fact; for he was always cheerful and
companionable--though, on this occasion, the speed with which he disposed
of his food gave little opportunity for conversation. After a very
hurried meal, he rose, and, pushing back his chair, glanced at his watch.

"You mustn't mind my running away," said he. "Time, tide and the
shopkeeper wait for no man."

He moved away toward the door, but before he reached it he paused and
then came back and stood beside my chair.

"You need'nt sit up for me," he said. "I may possibly be rather late. So
I'd better say 'good-night' now.'" He took my head in his hands, and,
looking earnestly into my eyes, murmured: "Dear little Jim; best and most
loyal of apprentices." Then he kissed me very tenderly and passed his
hands over my hair.

"Good-night, sweetheart," said he. "Don't sit up reading, but go to bed
early like a sensible girlie--if you will pardon my thopping into
Weggish poetry without notice."

He turned away and walked quickly to the door, where he stood for a
moment to wave his hand. I heard him go to the study, and sat stiffly in
my chair listening. In a few moments he came out and stepped quietly
across the hail; there was a brief pause, and then the outer door closed.

He was gone.

At the sound of the closing door, I sprang to my feet with all my terrors
revived. Whither had he gone? It was unusual for him to leave his home at
night. What was it that had taken him abroad on this night of all others?
And what was it that he wanted to buy? And wanted so urgently that he
could not wait until the morrow? And why had he wished me "good-night"
with such tender earnestness? A foolish question, this, for he was a
loving father, and never sought to veil his affection. But to-night I was
unstrung; haunted by nameless fears that gave a dreadful significance to
every passing incident. And as the chill of mortal terror crept round my
heart, the resolution that had been growing--growing, came to its final
completion.

It had to be. Horrible, loathsome as, even then, I felt it to be, it was
the only alternative to that other nameless and unthinkable. The
sacrifice must be made by us both for both our sakes--if it were not too
late already.

Too late? Even as the dreadful thought smote like a hammer on my heart, I
ran from the room and sped up the stairs on the wings of terror. With
trembling fingers I took my hat and cloak from the wardrobe and hurried
down stairs, putting them on as I went. At the dining-room door I called
out a hasty message to the maid, and then, snatching up my gloves from
the hall table, I opened the door and ran out into darkness.

Chapter III--The Covenant

As I sped swiftly along the quiet roads on the outskirts of the town the
confusion and sense of helplessness began to subside under the influence
of action and a definite purpose; by degrees my thoughts clarified, and I
found myself shaping out, with surprising deliberation and judgment, the
course that I intended to pursue. Mr. Otway's house was about a mile
distant from ours, somewhat farther out of town, though on a frequented
road; a short distance and quickly covered by my flying feet. Yet, short
as it was, and traversed with a phantom of terror in close pursuit, it
gave me time to collect my faculties, so that, when I opened the gate and
walked up the little drive, I had already to a large extent recovered my
self-possession, though I was still trembling with the fear of what might
be happening else where at this very moment.

The door was opened by a small frail-looking woman of about fifty, who
did not look quite like an ordinary servant, and whose appearance
instantly impressed me disagreeably. She stood with her face slightly
averted, looking at me out of the corners of her eyes, and holding the
door open as she asked, with a slight Scotch accent:

"Who would you be wanting?"

"I wish to see Mr. Otway, if he is at home?" I replied.

"If ye'll come in and give me your name, I'll tell him," said she; and
with this she showed me into a small room that opened out of the hall,
where, when I had told her my name, she left me. In less than a minute
Mr. Otway entered, and having carefully closed the door, shook hands
gravely and offered me a chair.

"This is quite an unexpected pleasure, Miss Vardon," said he. "Oddly
enough, I was just thinking about you. I called on your father only this
afternoon."

"I know," said I. "It was about that that I came to see you."

"Your father, then," said Mr. Otway, "has mentioned to you the subject of
our not entirely pleasant interview?"

"No, he has not," I replied. "Nothing has passed between us on the
subject, and he is not aware that I have come here. The fact is, I
overheard a part of your conversation and made it my business to hear as
much of the rest as I could."

"Ha! Indeed!" He gave me a quick glance, half enquiring, half suspicious,
and added: "Perhaps, Miss Vardon, you had better tell me what you heard."

"There is no need for me to repeat it in detail," said I; "but, from what
I heard, I gathered that my father had rendered himself liable to a
prosecution. Is that correct?"

"Yes," said Mr. Otway, "that is unfortunately--most unfortunately--the
case."

"And that the proceedings will be taken by you, and that you have the
power to stay them if you choose?"

"I wouldn't put it that way, Miss Vardon. That hardly states the position
fairly. Do you know nothing of the circumstances at all? Has your father
not told you any thing about this unfortunate affair?"

"He has not spoken a word to me on the subject, and he has no idea that I
know anything about it."

"H'm," Mr. Otway grunted, reflectively. "Yes. Well, Miss Vardon, if you
wish to talk the matter over with me, perhaps I had better just let you
know how the land lies, although, really, your father is the proper
person to tell you."

"I think you had better tell me, if you don't mind," said I.

"Very well, Miss Vardon," he agreed. "Then the position is this: A sum of
money--five thousand pounds, to be exact--was handed to your father by
the trustees of a certain estate, to be invested by him on behalf of the
trust; and the manner of its disposal--into which we need not enter--was
quite clearly specified. But your father, instead of disposing of the
money as directed, chose to make over the whole of it as a loan to a
friend of his who was in temporary difficulties; a manufacturer, as I
understand, who had suffered an unexpected loss and was on the verge of
bankruptcy. There was no proper security, nor even, as I understand, any
satisfactory arrangement as to the payment of interest. The whole affair
was most improper; a gross violation of trust. In effect, your father
converted this money and made use of it for his own purposes."

"Is the money lost?" I enquired.

Mr. Otway shrugged his shoulders. "Who can say? It may be recoverable
some day, or it may not. But that is very little to the point. The
position is that it is now demanded of your father and that he can't
produce it."

"And so you are going to prosecute him?"

"Oh, please don't put it that way, Miss Vardon. I am a quite involuntary
agent. My position is that I am instructed to get this money from your
father and dispose of it in a particular way. But I can't get it; and
when I report that fact, I shall, of course, be urged--in fact,
compelled--to take criminal proceedings. I shall have no choice. It
isn't my money, you know."

"But why criminal proceedings?" I asked. "It seems to me that a civil
action to recover the money would be the natural course."

Again Mr. Otway shrugged his shoulders. "I don't see that it makes much
difference," said he. "The money has been made away with. Even if the
trustees took no criminal action, there is the Public Prosecutor and
there is the Incorporated Law Society. A prosecution is inevitable."

"And supposing my father is convicted?"

"It is hardly necessary to suppose," said Mr. Otway. "He will be. There
is no defence. As to the sentence, I don't imagine that the maximum
punishment of seven years penal servitude is likely to be inflicted.
Still, your father is a solicitor, and the law is, quite properly, very
severe in the case of solicitors who misappropriate their clients'
property. He is almost certain to get a term of imprisonment."

To this I made no reply. There was nothing to say. It was only too clear
that every avenue of escape was closed--save one; and realizing more
fully every moment where that one led, I could not bring myself to make
the fateful move. So, for a while, we sat in a hideous silence through
which the ticking of a clock penetrated noisily and seemed to keep pace
with the thumping of my heart.

As I sat, bracing myself for the effort that had to be made, my eyes
travelled, half unconsciously, over the person of my companion. His
appearance was not prepossessing. Huge, unwieldy and shapeless, although
by no means grossly fat, his great size carried no dignity; nor did his
very marked and prominent features impart to his face anything of
distinction or nobility. He was of a distinctly oriental type, with black
and rather curly hair, oiled and combed over a slightly bald head, a
large aquiline nose, a wide mouth, rather full and fleshy, and very dark
eyes, under which were baggy folds of skin creased by innumerable tiny
wrinkles. As I looked at him with growing distaste, I found myself
comparing him to a gigantic spider. Suddenly it was borne in on me--perhaps
by the measured ticking of the clock--that time was passing:
time which might be infinitely precious. To delay further were mere
cowardice. Nevertheless, when I spoke, it was in a voice so husky that I
had to stop and begin again.

"You spoke, Mr. Otway--I heard you mention to my father that--that on
certain conditions, you would--would be prepared to abandon your
intention of prosecuting--Or, at least--"

I could get no farther. Fear and shame and loathing of this thing that I
was going to do, overpowered me utterly. It was only by the most
strenuous effort that I choked down the sob that was rising in my throat.
But I had said enough, for Mr. Otway now came to my assistance.

"I told your father that I was prepared to take over his liabilities, for
the time being, at least, on condition that you became my wife. He
refused, as perhaps you know refused very definitely, I may say."

"And rather rudely, I am afraid."

"He was not at any great pains to wrap his refusal up delicately. But we
may let that pass. Is it in respect of this proposal of mine that you
have done me the very great honour of calling on me, Miss Vardon?"

I felt myself turn scarlet, but nevertheless I answered, resolutely:

"Yes. I came to ask if my father's very blunt refusal had closed the
matter finally, or whether you were prepared to--to re-open it."

"We won't talk about re-opening it. It was never closed, by me. The
proposal that I made to your father I now make to you; and if you should
see your way to accepting it, I believe you would never have occasion to
regret your decision."

He spoke in a dry, commercial tone, as if he were trying to sell me
something at a rather high price; as, in fact, he was. And meanwhile I
found myself wondering dimly why on earth he wanted to marry me.

"May I ask," he continued, after a pause, "if you are disposed to
entertain my proposal?

"I would do anything to save my father," I replied.

"That," said he, "is what I thought, judging from my previous knowledge
of you; and it was the knowledge of your devotion to your father that
encouraged me to make the proposal. For it seemed to me that a young lady
of your attractions who could so completely devote herself to an elderly
father might find it possible to devote herself to an elderly husband."

His reasoning did not impress me as very sound, seeing that it took no
account of the respective personalities of the father and the proposed
husband. But I made no reply, and, after a further pause, he asked:

"Am I to understand that you--that you regard my proposal favourably?"

"I can't say that," I replied. "But I came here to-night prepared to
accept your conditions, and I am ready to accept them now. But, of
course, you understand that I do so under compulsion and not of my own
free choice."

"I quite realise that," said he; "but I take it that you will carry out
fairly any covenant into which you may enter."

"Certainly I shall," was my reply.

"Then may I take it that you are willing to marry me, on the conditions
that I named?"

"Yes, Mr. Otway. I consent to marry you on those conditions and on
certain others that I will propose."

"Let us hear the other conditions," said he.

"The first is that you give me a promise in writing that, in
consideration of my consent to marry you, you will do what is necessary
to get my father out of his present difficulties."

"That is quite fair, though it is rather unnecessary. I shouldn't want a
convict for a father-in-law, you know. But, anyhow, I'll agree, as soon
as the marriage is over, to pay into your father's bank a cheque for five
thousand pounds, or, if he prefers it, to give him a full discharge for
that amount. And I will give you an undertaking in writing to that effect
before you leave here to-night. Will that do?"

"It will do quite well," I answered. "But I wish you also to add to that
undertaking a proviso to the effect that, if at any time before the
marriage takes place, any circumstances shall arise by which your
pecuniary help shall become unnecessary, then this agreement between you
and me shall not take effect, and you shall have no claim of any kind on
me."

Mr. Otway looked at me in some surprise, and, indeed, I was somewhat
surprised myself at the completeness with which my judgment and
self-possession had revived as soon as it came to making terms; though I
had considered the matter very carefully on my way to Mr. Otway's house.

"You are a true lawyer's daughter, Miss Vardon," said he, with a somewhat
wry smile. "You are not going to give yourself away gratis. No play, no
pay, h'm? How ever, you are quite right. You agree to marry me for a
certain consideration. If you don't receive the consideration, you don't
marry me. Very well. That is a perfectly business-like proposition, and I
agree to it. You think that perhaps your father may be able to meet his
liabilities, after all?"

"I do not think anything of the kind. The proviso was introduced by me in
view of a very different contingency. I was making this sacrifice to save
my father's life. If I failed in that, the sacrifice would be useless.
But I did not think it necessary to mention this to Mr. Otway. I
therefore replied that, as I knew very little about my father's affairs,
I thought it wise to provide even against the improbable."

"Quite so, Miss Vardon, quite so," he agreed. "One should always make
provision for the unexpected. Well, I have said that I accept your first
two conditions. What is the next one?"

"I want you to write my father a letter which shall relieve him of all
present anxieties, and I want you to give me that letter so that it may
be delivered to-night."

At this Mr. Otway's countenance fell somewhat. He pursed up his lips
disapprovingly, and, after some moments of reflection, said gravely:
"That, you know, Miss Vardon, really anticipates the fulfilment of the
contract on my side. Such a letter would commit me to a withdrawal of my
demand for immediate payment of this money."

"But," said I, "you have my promise, which I am willing to give you in
writing, if you wish me to."

"Well," he replied, dubiously, "that would seem to meet the difficulty,
not that I am suspecting you of trying to evade fufilment. But, you see,
your father has refused his consent and will probably continue to refuse,
so that one would rather not raise the question. By the way, I suppose
you are over twenty-one?"

"I was twenty-three last birthday."

"Then, of course, his consent is not necessary. Still, one doesn't want a
fuss; and if you delivered this letter to him, he would be in possession
of the facts, and then there would be trouble."

"I was not proposing to deliver it to him. I should drop it in the
letter-box and let him think that you had sent or left it. He would know
nothing of my visit to you or of the arrangement we have come to."

"I see. That alters the position somewhat. But is it really necessary? I
can understand your wish to relieve his anxiety; but still, it need be
only a day or two. Do you really think it is essential?"

"I do, Mr. Otway. I think it absolutely essential. If I had not, I should
not have come here to-night. My father is in a desperate position, and
one never knows what a desperate man may do."

Mr. Otway gave me a quick glance, and I could see that he was
considerably startled. The possibility at which I had hinted would have
consequences for him as well as for me, and I saw that he fully realized
this. But he did not answer hastily. Perhaps he saw more in my suggestion
than I did myself. At any rate, he pondered for some seconds before he
finally replied:

"Perhaps you are right, Miss Vardon. I'm sure I shall be very glad to put
an end to his suspense. Yes, I'll write the letter and give it to you.
Are there any more conditions?"

"No; that is all. So if you will write the letter and the agreement and
draft out what you want me to say, we shall have done. And please make as
much haste as you can. It is rather late, and I am anxious to get home
before my father if possible."

My anxiety apparently communicated itself to Mr. Otway, for he
immediately swung his chair round to his desk, and, taking one or two
sheets of paper from the rack, began to write rapidly. In two or three
minutes he turned, and, handing me what he had written, together with a
blank sheet of paper and a pen and ink-bottle, took a fresh sheet
himself, and, without a word, began once more to write. The draft which
he had handed me was simply and concisely worded as follows:--

"I, Helen Vardon, of Stonebury, Maidstone, in the county of Kent,
spinster, hereby promise to marry Lewis Otway, of the Beeches, Maidstone,
in the county of Kent, attorney-at-law, within fourteen days from this
present date, in consideration of his assuming the present liabilities
of my father, William Henry Vardon, in respect of the estate of James
Collis-Hardy deceased, this promise to be subject to the conditions set
forth in a letter written to me by the said Lewis Otway and dated
the 2 of April, 1908.

"(Signed) HELEN VARDON.
Maidstone, Kent.
21st April, 1908."

I read the draft through carefully, noting that it was not only quite
simple and lucid, but that it embodied the terms of our agreement with
scrupulous fairness and took over my father's liabilities without any
limit as to time; then I dipped the pen in the ink and made a fair copy
on the blank sheet which I signed, and laid on the corner of the desk.

By the time I had finished my copy, Mr. Otway had completed the first of
the documents, which he now handed to me; and as I read it, he took up
the paper that I had written, and, having glanced through it, placed it
in a drawer and began once more to write. The paper that he had given to
me was in the form of a letter, and read thus:

"Dear Miss Vardon,

"At your request I put on record the terms of the arrangement which has
been made between us to-day, and which are:

"1. That in consideration of my taking over your father's liabilities in
respect of the Collis-Hardy Estate, you agree to marry me within fourteen
days of this present date.

"2. That on the completion of the marriage ceremony, or at such time
thereafter as you may decide upon, I shall pay into your father's bank
the sum of five thousand pounds, or, if he prefers it, give him a full
discharge of all liabilities in respect of the Collis-Hardy Estate
aforesaid.

"3. Provided that if at any time prior to the said marriage your father
shall discharge the said liabilities, or any circumstances shall arise by
which the said payment or discharge by me shall become unnecessary, then
the agreement between you and me which is herein recorded shall become
void, and neither of us, the contracting parties, shall have any claim
upon the other.

"I am, dear Miss Vardon,

"Your obedient servant,

"LEWIS OTWAY.

"Maidstone, Kent.

"2 April, 1908."

Mr Otway glanced up from his desk as I folded the paper and bestowed it
in my purse, and asked: "Will that do? I think it covers the terms of our
arrangement."

"Thank you," I answered; "it will do quite well."

He made no rejoinder, but went on with the letter that he was writing;
and meanwhile I sat and watched him, with a strong distaste of his
appearance, dimly wondering at this strange interview and at my own
curious self-possession and mental alertness. But behind these hazy
reflections was a background of haunting terror that had never quite
faded even when I was putting the utmost strain upon my wits; terror lest
all this bargaining should be useless after all; lest I should arrive
home to find that my help had come too late.

These disquieting thoughts were presently interrupted by Mr. Otway, who,
laying down his pen and swinging round in his revolving chair, took up
the letter that he had just written.

"This is what I have said to your father, Miss Vardon. I think it will
make his mind quite easy for the present, which is all we want.

"'Dear Vardon,

"'Since my talk with you this afternoon, I have been thinking over
matters and considering whether it is not possible to give you more time.
On looking into the affairs of the trust more closely, I think it can be
done; in fact, I am sure it can, with some careful management on my part.
So you may take it from me that the demand, which I felt compelled to
make, is withdrawn for the time being. When you are in a position to
surrender the money, you had better notify me; and in the meantime you
have my assurance that no further demand will be made without reasonable
notice.

"'I hope this will relieve your natural anxiety, concerning which I have
been a little uncomfortable since I left you.

"'The Beeches.

"'2 April, 1908.

"'Yours sincerely,

"'LEWIS OTWAY."

He handed me the letter when he had finished reading, and I glanced
through it quickly before returning it to him.

"I think that ought to relieve him of all anxiety," said he.

"Yes," I answered. "It will do admirably. And if you will kindly seal it
and let me have it, I will go at once and drop it in the letter-box. It
is most important that it should be in his hands as soon as possible."

"Quite so," he agreed; "and I won't detain you further excepting to point
out that, by giving you this letter, I am putting myself entirely in your
hands. You will observe that this amounts to a surrender of my claim on
your father for the time being. He will, of course, keep the letter, and
could produce it in answer to any sudden demand for the restitution of
the money. So I am really carrying out my part of the agreement in
advance."

"Yes, I see that," I replied, "and I thank you most sincerely; but," I
added, rising and holding out my hand for the letter, "you have my solemn
promise to carry out my part. If you were better acquainted with me, you
would consider that enough."

"But I do, Miss Vardon," he rejoined, hastily; "I do. If I did not trust
you implicitly, I should not have written this letter. However, I mustn't
delay you. I will make all the necessary arrangements and let you know
when everything is ready. Will next Thursday be too soon?"

At the mention of an actual date, and one so near, too, something like a
complete realisation of what I was doing flashed into my mind and set my
heart thumping painfully. But it had to be, so why haggle for terms? Nor,
indeed, since it must be, was there any use in trying to put off the evil
day. The urgent need of the moment was to get this letter into my
father's hands, if it were not already too late.

"I must leave the arrangement of the affair to you, Mr. Otway," I
murmured, shakily. "Do as you think best. And now I must really go."

He shook my hand in a drily courteous fashion and let me out,
accompanying me down the drive to the outer gate, which he opened for me
with a ceremonious bow. I wished him a hurried "good-night," and, as soon
as I was outside the gate, ran off in the direction of home, holding the
precious letter in the little pocket of my cloak.

Chapter IV--The Eleventh Hour

As I drew near the neighbourhood of our house my fears grew so that I was
compelled by sheer breathlessness and the trembling of my limbs to
slacken my pace. I was sick with terror. In my mind, pictures, vague and
nebulous but unspeakably dreadful, rose like the visions of a nightmare.
I clutched the precious order of release in my pocket and set my teeth,
trying not to think of what I might find at my journey's end.

At last I came in sight of the house. It was all dark save two of the
upper windows--those of the servants' bedrooms. The servants, then, were
going to bed as usual, for ours was an early household. This seemed
reassuring, but only to a slight degree; for even if--I opened the gate
softly--I do not know why, but some how I instinctively avoided noise of
any kind--and running up the garden path, let myself in quietly with my
latch-key. With one quick and fearful glance around the darkened hall, I
stole up to the hat-stand. Apparently my father had not yet come home,
for his stick was not in the stand, and one of his hats was missing. I
looked at the tall clock and noted that it was not yet half-past ten; I
peered out through the open doorway, down the dark road, and listened
awhile for the sound of footsteps; then, slipping the letter into the
letter-box--which I could see contained no other missives--I lit one of
the candles from the hall table, and, having peeped into the study, the
book-room and the workshop, stole silently up the stairs.

First, I went to my father's bedroom, and, by the glimmer of gas that the
maid had left burning, and the light of my candle, inspected it narrowly.
I looked over the trifles on the mantelpiece and on the dressing-table,
and even opened the little medicine-cupboard to run my eye over the
collection of bottles and boxes, pausing from time to time that I might
listen for footsteps, strange or familiar, as Fate might decree. But pry
as I would, there was nothing unusual, nothing on which the most eager
suspicion might fasten. All the details of that room were familiar to me,
for it had been my daily task since my girlhood to look them over and see
that my father's orderly arrangements were not disturbed by the servants;
and everything was in its place, and nothing new or strange or sinister
had made its appearance.

When I had finished my inspection, I stole softly along the corridor to
my own bedroom, which was at the head of the stairs, and, turning up the
gas, but leaving the door ajar, began slowly to undress, listening
intently the while for any sounds that might confirm or dispel my fears.
The house was very quiet and still; so quiet that the tinkle of the
water, as I poured it out from the ewer, struck with disturbing harshness
on my ear, and even the ticking of the little clock and my own slippered
footfalls seemed an impertinent intrusion into that expectant silence.

It was a few minutes past eleven when the sound of a latch-key and the
gentle closing of the hall door sent the blood tingling to my very
finger-tips. No footsteps had been audible on the garden path, but this,
in itself, was characteristic; for my father and I were alike in that we
both disliked noise and habitually moved about softly, avoiding the
slamming of doors or the production in any way of jarring sounds.

I crept on tip-toe to the door and listened. A stick was carefully put
down in the hall-stand, and then I thought--but was not quite sure--that
I heard my father unlock the letter-box. A few seconds later I
caught a faint creak, which I recognised as proceeding from the study
door, and, after a short interval, the creak was repeated and the door
closed. Then the hall gas was turned out and soft footfalls began to
ascend the stairs.

"Is that you, Pater, dear?" I asked.

"Is it I, indeed, O! wicked and disobedient child and likewise minx!" was
the welcome answer. "Didn't I tell you to go to bed?"

"Yes, you did; and I am going. But I thought I would like to see you
safely home from your roysterings."

"Mures rathi!" he exclaimed, as he came into the light from my open door.
"It is poor old Queen Anne who has been keeping you out of your little
nest. I know you."

Here he gave a gentle tug at one of the tails into which I had plaited my
hair, and, having kissed me on the tip of my nose, continued:

"And you look as tired as the proverbial dog--which is the only kind of
dog that ever does get tired. Now go to bed and sleep like a young
dormouse. Good-night, Jimmy, dear."

With the aid of the convenient tail, he drew my face to his and kissed me
again; then he went off along the corridor singing very softly, but just
audibly to me:

"Her father he makes cabbage nets
And in the streets does cry 'em;
Her mother she sells laces long--"

Here a rapid diminuendo indicated the closing of the door, and the
silence that had been so agreeably broken once again settled down upon
the house. Still, I stood at the open door, looking out into the
darkness. Had my father seen the letter? He had seemed very cheerful. But
then, he would have seemed very cheerful if he had been walking to the
scaffold or the stake. That was his nature. Yet his gaiety had appeared
to me more genuine than that which he had exhibited earlier in the
evening. However, there was no need to speculate; the question could
easily be set at rest. Taking the match-box from my candlestick, I stole
silently down the stairs, steadying myself by the hand-rail, and groped
my way across the hall until I reached the door. Then I struck a match,
and by its light, peered through the wire grating into the letter-box.

It was empty. The letter had been taken out.

I blew out the match, and, having dropped it into the salver on the
table, crept back up the stairs to my room. Closing the door silently, I
made my final preparations, turned out the light and crept into bed,
feeling in the sudden ecstasy of relief that I could now shake off all
care and bury the anxieties and alarms of this dreadful day in slumber.

My father was saved! No haunting fear of imminent tragedy, no dread of
impending ruin and disgrace, remained to murder sleep or mingle it with
frightful visions. My father was saved. At the eleventh hour I had made
my bid for his life and liberty; and the eleventh hour had not been too
late.

But it was long--very long before sleep came to shut out for a time the
realities of life. The blessed feeling of escape from this appalling
peril, the sense of restored security, was presently followed by the
chill of reaction. For the end was not yet. I had bid for my father's
life and had bought it in; but the price remained to be paid. And only
now, when I could consider it undisturbed by terror for my father's
safety, did I begin to realise fully how bitter a price it was. Not that
I would have gone back on my bargain, for I had made it with my eyes
open; and would have made it over again if the need had been. But it was a
terrible price. I had sold my birth-right--my precious woman's
birth-right to choose my own mate--for a mess of pottage. It was a price
that I should have to pay, and go on paying as long as life lasted.

Hour after hour did I lie, gazing wide-eyed into the darkness, letting my
thoughts flit hither and thither, now into the quiet, untroubled past,
now into the dim and desolate future, whence they would come hurrying
back affrighted. But always, whithersoever they wandered, behind them
rose, now vague and remote, now horribly distinct, that unwieldy figure
with the impassive oriental face; even, as to the eyes of the fisherman
in the Arabian tale, the smoke from the magic jar shaped itself into the
menacing form of the gigantic Jinn.

I tried to consider dispassionately the character of Mr. Otway. It was
very difficult. For had he not come into our life like some malignant
spirit, to dispel with a word and in the twinkling of an eye, all the
peace and happiness of our quiet home? To snap off short my serene
companionship with my father? To turn into dust and ashes all the
vaguely-sweet dreams of maidenhood? To shut out the warm and hazy
sunshine from my future and fill the firmament with unrelieved, leaden
greyness? Still, I tried to consider him fairly. Callously, cynically, he
had driven his Juggernaut car over my father and me, his eyes fixed upon
his own desires and seeing nothing else. He was an absolute egoist. That
was undeniable. For some reason, he wished to marry me; and to achieve
that wish he had been willing to put us both on the rack, and, with
passionless composure, to turn the screw until we yielded. It was not a
pleasant thing to think of.

On the other hand, he seemed, in his way, to be a just man. By no hair's
breadth had he sought to modify the terms that he had first proposed;
indeed, in his letter to me he had treated the loan to my father as an
almost unconditional gift, and the other details of our agreement he had
expressed in writing fully and fairly, with no attempt at evasion. Nor
was he niggardly. Five thousand pounds is a large sum to pay for the
privilege of marrying an unwilling bride. Under other circumstances I
might have appreciated the implied compliment. Now, I could only admit
that, according to his lights, he seemed not ungenerous.

But when I considered him as the companion with whom I must share the
remainder of my life--or, at least, that part of it which mattered--the
thought was almost unendurable. To live, day after day and year after
year, under the same roof with this huge, dull, uncomely man; to sit at
table with him, to walk abroad by his side, to spend interminable
evenings alone with him: it was appalling. I could hardly bear to think
of it. And yet the horrible reality would be upon me in the course of a
few swiftly-passing days.

Nor was it a question of mere companionship--but from this aspect I
hurriedly averted my thoughts in sheer cowardice. I dared not let myself
think even for a moment of what marriage actually meant. Under normal
conditions it may be permitted to the modesty of an unwedded girl to cast
an occasional glance, half-shy and not wholly unpleasurable, at the more
intimate relations of married life: but to me, if the thought would rise
unbidden, it could call up nought but the quick flush of shame and
loathing whereat I would bury my face in the pillow with a moan of
shuddering disgust.

It was a relief to turn from the distressful present and the unthinkable
future to the past, or even to the future that might have been. For, like
most other girls, I had had my day-dreams. The companionship with my
father had been happy and full of interest; but it had never seemed
final. I had looked on it as no more than the prologue to the real life,
which lay, for the moment, hidden behind the near horizon of my
maidenhood. And as to that reality, though it offered but a vague
picture, yet it had a certain definiteness. To many modern girls,
ambition seems to connect itself with the academy and the laboratory,
with the platform and the forum. They appear to hanker after fame, or
even mere notoriety, and would contend with men--who have nothing better
to do--for the high places in politics, in science or in literature. I
had read the impassioned demands of some of these women for political and
economic equality with men, and had looked at them with a certain dim
surprise to see them so eager to gather this Dead Sea fruit and turn
their backs upon the Tree of Life, with its golden burden of love and
blessed motherhood. Ambition of that kind had no message for me. So far
my mind was perfectly clear. As to the terms in which I conceived the
realities, the blossom and fructification of a woman's life, I am less
clear. A home of my own like the pleasant, peaceful home that my father
had made; a man of my own, in whom I could feel pride and by whom I could
be linked to the greater world outside; and a sweet brood of little
people in whom my youth could be renewed and for whom I could even
cherish wider ambitions: this was probably what my rambling thoughts
would have pictured if they could have been gathered up and brought to a
definite focus. But they never had been. The necessary refracting medium
had been absent. For what the burning-glass is to the sunbeam, the actual
love of some particular man is to the opening mind of a young girl,
bringing the scattered rays of thought to a single bright spot in which
the wished-for future becomes sharp and distinct. And this influence, in
its completeness, had never come into my life. The undoubted liking that
I had for the society of men was due, chiefly, to their larger interests
and wider knowledge. Of experiences sentimental or romantic there had
been none.

And yet the little god had not entirely forgotten me. Indeed, his winged
shaft had missed me so narrowly that I could hardly yet be certain that I
had passed quite unscathed. That little episode--tame enough in all
conscience--had occurred two years ago, when a Mr. Davenant had come
from Oxford with a small party of fellow undergraduates, to spend a more
or less studious vacation in our neighbourhood. I had met him, in all,
three times on the footing of a casual acquaintance, and we had talked
"high philosophy" with the eager interest of the very young. That was
all. He had been a bird of passage, alighting for a moment on the very
outskirts of my life, only to soar away into the unknown and vanish for
ever.

It seemed an insignificant affair. A score of other men had come and gone
in the same way. But there was a difference--to me. Those other men,
too, had talked "high philosophy," but I had forgotten utterly what it
was that they had said. Not so had it been in the case of Mr. Davenant.
Again and again had I found myself thinking over his talks with me, not,
I suspect, for the sake of the matter--which, to speak the truth, was
neither weighty nor brilliantly original--but rather because I had
enjoyed talking to him. And sometimes I had been surprised to notice how
clearly I remembered those talks, even to the very words that he had used
and the tones of his pleasant, manly voice. Two years had passed since
then--a long time in a girl's life; but still Mr. Davenant--his name,
by the way, was Jasper, a pleasant-sounding name I had thought it--remained
the one figure that had separated itself from the nebulous mass
of humanity that had peopled my short existence. And to-night--on this
night of misery and despair, when all that was worth living for seemed to
be passing away, as I lay staring up into the darkness, the memory of him
came back to me again. Once more I heard his voice--how strangely
familiar it sounded!--framing those quaintly-abstruse sentences, I
recalled the look in his eyes--clear, hazel eyes, they were, that
sparkled with vivacity and the fresh interest of youth--and his smile,
as he uttered some mild joke--a queer, humorous smile that drew his
mouth just a little to one side and seemed to give an added piquancy to
the jest by its own trifling oddity. I remembered it all, clearly,
vividly, with the freshness of yesterday; the words of wisdom, the
humorous turn of speech, the earnest, almost eager tone, the easy manner,
friendly yet deferential--all came back to me as it had done a hundred
times before, though it was two years ago.

He had been but a stranger--a mere passing stranger who had come and
gone--who had sailed across the rim of my horizon and vanished. But even
in that swift passage some virtue had exhaled from him by which it had
been given to me to look beyond the present into a world hitherto in
visible to me. He was my one little romance; a very little one, but all
that I had; and, to me, he stood for all those things that might have
been and now could never be. And so it happened that, on this night, when
I seemed to be bidding farewell to my youth and all its dimly-cherished
hopes, the memory of him lingered in my thoughts and was with me still
when, at last, sleep--the sleep of utter weariness and exhaustion--closed
my eyelids and shut out for a time the realities of that life on
which I would have been well content never to look again.

Chapter V--On the Brink

Of the four days that followed, I do not, even now, like to think. The
dreadful change that was coming into my life loomed up every moment more
distinct, more threatening, more terrible. The hideous realities of what
was about to happen to me refused to be ignored. They thrust themselves
upon me and filled my thoughts every instant of the day and haunted my
dreams at night. There were times when I turned a wistful eye upon that
solution of the hopeless difficulties of life at which my father had
hinted; but alas! even that was no solution as matters stood. Death which
would have released me from this bondage into which I had sold myself,
would have left my father unemancipated; and to attain it by my own act
would have been a grossly dishonest evasion of the covenant into which I
had entered with Mr. Otway. Expediency and honour both demanded that I
should carry out the terms of my agreement.

But it was a terrible burden that I bore during those four days, and
bore, of necessity, with a cheerful face and as little change as might be
from my usual manner. That was the most difficult part of all. To keep up
the appearance of quiet gaiety, which was the tone of our house; to
smile, to jest, to discuss projected work and to talk over the history
which I was supposed still to be reading; and all the time to feel the
day of doom creeping upon me, nearer and nearer with every beat of my
aching heart. That was the hardest part. But it had to be done and done
with thoroughness; for my father's watchful and sympathetic eye would
have detected at once the smallest flutter of a signal of distress. And
it was imperative that he should be kept in the dark.

And that, perhaps, was the bitterest drop in this bitter potion. For the
first time in my life I had a secret from my father. I was systematically
deceiving him. And the secret that I withheld from him and shared with a
mere stranger--with an enemy, in fact--was one that concerned him
profoundly. And yet that, too, had to be. It was of the essence of the
transaction. For, if he had suspected, for one instant, what I proposed
to do, he would certainly have interfered; and I knew him well enough to
feel sure that his interference would not have taken the form of mere
persuasion. He was a quiet man, suave and gentle in manner;
even-tempered, patient, forebearing--up to a certain point; but when
that point was passed, a change occurred which was apt to surprise those
who knew him but slightly. Like a heavy body, he was difficult to move
and difficult to stop when moved. If he had suspected Mr. Otway of
putting unfair pressure on me--which he would certainly have done--then
I would not have answered for the consequences to Mr. Otway.

But strive as I would to keep my secret, the intolerable strain of those
days of misery must have made itself visible in some change in my
appearance. Once or twice I caught my father looking at me narrowly with
something of anxiety in his expression, and hastened to put on a little
extra spurt of gaiety and to divert his attention from myself. Still, he
was not entirely deceived by my assumed cheerfulness, though he made no
remark until the very last evening, when, I suppose, my efforts to
conceal the grief and wretchedness that were gnawing at my heart were
less successful than usual. Then it was that he took me quite seriously
to task.

"I wonder what is the matter with my little girl," he said, looking at me
reflectively as we sat at the supper table. "She has been getting a
little pale of late, and looks tired and worn. Is it too much Queen Anne
and not enough sleep, think you?"

"I am feeling quite well," I replied.

"That is an evasion, my dear, and a tarradiddle to boot, I suspect. You
are looking quite well. What is it, Jimmy?"

"I don't think it is anything, Pater, dear," I answered, not without a
qualm of conscience at the direct untruth. "I haven't been sleeping so
very well lately, but that is not due to my sitting up reading. Perhaps
it's the weather."

"H'm!" he grunted; "perhaps it is--and perhaps it isn't. Are you sure
there is nothing troubling you? No--what shall we say? Well, to put it
bluntly, no young man, for instance, competing with the good Queen Anne
for your attention?"

I laughed a little, bitterly. If only there had been! But, alas! I was
only too well secured against any troubles of that sort. So I was able to
reply with a moderately clear conscience.

"No, of course there isn't. You know that perfectly well. How could there
be when you keep me so securely in my little hutch?"

"That's true, Jimmy," he answered. "I certainly haven't noticed any buck
rabbit sniffing around. But perhaps it is the hutch itself that is the
trouble. It is a dull life for a girl, to be shut up with an old fellow
like me. Coal-scuttles and such-like are all very well for an ancient
fossil who has sucked all the juice out of life and must needs content
himself with a modest nibble at the rind that's left. But it's not the
sort of thing for a girl. Your orange is still unsucked, Jimmy, dear, and
we mustn't leave it to get over-ripe."

"I've always been very happy with you, dear old Pater," I said; and a
lump rose in my throat as I spoke. How happy I had been! And oh, how
thankfully would I have gone on with that serene, peaceful life and never
asked for anything different, if only it might have been so!

"I know you have, my dear," he rejoined; "always contented and cheerful
and kind to your old father. But still--well, we mustn't get too groovy.
We must have a little change now and again. I have been rather preoccupied
these last few days, but I shall be more free now. What do you
say to a few lays in London? It's quite a long time since we've been to
town. Shall we take a week off and dissipate a little? Just spread a thin
wash of carmine--quite a thin and delicate one--over the metropolis,
and incidentally see for ourselves if the population of the great world
doesn't still contain a few presentable human beings? What do you say?"

I don't know what I said, or how I controlled the almost irresistible
impulse to fling myself on his neck and sob my secret into his ear. It
was terrible to listen to him making these plans for one of those
blissful little holidays that we had enjoyed together from time to time,
and to know that the morrow would see my own life spoiled irrevocably and
his home made desolate. Some vague answer I murmured, and then managed to
lead the conversation into a less distressing channel. But once or twice
during the evening he reverted to the subject, and when, at a rather
early hour, I wished him "good-night," he said, as he held my hands and
looked me over-critically:

"Yes; the blossom is undoubtedly a little faded. We must see to it,
Jimmy. Think over my proposal and consider whether there is any
particular kind of jaunt that you would like; whether, for instance, you
would rather go to the sea than to London."

"Very well, Pater, dear," I replied; "I'll think about it," and with this
only too easily fulfilled promise I turned away and went upstairs.

It was my last night at home; the last night of my girlhood and of
freedom. Virtually and to all intents, I had said farewell to my father
for ever; for though, hereafter, we should meet, I should be his
daughter, in the old sense--no more. I should be the chattel of another
man, and that man no friend of his.

For long after I went to my room I sat thinking these thoughts and gazing
with scared, bewildered eyes into the dark future on whose threshold I
already stood. What that future held for me, beyond the certainty of
misery and degradation, who could tell? I dared not try to pierce that
dread obscurity. From what might lie beyond that threshold my thoughts
shrank back, appalled. The whole thing seemed like some hideous dream
from which I should presently awaken, trembling, but with a sigh of
relief. And yet it was not. Unbelievable as was this awful thing that had
descended upon me in a moment, it was yet but too real for any hope of
awakening.

And what of my father? For him, too, the old pleasant life was at an end.
The quiet gaiety, the serene happiness of his home was gone for ever.
Henceforth he would be a lonely man, mourning the loss of his companion
and cherishing a bitter resentment against the man who had stolen her
away. But what would he feel about this ship wreck of my life--for so he
would certainly regard it? What portion of the wretchedness and
degradation into which I had sold myself would have to be borne by him?
It was a question which I had hardly asked myself before; but now, when I
thought of his devotion to me, of his sympathy with me and his
self-forgetfulness, a sudden misgiving crept into my mind. Was it worth
while, after all? If my father and I were both to be made wretched for
life, what good had I done by this sacrifice?

I thought of him as he had been this evening and for the last day or two.
All his light-heartedness had come back. He was quite himself again.
Since I had delivered Mr. Otway's letter, all signs of care had vanished.
That letter had apparently put him entirely at his ease; naturally
enough, since it had put an end to his immediate difficulties, and since
he knew nothing of the price at which it had been purchased. And though I
knew better, yet his ease and confidence were not without their effect on
me. Under the clear sky and in the sunshine, it was hard to believe that
the thunderbolt was still ready to fall. And so it was that, more than
once on that night, I found myself asking if it were possible that I had
done the wrong thing? Had I been too precipitate?

But it was of no use to think of that now. The bargain had been made, and
payment accepted in advance. Nor if it had been possible for me to go
back on a promise voluntarily given--which it obviously was not--could
Mr. Otway have been held to his. The original situation would have been
created afresh.

Before undressing, I sat down at my little bureau and wrote a letter to
my father in case there should be no time on the morrow. For the
arrangements--which Mr. Otway had communicated to me in a letter
addressed in a feminine handwriting--were necessarily of a somewhat
clandestine character. Mr. Otway had obtained a special license and had
given notice to the clergyman of a small church on the outskirts of the
town, and on the by-road leading to the church I was to meet him on
Thursday morning as near as possible to eleven o'clock. There was not
likely to be any difficulty in carrying out my part of the arrangement,
but nevertheless, it was as well to leave nothing to be done on the
morrow.

The letter that I wrote to my father was quite short. There was no need
for a long one, since the facts to be communicated were of the simplest
and I should probably see him in the course of the day. What I wrote was
as follows:

"My dearest Father,

"I am writing to tell you that I am about to do a thing of which I fear
you will disapprove. I am going to marry Mr. Otway; and by the time you
get this, the marriage will have taken place.

"You will understand why I have done this when I tell you that I
accidentally became aware of your difficulties and of the claim which he
had on you and you will understand, too, why I have kept my intention
secret from you. It was the only way out for us; and you are not to think
that I have done it for you only. I was equally concerned, and have acted
in my own interests as well as yours.

"Please, dearest, try to forgive me for taking this step without your
sanction. You would never have consented, and yet it had to be.

"Your loving daughter,

"HELEN."

I sealed the letter, and, having addressed it, placed it in my bureau in
readiness for the morning. Then I made various little arrangements of my
possessions, tidying up my bureau and wardrobe, tearing up letters that
had been answered and packing a small trunk with necessary articles of
dress, to be sent for on the morrow; and all this I did with a curious
stony calm and the sense of setting my affairs in order as if preparing
to bid farewell to life. And this calm--a calm like that which persons
of character often exhibit in the face of unavoidable death, or on the
eve of a dangerous operation, continued even after I went to bed, so
that, in contrast to the perturbed nights that I had passed since my
interview with Mr. Otway, I presently fell into a sound sleep and slept
late into the morning.

Chapter VI--A Meeting and a Parting

IT turned out to be easier than I had expected to keep my appointment
with Mr. Otway, for my father had business that took him abroad early,
and, when I came down to breakfast, he had already left the house; which
was a profound relief to me, since it saved me the added misery of a last
farewell and the necessity of further deception.

It was half-past ten when, after placing my letter in the salver on the
hall table, I set forth from the house. The most direct way to the church
was across the town, but the fear of meeting my father or any of my
acquaintances led me to the roads that led out from the environs towards
the country, and thus skirt the circumference of the town. I walked at a
good pace, unconsciously threading my way through the rather complicated
maze of by-roads, and still pervaded by the curious, half-dreamy calm
that had possessed me on the preceding evening.

As I approached the vicinity of the little church--which was a kind of
mission-chapel, in charge of a supernumerary curate--I glanced at my
watch and saw that it was five minutes to eleven; and almost at the same
moment, on turning a corner, I came in sight of a figure the very first
glance at which so completely shattered my self-possession that I felt
ready to sink down upon the pavement. There was no mistaking it, though
the back was towards me; a huge, ponderous figure that walked away from
me with the peculiar gait of the heavy and unathletic man; a silent,
deliberate gait that recalls the action of the hind legs of an elephant.

I followed him breathlessly up the rather sordid-looking street, noting
that, from time to time, a thin cloud of blue smoke floated over his
shoulder. At length, at the corner of an intersecting road, he turned and
saw me; upon which he flung away a cigar, and, retracing his steps
towards me, saluted me with a flourish of his hat and held out his hand.

"This is good of you, Miss Vardon," he said, "to be so punctual. I hardly
hoped that you would be able to be here so--er--so punctually."

I took his hand limply, but made no reply. The shock of the sudden
encounter was slowly passing off and giving place to a sort of benumbed
indifference mingled with vague curiosity. I felt as if I had been
drugged or were walking abroad in a hypnotic trance, half conscious and
waiting with dull expectancy to see what would happen next. I walked at
Mr. Otway's side up the mean little street with a feeling somewhat like
that with which one would walk in a dream beside some historical or
mythical personage, accepting the incongruous situation from mere mental
inertia.

Mr. Otway, too, seemed subdued by the strangeness of the position, or
perhaps he was embarrassed by my silence. At any rate, although he
occasionally cleared his throat as if about to make a remark, he did not
actually speak again until we turned a corner, when there appeared,
embedded in a row of mean houses, a small brick building which, in
general shape and design, resembled a large dog-kennel.

"That," said he, "is the church, Miss Vardon--or perhaps I should say,
Helen. It is a little difficult to--ah--get used to these--these
intimacies, I may say, at so short a notice. No doubt you find it so?"

"Yes," I answered.

"I am sure you do. Naturally. My own name, you may remember, is Lewis. My
Christian name, I mean," he added, shying slightly at the word
"Christian."

"I remember," said I.

"Quite so. I had no doubt you would. Ahem." He cleared his throat once or
twice in an embarrassed manner, and then, as we crossed over towards the
church, he continued: "I think we shall find the doors open. The law, I
believe, requires it. And we shall find my housekeeper, Mrs. Gregg,
inside. She will be one of the witnesses, you know. The other will be the
sexton."

The outer door was on the latch, as he had said, and, when he had
admitted me, he closed and relatched it. From the dark vestibule, I
stepped into the bare, comfortless building, from the white-washed wall
of which a great, emblazoned text grinned at me, as if in derision, with
the words: "I was glad when they said unto me, 'Let us go into the House
of the Lord.'"

Near the door, on one of the deal benches, the little, frail-looking
woman whom I had seen at Mr. Otway's house was seated, conversing with a
very bald and rather seedy elderly man; but, as we entered, the man
hurried away towards the vestry and the woman rose and came forward a few
paces to meet us.

"This is Miss Vardon, Mrs. Gregg," said Mr. Otway, introducing me in a
heavy, embarrassed manner.

Mrs. Gregg stared at me with undisguised curiosity and something of
hostility in her expression, as she replied: "Ah've seen her before."

"Yes," said Mr. Otway, "I believe you have. Yes. To be sure. Of course.
And I--er--hope--in fact, I may say that I--ah--"

What he was going to say I have no idea, and I suspect that he was not
very clear himself; but at this moment the man--who was apparently the
sexton--emerged from the vestry in company with a young clergyman,
vested already in his surplice and carrying a book in his hand.

Apparently everything had been explained and arranged beforehand by Mr.
Otway, for, as we advanced up the nave, the curate took his place before
the communion table and opened his book. I noticed that he gave me one
quick and intense look, full of surprise and curiosity, and thereafter
seemed, as far as possible, to avoid even glancing in my direction.

The ceremony began abruptly and without preamble. With dim surprise, I
became aware that the clergyman was speaking, or rather reading aloud, in
a rapid and indistinct undertone. I listened with but slight attention,
and failed, for the most part, to distinguish the words which, I think,
was what the curate intended; his half-apologetic mumble being, I
believe, designed to mitigate the effect of those coarsely-phrased
impertinences with which the service is besprinkled, and which have
survived so inappropriately into this age of decent and reticent speech.
I tried to fix my thoughts on the ceremony in which I was taking part,
but found them constantly wandering away to my father, busying themselves
with his present whereabouts and occupation. Was he still at his office?
Or had he perchance called in at our house, as he sometimes did, and
already seen my letter?

I was brought back to the happenings of the moment by a question
addressed to me by name in more distinct tones, and followed by the
murmured instruction: "Say I will." I obeyed the gently-spoken command,
and then, with my right hand enveloped in a large and flabby grasp, I
heard Mr. Otway repeat after the curate the solemn form of words that
should mean so much and that was, as now spoken, so empty a mockery; of
which the phrase "to have and to hold from this day forward" seemed to
separate itself as the only part truly applicable.

Still passive, and conscious only of a certain, dull discomfort and
surprise at the incongruity of the whole affair, I permitted our hands to
be separated and re-joined, and obediently repeated the form of words as
the curate dictated.

"I, Helen Vardon, take thee, Lewis Otway, to my wedded husband, to have
and to hold from this day forward, for richer for poorer, in sickness and
in health, to love, cherish, and to obey, till death us do part,
according to God's holy ordinance; and thereto I give thee my troth."

It was amazing. These burning words, so charged with love, with utter
devotion and self-abandonment I was actually addressing to a mere
stranger, to a man who, even now, was but a name attached to an
unfamiliar, ungracious personality; upon whose corpse, if he had fallen
dead at my feet in the very moment of my speaking, I could have looked
with no emotion but relief.

It was an astounding situation. The wonder, the incredibility of it
filled my mind to the exclusion of all else until, as Mr. Otway began
once more to speak at the curate's dictation, and I became aware that a
ring had been slipped on my finger, I realised dimly that the ceremony
was complete and that the irrevocable change had occurred.

But even then my thoughts quickly flitted away from this significant
scene to others that seemed more deeply to concern me. As I knelt at Mr.
Otway's side and the monotonous mumble recommenced, I began once more to
wonder where my father was and what he was doing. Had he come in and seen
my letter, or had the maid noticed it and taken it to the office? And
would he be angry or only grieved? Would he think that I had acted
rightly? Or would he condemn my action as ill-considered or even
unnecessary? And lastly, was it just barely possible that I had done the
wrong thing? Had I sacrificed myself--and him--without sufficient
cause?

Thus my thoughts wandered to and fro to the mumbled accompaniment of the
interminable prayers and exhortations that rolled past me in an unheeded
stream. At last the ceremony came to an end. Rising from our knees, we
trooped after the curate to the vestry, where, as I signed the familiar
name in the register, the first clear realization of my changed condition
came upon me. But even then the vivid flash of perception was but
transient. Hardly had I shaken hands with the clergyman and passed out
into the street, when my thoughts sped away once more to my home--my
real home--and my father.

For some time after leaving the church Mr. Otway and I walked in silence.
He hemmed once or twice and seemed on the point of speaking, but either
he could find nothing appropriate to say or he found some difficulty in
opening the subject of his thoughts. And meanwhile I pursued my own
reflections. At length, however, after one or two preliminary hems, he
managed to make a beginning.

"I am afraid, Helen, you may think that I have put rather unfair pressure
on you to marry me."

I roused myself to consider what he had said, and replied, after a slight
pause:

"Whatever I may think, I am not complaining. I don't forget that I
accepted your proposal of my own free will; and I intend to try to carry
out honestly my part of the bargain."

"I am glad to hear you say that, Helen," he said eagerly. "I was afraid
you might feel resentful--might think I had driven a rather hard
bargain."

"Perhaps I do," I replied. "But that doesn't affect the terms of the
bargain. My feelings towards you were no part of the agreement."

"No; that's true," he agreed hastily; but he was visibly crestfallen, and
walked by my side for some time without speaking. My thoughts began to
wander again; and then, suddenly, there occurred to me a question that I
had already asked myself over and over again without finding any answer.
Now, moved by a fresh impulse of curiosity, I put it into words.

"Would you mind telling me, Mr. Otway, why you wished to marry me?"

He looked at me in some surprise and a little confusion.

"Why, my dear Helen," he replied hesitatingly, "there is nothing
remarkable about it, is there? I wished to marry you for the same reason
that any other man would; because you are a handsome girl--a beautiful
girl, I may say--and clever and bright, and, as far as I could judge
from your manner to your father, a good, affectionate girl. I have
admired you ever since I first met you, a year and a half ago."

I suppose I looked surprised--I certainly felt so, seeing that he had
made no effort to cultivate our acquaintance--for he continued:

"Yes, Helen, I admired you; but as I had nothing to offer in the way of
personal attractions, and I did not suppose that my means would be a
sufficient set-off for my--ah--personal disadvantages, I kept my
admiration to myself. In fact, I suppose, if it had not been for this
lucky chance--lucky for me, I mean--a little unfortunate perhaps for
you--though not so unfortunate as it might--er--at least I venture to
hope that things may turn out--"

He paused awkwardly, as if expecting me to help him. But I made no
comment. My momentary curiosity was satisfied. I had heard his
explanation, and a very insufficient one it seemed to be. So the sentence
remained unfinished, and, in the silence that ensued, my thoughts went
back once more to my father.

When would he get my letter? And what would be his feelings when he
realized that his daughter--his companion and playmate, his beloved
apprentice--was lost to him for ever? And what would be his attitude to
Mr. Otway? Deeply resentful, beyond a doubt. His scornful rejection of
the proposal had shown that clearly enough. Yes, he would be angry--furiously
angry; for quiet and gentle as his manners were, he was a
passionate man. He could even be violent, as I knew from one or two
experiences. And our doctor, Dr. Sharpe, knew it, too, and had warned him
to be careful, had cautioned him not only to avoid over-exertion, but
excessive excitement of any kind. The doctor's words came back to me now
with a qualm of uneasiness. I had not thought of that before. His
distress, his grief, his anger against the man who had exacted this price
from me--all that I had thought of and fretted over. But the actual
physical shock that my letter would inflict on him, utterly unprepared as
he was--that I had somehow overlooked. And yet it was palpable enough.
He would come home expecting to find me waiting for him as usual; and
then, without an instant's warning, in the very twinkling of an eye, he
would learn that I had been spirited away out of his life for ever. It
would be a terrible blow.

The more I thought of it the more uneasy I became. Supposing he should
become seriously ill on receiving my letter. It was quite possible; it
was even very probable. And if he should have got my letter already! If
he should be, at this very moment, lying, prostrated by the shock, with
none but the servants to tend him! As I thought of this dreadful
possibility, my anxiety grew, moment by moment; and I was beginning to
consider how soon I could contrive to escape to him, to satisfy myself
that all was well, when the voice of Mr. Otway broke in on my thoughts. I
did not at first gather clearly what he was saying until, by an effort, I
detached my attention from the agitating subject of my reflections.

"Of course," he was saying as I endeavoured to catch up the thread of his
remarks, "it answered my purpose as a solitary bachelor; but it won't do
now. We shall have to get quite a different class of house. And we shall
want some other servants. I shall keep Mrs. Gregg, if you don't object,
as she has been with me so long and knows my ways, but we shall want a
couple of maids in addition, I suppose."

"Is Mrs. Gregg your only servant?" I asked, rather absently.

"Yes," he replied; "that is to say, the only resident servant. She has a
girl to help her in the mornings with the housework and to mind the place
when she goes out shopping. That is how she was able to attend at the
church this morning."

As he was speaking, we turned into the quiet, countrified road in which
he lived, and a few more steps brought us to the house. Mrs. Gregg, who
had apparently hurried on in advance by a different route, was standing
at the open door talking to a girl of about sixteen, and, as we ascended
the steps, she addressed Mr. Otway.

"I've got to see to some things in the town. D'ye want Lizzie to stay or
will ye open the door yourself if anyone comes?"

"Oh, she needn't stay, Mrs. Gregg," was the reply. "I shan't be going
out. But don't be any longer than you can help."

On this Mrs. Gregg dismissed the girl, and followed her out, shutting the
door after her. Mr. Otway hung his hat on a peg in the hall, and placing
his umbrella in the stand, remarked apologetically:

"Mrs. Gregg's manner is not all that might be desired in a servant; but
she is a capable woman and absolutely trustworthy. She comes from the
North, you know, where manners run a little more blunt than with us.
Shall I show you your room?"

Without waiting for a reply, he preceded me up the stairs to the first
floor, where he ushered me into a bedroom and stood by the door with an
embarrassed and rather deprecating air, casting a glance of obvious
disparagement over its somewhat meagre appointments.

"It's a poor place to bring you to, Helen," he remarked, "but that can be
mended. It was good enough for a bachelor. You'll find the wardrobe and
chest of drawers empty when you send for your things. Mine are in the
dressing-room--that little room to the right. And now I'll leave you in
possession for the present."

With this he went out, closing the door behind him, and I heard his soft,
heavy tread descending the stairs.

For some time after he had gone I stood looking about me in absolute
dismay. The room was mean almost to sordidness--surprisingly mean for
the habitation of an admittedly wealthy man. But it was not that which
filled me with consternation. Delicately as I had been brought up, the
mere surroundings of life were of no great consideration to me. What
appalled me utterly was the fact now brought home to me with overwhelming
force; that I was no more my own; that I had surrendered myself to the
possession of another person, a strange man, towards whom I felt a
growing repugnance. This was not my room: it was our room. No longer had
I any rights of privacy or of personal reticence. I was his, "to have and
to hold from this day forward," with no power of escape or protest
against the most repulsive familiarities. I had voluntarily surrendered,
not only my liberty, but even the appearance of security from the most
outrageous intrusions.

Of course I had known all this before. But in the hurry and rush, the
alarms and agitations of the events that had forced me to my hasty
decision, perception had been partly obscured. I had known what I was
doing, but had only dimly realized. It had needed the sight of that mean
room, with its significant contents and the presence of that man who
stood at my side as joint occupier, to light up the vague perception into
realization of the most horrid vividness.

Presently I began, with the dull curiosity of a prisoner introduced to a
new cell, to explore the room, opening the empty wardrobe and pulling out
the ill-fitting drawers of the plain pine chest. Then I peeped into the
dressing-room--a bare little closet, furnished with a wash-stand, a
dressing-table and a chest of drawers--and even stepped in to glance
over the half-blind down into the garden and street beyond. I was about
to turn away when I noticed a man approaching the house at a rapid pace;
and in an instant my heart leaped with mingled joy and alarm.

It was my father.

I watched him nervously as he strode towards the house, and my fears rose
with each step that he took. Every movement was expressive of excitement
and anger; the swift stride, the forward-thrust chin, the very set of the
shoulders; the way in which he grasped his stick by the middle, as if
aiming a blow, was full of menace. As he drew nearer I shrank behind the
curtain, but still watched him; watched him with growing alarm, for now
I could see that his eyes were wild under the frowning brows, his mouth
was set and his face was of a strange, blotchy, purple colour. He looked
as if he had been drinking, but I knew he had not.

As he reached the gate, he wrenched it open violently, and, entering,
slammed it behind him; a thing I had never before known him to do. He
strode up the path, without a glance upwards, and disappeared from my
sight, and a moment later there came a wild jangling of the bell,
followed by a thundering knock at the door.

I hesitated, undecided what I should do. Should I go down and meet him
with appeasing words, or should I wait until the first explosion of his
wrath had subsided? I crept out of the bedroom to the landing and stood
with my hand on the baluster rail, listening. I heard Mr. Otway walk
along the hall, softly and rather slowly. I heard him open the door, and
then my father's voice rose, loud and fierce.

"Where is my daughter, Otway? Is she here?

"Yes," Mr. Otway replied; "she is upstairs. We have just returned from
the church."

"Do you mean to say," my father demanded, "that the marriage has actually
taken place?"

"Yes," Mr. Otway answered. "We were married half an hour ago."

"What!" roared my father. "After my letter! Did you tell her about that
letter? You didn't, you damned scoundrel! You've tricked her! You've
swindled her!

"As to your letter, Mr. Vardon," I heard Mr. Otway reply, "I haven't seen
it myself, yet. The morning's correspondence is still--"

Here a door closed, and his voice became inaudible. They had gone into
one of the rooms. I staggered back into the bedroom and sank on to a
chair, trembling from head to foot. In the name of God, what did my
father mean? Tricked! Swindled! Could it be true? Was it actually
possible that I had been lured into the arms of this ungainly lout by a
false pretence? It was incredible. And yet--As the first shock of this
amazing statement began to pass off, a storm of anger and indignation
arose in my breast; and I was on the point of rising to go down and
confront Mr. Otway, when the house shook to a heavy concussion. I sprang
from the chair, and flying on the wings of terror down the stairs, opened
the first door that I came to.

Years have rolled by since that unforgettable moment, but even now, as I
write, the tableau that met my eyes as I opened the door rises before me
vivid and distinct as the dreadful reality. I saw it even then but for a
single instant, as I darted into the room; but it has remained with me
and will remain till my dying day.

My father lay motionless on the floor near the fire-place; his face an
awful, livid grey, his eyes staring fixedly at the ceiling; and from a
small wound on the right side of his forehead a few drops of dark blood
trickled down his temple. Beside him, and stooping over him, stood Mr.
Otway, with ashen face and dropped jaw, the very picture of horror and
mortal fear; and in Mr. Otway's right hand was grasped my father's stick,
a stout Malacca, with a heavily-loaded silver knob.

I flew past him and sank on my knees by my father's side; and in that
moment I knew that my father was dead. I had never seen a dead person
before. But it was unmistakable. I spoke to him; I called to him in an
agonised whisper; I patted his head and touched his face. But all the
while I knew that he was dead; that he was gone from me for ever. Even as
I looked at him, the livid grey of his face faded to a dead white; the
staring eyes relaxed and seemed to sink into their sockets; and the mouth
slowly fell open. It was death. I knew it. Dazed, stricken, almost bereft
of consciousness and the power of thought, I knew it, with the dull
certainty of despair.

As I had entered the room, Mr. Otway had started up with a look of
terror, and when I sank at my father's side, I had heard him move away
softly towards the writing-table. He was now back and once more stooping
over my father's body. I felt that he was there, although my eyes were
fixed on that pallid face that gave back no answering glance. Presently
he spoke, in a hushed, awe-stricken whisper.

"This is terrible, Helen! Can't we do anything?"

I looked up at him with a sudden flush of loathing and detestation; and
as I looked, I noticed that he no longer held the stick. I rose slowly to
my feet and faced him.

"No," I answered. "He is dead. He is dead. Mr. Otway, you have killed my
father."

As I faced him, he shrank away from me, staring at me as if I had been
some horrid apparition. His face, blanched to a horrible white and shiny
with sweat, was dreadful to look upon; the face of abject, mortal terror.

"Helen!" he gasped. "Helen! For God's sake don't look at me like that! It
was not I who killed him. I swear to God it was not. He fainted. I was
trying to take the stick from him--I had to, or he would have killed me
--and his head struck the mantelpiece. Then he fainted and fell. I am
telling you the truth, Helen. I am, before God!"

To this I made no reply. Whether I believed him or not, I cannot say.
Stunned as I was by this frightful thing that had befallen, I could only
look at him with utter loathing as the cause of it all.

"Helen!" he continued, imploringly, "say you believe me! I swear I never
touched him. And don't look at me like that! Helen! Why do you look at me
in that awful way?"

He clasped his hands, and, casting a fearful glance at my poor father's
corpse, moaned: "My God! my God! but this is horrible! Horrible! Do you
think he is really dead? Don't you think--can't we do anything? If a
doctor were here--if we only had someone to send--Shall I go and fetch
a doctor, Helen?"

"Yes," I answered, "you had better."

"I will," he said. "But you do believe me, don't you? I swear--"

"You had better go at once, Mr. Otway," I interrupted.

He gave me one pitiful glance of appeal, and then, with a despairing
moan, turned and left the room. I heard him hurry along the hall and a
moment later the outer door closed.

Once more I sank on my knees beside my father, and, taking the passive
hand in mine, looked into the pallid face, dimly surprised to find
something new and unfamiliar creeping into it. I did not weep. The blow
was too crushing, too overwhelming to call forth common emotion. Nor did
I think coherently; but knelt, looking dumbly into the face that was my
father's, and yet was not, wrapped in a sort of dreadful trance,
conscious only of bitter pain and a sense of unutterable loss.

After a time--I do not know how long--I became aware of sounds of
movement in the house, and presently soft foot steps approached the room.
The door, which Mr. Otway had left ajar, opened with a faint creak, and
the voice of Mrs. Gregg ejaculated: "Sakes! What's this?"

She stole on tip-toe into the room until she stood beside me, looking
down with a scared expression as my father's corpse.

"Why!" she exclaimed, "the man's dead! Who is he?

"He is my father, Mrs. Gregg," I replied.

She stood for some time in silence, apparently considering the import of
my answer. Then she walked round and looked down curiously at the wound
on the forehead.

"Where is Mr. Otway?" she asked.

"He has gone to fetch a doctor," I answered.

"A doctor!" she repeated. "And what might be the good of a doctor when
the man is dead? D'ye know how it happened?"

Before I had time to reply to her question, there came the sound of a
latch-key inserted into the hall door. She turned quickly and made as if
she would leave the room, but, as she reached the threshold, Mr. Otway
entered, followed by the doctor, and she fell back to let them pass. I
rose to my feet, and the doctor--a hard-faced, middle-aged man whom I
knew by sight--knelt down in my place. He lifted the limp hand and laid
his finger on the wrist; he raised the eyelid and touched the glazing
eyeball; then drawing out his stethoscope he listened for some time at
the chest over the region of the heart. And meanwhile we all stood
watching him in a profound silence through which the ticking of the clock
broke noisily, as it had done on that fateful night when I had sat in
this very room unconsciously preparing the elements of this tragedy.

At length the doctor rose, and, folding his stethoscope, deliberately
slipped it into his pocket and turned to Mr. Otway.

"I am sorry to say that it is as you feared," said he. "He is quite dead.
From what you have told me, I should say it was a case of heart failure
from over-excitement. Have there been any previous attacks?"

"No," I answered. "But I think Dr. Sharpe considered that his heart was
weak."

"Ah! He did, did he? Well, I had better call on Dr. Sharpe and hear what
he knows about the case." He walked round, and, stooping down, examined
the wound attentively. Then, without looking at Mr. Otway, he asked: "You
say he struck his head against the corner of the mantelpiece? This
corner, I suppose?"

He touched the right hand corner of the marble shelf, and, as Mr. Otway
assented, I saw him place his shoulder against it as if to measure its
height.

"Was that when he was in the act of falling?" he asked, with his eyes
fixed on the wound.

"Yes," replied Mr. Otway. "At least, I think so--I should say yes,
certainly--that is, to the best of my belief. Of course, Dr. Bury, you
will understand that I am a little confused in my recollection. The--ah
--the circumstances were very agitating and--ah--confusing. Is the
point of any importance?"

"Well, you see," the doctor replied a little drily, "when a man dies
suddenly and only one person is present--as I understand was the case in
this instance--every point is of importance."

"Yes, of course. It would be, naturally."

Mr. Otway spoke these words in a low, husky voice, and, as I looked at
him, I saw that he had turned as pale as death and that his face had
again broken out into a greasy sweat. Nor was I the only observer. Mrs.
Gregg, who had been standing in the corner by the door, quietly attentive
to all that passed, was now watching her employer narrowly and with a
very curious expression. There was a brief interval of silence, and then
Mr. Otway having cleared his throat once or twice, asked, in the same
husky, unsteady voice:

"I suppose, when you have talked the matter over with Dr. Sharpe, you
will be able to certify the death in the usual way?"

"In the usual way?" Dr. Bury repeated. "Yes: in the way that is usual in
cases of sudden death. Of course, I shan't be able to give an ordinary
certificate. I shall write to the coroner, giving him the facts, and he
will decide whether an inquest is necessary or whether he can issue a
certificate on my statement."

"I see," said Mr. Otway. "You will report the facts--and, I suppose, you
will state what your own views on the case are?"

"I shall make any comments that seem to be called for, but, of course,
the facts are what the coroner wants."

"And would you consider that, in a case like this, an inquiry is
necessary?

"I don't know that I should," was the reply; "but it doesn't rest with
me. Would you like me to help you to move him? You can't leave him lying
here, and you can hardly have him carried to his own house by daylight."

"No," Mr. Otway agreed, "we could not. If you will kindly help me to
carry him to the drawing-room, we can lay him on the sofa."

The two men raised my poor father, and, while I supported his head, they
carried him to the drawing-room and laid him on the sofa, when Dr. Bury,
having taken an embroidered cover from a table and spread it over him,
drew down the blinds.

"Perhaps," said he, "you had better leave him here until we know what the
coroner intends to do. In case he should decide--"

Here he glanced a little uncomfortably at me, and I realised that he
would rather speak of the grim details unembarrassed by my presence.
Accordingly, I stole from the room and returned to the one from which we
had just come. The door was open as we had left it, and, as I came
opposite to it, treading softly, as was my habit, I saw Mrs. Gregg
standing by the roll-top table with my father's stick in her hand,
apparently testing the weight of the heavy lead loading that the silver
knob concealed. She started as she suddenly became aware of my presence,
but, quickly recovering her self-possession, asked:

"Will this be your father's stick?"

I answered that it was, whereupon she remarked, as she stood it in the
corner behind the writing-table, whence, I suppose, she had taken it:

"I thought 'twas a stranger to me. A fine stick it is, too, and a trusty
companion 'twould be on a dark night and a lonely road."

To this I made no reply; and when she had glanced at the clock and peered
curiously into my father's hat, which stood on the table, she turned
abruptly and left the room.

Chapter VII--The Terms of Release

WHEN Mrs. Gregg had gone, I shut the door, and, sinking on to the chair
by the writing-table, tried to collect my thoughts. But though I was
vaguely conscious that this dreadful disaster vitally affected my
position, and must in some way affect my actions, overwhelming grief and
a sense of irreparable loss rendered coherent thought impossible. My
father was dead. That was all I could think of. My one perfect friend,
who had absorbed all my affection and given me all of his, had gone out
of my life. Henceforward I was alone in the world.

Presently I heard Dr. Bury leave the house, and then the door opened, and
Mr. Otway came into the room, looking like a man who had risen
prematurely after a severe illness. He dropped limply on a chair, and
sat, with his hands on his knees, looking at me with a pitiable
expression of misery and consternation.

"This is a terrible affair, Helen," he said in a broken voice. "Terrible!
Terrible!"

I made no reply, but looked at him, half-curiously and resentfully. In
the extremity of my grief, I had no pity to spare for him who was the
cause of this dreadful calamity.

"Won't you speak to me, Helen?" he said, imploringly. "Won't you try to
give me some comfort? Think of the awful position I am in."

At his miserable egotism, my grief blazed up into sudden wrath.

"You!" I exclaimed, scornfully. "And what of me? You have robbed me of my
father--of all that matters to me in life--and now you ask me to
comfort you!"

He stretched out his hands to me with a gesture of entreaty.

"Don't say that, Helen!" he implored. "Don't say I robbed you of him. It
was an accident that no one could foresee. And after all, you know,
Helen," he added, persuasively, "if you have lost a father, you have
gained a devoted husband."

At these words I gazed at him in utter amazement; and quite suddenly the
confusion of my thoughts began to clear up. I began to realise that some
action was called for, though what that action was I could not clearly
see at the moment. But what I did see quite clearly was that the thing he
was suggesting was utterly unthinkable.

"Do you suppose, Mr. Otway," I demanded, "that I could possibly live with
you as your wife after what has happened?"

"But you are my wife, Helen," he protested.

"I agreed to marry you, Mr. Otway, in order to save my father. My father
has not been saved."

"That was, no doubt, your motive, Helen," he answered. "I don't deny
that. But, actually, you agreed to be my wife on certain specific
conditions, which I carried out--or, at least, was prepared--"

He hesitated with sudden embarrassment; and the embarrassment, with the
statement, in the midst of which he had broken off, gave me my cue.

"Mr. Otway," I said, "you had a letter from my father. What was in that
letter?"

At this question his self-possession broke down completely.

"I have had no letter," he stammered; "at least, that is to say, I
haven't seen--he spoke of a letter, but--but the fact is, in my
excitement this morning I forgot to look at my correspondence. If there
was a letter, it must be in the box still."

"Let us go and see if it is there," said I. My confusion of mind was fast
clearing up, and as my wits returned, I found myself shaping a definite
course of action. I rose and accompanied him to the hall door and stood
by while he unlocked the letter-box. As he opened the trap, I perceived
that the box contained a single letter; and even in that agitating
moment, the significance of the fact struck me. It was strange, indeed,
that the morning's delivery should bring to a man of business no more
than a single letter.

He picked the missive out, and, having glanced at it, handed it to me. I
looked at it, and, perceiving that it was in my father's handwriting,
tore open the envelope and drew out the letter, which I read aloud. It
ran thus:--

"Stonebury, Maidstone.

"25th April, 1908.

"Dear Otway,

"You will, no doubt, be glad to learn that our little difficulty is at an
end. The unexpected has happened. My friend has been able to raise the
wherewith to repay the loan that I made to him, and has sent a cheque for
the full amount. I have paid it into my bank, but, as a measure of
security, in view of the magnitude of the sum, I am waiting until the
cheque is cleared before sending you mine. However, you may expect to
receive payment in full in the course of three clear days from this date.

"With many thanks for your forbearance,

"I am, yours very truly,

"W. H. VARDON."

As I finished reading, I looked Mr. Otway sternly in the face.

"You realize," I said, "that this letter makes our agreement void?"

He did not reply immediately, but stood with his eyes averted from me and
his fingers working nervously.

"Do you realize that?" I demanded.

"Well, in a way, yes," he replied, hesitatingly. "If it had reached me
sooner--that is to say, if I had seen it--"

"If you had seen it!" I interrupted, angrily. "What has that to do with
the question? The letter was delivered to you, as the post-mark shows,
before you left the house. It came by the first post. If you chose to
leave it unopened, that is your affair. When you met me this morning, the
agreement was already at an end."

He glanced nervously along the hall towards the kitchen stairs.

"We needn't stand here," he said. "Let us go into the study and talk this
affair over quietly."

He led the way back to the room we had left, and, having shut the door,
turned to me deprecatingly.

"It's an unfortunate business, Helen," he said. "Very unfortunate. Of
course, I ought to have looked over the morning's post, but, in my
natural excitement, I overlooked it; and now I don't see that there is
anything for us to do but make the best of it."

I looked at him in amazement. "But," I exclaimed, "you don't seem to
realize that our agreement was at an end before the marriage took place."

"No, I don't," he replied. "You see this letter is only a notification--a
conditional promise to pay. It doesn't discharge the debt."

At this my patience gave out completely. "Let us have no evasions or
quibbles, Mr. Otway," I said. "Our agreement was at an end before the
marriage took place, and I have no doubt that you knew it. You obtained
my consent by fraud."

"I don't admit that," said he. "But even if it were so, what would you
propose?"

"I propose to have the marriage annulled," I replied.

He shook his head. "That is impossible, Helen," he said. "The marriage is
not voidable. An action for nullity can be sustained only on certain
conditions, none of which exist in our case."

"But," I exclaimed, "my consent was obtained on a fraudulent pretence!
Surely that is a sufficient ground for claiming to have the marriage
annulled!"

"I deny the fraud," he replied, doggedly. "But in any case it is not
material. The marriage was perfectly regular, you are of full adult age,
you gave your consent without compulsion, and there are none of those
impediments which the law recognises. I assure you, Helen, that our
marriage is not voidable--that it cannot be annulled by ordinary
process."

Little as I trusted to his truth or honour, I suspected that what he was
now saying was true. But yet the position was unthinkable.

"Do you mean to tell me," I demanded, "that the law would uphold a
marriage between a woman and the murderer of her father?"

He winced as if I had struck him a blow, and his face grew sensibly
paler.

"For the love of God, Helen," he entreated, "don't talk like that! You
don't believe it. I can see you don't. You know I did not kill your
father."

"I know nothing," I replied, "but this--that when I came into the room
my father was lying dead with a wound on his forehead and that you were
standing over him with a formidable weapon in your hand."

I thought he would have fainted. He sank into a chair with a gasp that
was almost a sob, and the sweat streamed down his pallid face. He was a
pitiable spectacle; but yet I felt no pity for him. I was bent only on
escaping from the net in which he had caught me.

"I swear I never touched him, Helen," he protested, breathlessly. "I
swear it. But you know I did not. You are only saying this to torture me.
You don't believe it. I know you don't."

"It is of little importance what I believe, Mr. Otway." I replied,
coldly. "The decision will not rest with me. You will be judged by others
on the facts which I have stated."

He made no immediate reply. He seemed absolutely paralysed by terror, and
sat, breathing quickly and staring at me, as if he expected me to kill
him then and there. At length he spoke in a husky, indistinct voice.

"Helen. What is it you want of me?"

"I want this marriage set aside," I answered.

"But," he protested, "I have told you that is impossible. It cannot be
annulled in the ordinary sense. Be reasonable, Helen. Let us talk the
matter over and see if we can't come to terms."

"What do you mean?" I asked.

"Well," he said, persuasively, "I should like to meet your wishes if I
can. I am not unreasonable. I can see that, as things are, you would not
wish to live with me as my wife. We can't get the marriage annulled, but
we can arrange a separation--a temporary separation, say, without
prejudice to any future arrangements--by mutual consent. What do you say
to that?"

"If the marriage cannot be set aside, I suppose a separation would be the
next best thing. Do I understand that you are willing to agree to a
separation?"

"Yes," he replied; "on certain conditions I am willing to agree to a
separation--a temporary separation, you know."

"What are your conditions?" I asked.

He cleared his throat once or twice, as if in doubt how best to put the
matter. Then, avoiding my eye, he began, hesitatingly, but with an
obsequiously persuasive manner.

"The exact circumstances of your father's most lamentable death, Helen,
are known to you and to me and to no one else. As I have told you, and I
am convinced that you believe, the heart attack which killed him came as
we were struggling for possession of his stick. It was due to the
excitement and the violent exertion. Perhaps the blow on the head from
the corner of the mantelpiece may have had something to do with it, for
the fainting attack came on almost directly afterwards. He relaxed his
hold on the stick and fell, leaving it in my hands. There was no violence
on my part. I never struck him or did anything that could in any way make
me responsible for his death. That is the truth, Helen, and I am
convinced that you believe it, in spite of what you have said."

"I have only your word that it is the truth," said I.

"Exactly," he agreed. "But you believe me. You know what your father's
state of health was, and you know that he was liable, on occasions, to be
--er--somewhat violent. So you believe me. But others, who have not the
knowledge that you have--ah--might--ah--might not believe me."

"I haven't said that I do," I interposed. "However, we will let that
pass. Go on, please."

He paused to wipe his face with his handkerchief, and then proceeded:

"You said just now that when you entered the room you saw me standing
over your father with a weapon in my hand."

"So I did."

"I know you did, Helen. You saw me holding your father's loaded stick. It
is quite true. But--it would--ah--greatly simplify matters if--well,
if that circumstance were not communicated to--ah--to anyone else."

"You mean to say," said I, "that you want me to suppress the fact that I
saw you standing over my father's dead body holding a loaded stick?"

"I wouldn't use the word 'suppress,' Helen," he replied, passing his
handkerchief once more over his haggard face. "I only ask you to refrain
--in the interests of justice and--ah--of common humanity--from
mentioning a circumstance that--ah--mentioned, might mislead the
hearers, and might, conceivably, lead them to quite erroneous
conclusions. It is a reasonable thing to ask. No doubt you blame me; you
look upon me as the cause of this dreadful trouble--which, in a certain
sense, I admit I am. But you would not be vindictive, Helen, or unjust.
You would not wish to see me placed in the dock--perhaps even convicted
--think of that, Helen! Convicted and sentenced when I am absolutely
innocent! My God! It would be an awful thing! You wouldn't wish to have
such a frightful miscarriage of justice as that on your conscience, I am
sure."

"It wouldn't be on my conscience," I replied, coldly. "The verdict would
not be mine; and besides, I have only your word that you are innocent.
You have made the statement to me, and you could make it to others, who
would take it for what it is worth."

He clasped his hands passionately and leaned forward towards me with an
imploring gesture.

"Helen!" he exclaimed. "Don't be so hard, so cold! Have you no pity for
me? Think of my awful position--an innocent man, but yet with
appearances so horribly against me. And the whole issue is in your hands.
You were not present when--when it happened. You have only to say so and
to refrain from making any unnecessary additions to that statement, and
no miscarriage of justice can occur. I am not asking you to say anything
that is not true; I am only asking you to keep irrelevant and misleading
matter out of the inquiry. Do this, Helen, and I promise to execute a
deed surrendering all claims on you--at least for a time."

I made no immediate answer. Mr. Otway was perfectly right on one point. I
did not believe that he had killed my father. I think I only half
believed it, even, at the awful moment of the discovery; for the alarming
appearance that my father had presented as he strode up the garden path,
with his wild eyes and his strange, blotchy colour, had made me fear a
catastrophe; and when the catastrophe had almost immediately followed, it
was natural that my mind should refer it to a cause already considered
rather than to one totally unexpected. Moreover, Mr. Otway's account of
the tragedy was intrinsically probable; it fitted the facts that were
known to me; whereas the supposition that he had killed my father was
wildly improbable.

It is not to be supposed, however, that, in my present agitated state, I
reasoned the matter out consciously in this methodical fashion. But
unconsciously, and perhaps vaguely, my mind had worked along these lines
to a conclusion; and that conclusion was that Mr. Otway's account of what
had happened was substantially correct. Nevertheless, I was not prepared
to admit this at the moment; indeed, my whole desire was to be rid of the
man's irksome presence--to be alone with my grief.

"I can't give you an answer now, Mr. Otway," I said. "I am not in a
condition to discuss anything. I want to go home and be quiet."

He acquiesced with surprising readiness, no doubt encouraged by my tacit
abandonment of the accusation.

"Of course you do," he agreed. "It has been a fearful shock for you. Go
home and keep yourself quiet. I shall hear from Dr. Bury, in the course
of the day, what the coroner intends to do, and I will call and let you
know. And I will bring a draft of the deed for you to look at. The sooner
we arrive at a settlement, the better. And, Helen, let me beg you not to
say anything to anyone about--anything that might complicate matters.
You understand what I mean."

I nodded wearily and moved towards the door. I was still wearing my
outdoor clothes, so I had no preparations to make. Mr. Otway opened the
door for me and I passed out into the hall; but before leaving the house,
I turned back into the darkened drawing-room, and, raising the cover from
my father's face, kissed his already cold cheek.

"Good-bye, dearest! Good-bye!" I whispered, passionately; and then,
feeling the tears rushing to my eyes, I kissed him again, and, replacing
the cover, hurried from the room. Mr Otway was standing at the hall door
to let me out, and timidly offered his hand; but I walked quickly past
him, and, running down the steps, made my way out through the gate that
had admitted me to my ruin and my father to his death.

Chapter VIII--"Whom God Hath Joined--"

OUR states of mind in certain unforeseen circumstances are sometimes
surprising, even, to ourselves. As I walked away from Mr. Otway's house,
I think I was dimly surprised at my own self-possession. The worst had
happened. The calamity which I had feared, and which I had made such
sacrifices to avert, had befallen; and yet I was comparatively calm. My
heart ached, it is true, with a grief such as I had never known before;
with a sense of irreparable loss and a feeling of utter loneliness and
desolation; but yet, under it all was a certain indefinable peace.

Looking back with more natural knowledge and experience, this state of
mind is not difficult to understand. My father's sudden death was a
crushing calamity; but, in the very moment of its happening, the incubus
of my relation to Mr. Otway was lifted. For, though I was not at the time
conscious of the fact, I now see clearly that, even as I passed out of
the house of the man whom the law regarded as my husband, my mind was
made up that I had done with Mr. Otway.

Moreover, my new trouble was in other ways more easy to bear than the
misery of the last few days. My marriage had seemed, in a manner, to put
an end to my life. It had offered nothing but an unending vista of
wretchedness, an unending submission to a state of things that was
intolerable even to think of. But this new catastrophe was sudden and
final. The blow had fallen, once for all; shattering, indeed, my present,
but calling upon me instantly to make provision for the future. And in
action, the necessity of which forced itself upon me even before I
reached home, I found, if not relief from my sorrow, at least some
temporary distraction.

As I let myself in with my latch-key, our housemaid met me in the hall to
announce that lunch had been waiting for some time, and to ask me if I
knew at what time my father would come in.

"My father is dead, Jessie," I replied. "He died suddenly at Mr. Otway's
house about an hour ago. I can't tell you any more just now."

I walked past her and ascended the stairs to my room, leaving her
standing in the hall as if petrified; but, before I reached the landing,
I heard her rush away towards the kitchen, making the house resound with
her hysterical shrieks and lamentations. It was very dreadful and
distressing, but yet it had a steadying effect on me, reminding me of my
isolated position and of the need for firmness and self-control. In a few
minutes I came down, and disregarding Jessie's sobs and tears, sat out
the simple formalities of lunch as a matter of discipline and example,
and even compelled myself to take a certain amount of food.

As I sat at my silent and solitary meal, my thoughts were busy with the
many things that had to be done. Not willingly, indeed; for I longed to
be quiet and nurse my grief--to forget everything but my sorrow and my
great bereavement. But that was impossible. I was practically alone in
the world, for I had no near relatives, and all that had to be done must
be done, or at least directed, by me. There was my father's funeral to be
arranged, the business to be transferred or wound up, the property to be
realised--and there was Mr. Otway.

Naturally enough, my thoughts constantly came back to him. As to his
moral claim on me, it was null and void. Whether he had, as I suspected,
seen my father's letter and deliberately left it unopened, or whether he
had simply neglected to look for it, made no difference. It had been
delivered to him, and thereupon our agreement had ceased to exist. But if
he had no moral claim, he had, apparently, a legal hold on me which would
have to be considered. If he could be induced to surrender that, the
position would be greatly simplified. And he was ready to surrender it on
a certain condition.

To Mr. Otway's proposal my thoughts came back again and again. The
condition that he had made was not an unreasonable one, or, at least, it
did not appear so to me. My father had died when they were alone
together. They had admittedly been quarrelling; my father bore the mark
of a heavy blow; and Mr. Otway had been found standing over the body with
a loaded stick in his hand. The appearances suggested that he had killed
my father. And yet I was convinced that he had not. Profoundly loathing
him as the cause of all my misfortunes, I still felt that he was, in this
respect, an innocent man; and common justice demanded that he should not
be made to suffer for a crime that he had not committed.

Now what was my position in the affair? Practically I held the scales of
justice. The one absolutely damning fact was in my sole possession; and I
alone, in all probability, would appreciate the misleading appearances
which that fact created. That was my dilemma. I could make known the fact
itself to those who should judge him, but could I make them understand
how little it was worth? It seemed very doubtful. I had trembled for my
father's safety and had seen him come in at the gate, already in a
dangerous condition. They had not. They might easily fail to weigh his
state of health against that one, apparently, sinister fact of the loaded
stick. In short, it came to this: that if I mentioned what I had seen,
Mr. Otway ran a serious risk of being punished for a crime which he had
not committed, whereas if I refrained from mentioning it, justice would
take its proper course.

That, I think, is, in effect, how I argued. Neither the logician nor the
jurist will commend me. But women have their own ways of looking at
things, and one of those ways is somewhat to confuse conviction with
knowledge. A thing firmly believed is apt to present itself as a thing
known. I had come to the conclusion that Mr. Otway was innocent of my
father's death, and having done so, had unconsciously treated his
innocence as a fact that was within my knowledge.

After lunch, I telephoned to the office, asking Mr. Jackson, my father's
managing clerk, to come and see me; and while I was waiting for him, I
took down from the study shelves a treatise of the Law of Husband and
Wife, and turned over those of its unsavoury pages which dealt with suits
for nullity. Apparently Mr. Otway was right. So far as I could make out,
the circumstances of our marriage afforded no grounds for such a suit. I
was married irrevocably. My complete freedom was gone beyond recall; I
should have to be content with such incomplete freedom as is conferred by
a deed of separation.

I had just returned the book to the shelf when Mr. Jackson arrived and
entered the room looking very flurried and uncomfortable.

"What a dreadful thing this is, Miss Vardon!" he exclaimed. "Shocking!
Shocking! So unexpected! I need not say how much we all sympathize with
you."

"It is very kind of you," I said, offering him a chair.

"Not at all," he rejoined. "It is a terrible misfortune for all of us.
Would it distress you very much to tell me how it happened?"

"It was for that purpose that I sent for you, Mr. Jackson; to tell you
exactly what has happened and to ask your advice," and here I gave him a
brief account of the events of the morning.

At the mention of my marriage he looked profoundly surprised, but also, I
thought, distinctly relieved; but he did not make any comment until I had
finished the whole tragic story, when he remarked:

"I am very glad to hear that you are married, Miss Vardon--or rather, I
should say, Mrs. Otway--to a man of such very substantial means, if I am
rightly informed."

"Why are you glad?" I asked.

"Because," he replied, "it disposes of rather a difficulty. Your father
was a man of great abilities and an excellent lawyer, but he was somewhat
inattentive to the financial side of his profession. I am afraid you
would have been left rather badly provided for."

"I am sorry to hear that," said I, "because I am not proposing to live
with Mr. Otway. I have asked him to agree to a separation."

Mr Jackson raised his eyebrows. "May I ask why?" he enquired.

"I don't want to go into details just now," I answered, "but I may say
that the marriage was an affair of accommodation; I supposed my father to
be in a position of embarrassment, and I made the arrangement with Mr.
Otway without his knowledge. It turns out that I was mistaken. He was not
embarrassed. When the marriage took place, I was under a misapprehension
and I was misled by Mr. Otway. Accordingly, I have asked to have a
separation deed drawn up."

"Does he agree to the separation?"

"He has not yet, but I think he will; so I shall have to consider my
resources, after all."

"But," Mr Jackson objected, "he will have to make you an allowance."

"That," I said, "is impossible. If I repudiate the marriage, I could not,
of course, allow him to support me."

"Why not?" demanded Mr. Jackson. "He is legally bound to. You are his
wife. While the marriage stands, you can't marry anybody else. Besides,
he is not likely to raise any objection. He is a lawyer, you know."

"I am not thinking of him: I am thinking of myself. I wish to be under no
obligations to Mr. Otway, and I shall not accept any assistance from
him."

"I am sorry to hear you say that," Mr. Jackson said, gloomily; "because I
am afraid you will be rather badly off. The business is a very personal
one, and is worth practically nothing to sell. If I were a qualified
solicitor, I might be able to carry it on. But I'm not; and I doubt if
anyone would care to buy the good-will at any price. Still, I'll see what
can be done. As to your father's will, I happen to know that you are the
residuary legatee--practically the sole legatee--but what that amounts
to, I shouldn't like to say. Mighty little, I fear. However, it's of no
use to worry you with these matters now. If you will authorize me to look
into your father's affairs, I will let you know exactly how things stand;
and if I could be of service to you in any way, I hope you'll let me
know. There's the funeral, for instance--"

He paused suddenly, and ran an uncomfortable eye along the rows of law
books on the shelves.

"You are very kind, Mr. Jackson," I said, "and your help will be
invaluable. As my father's friend, I should like you to take charge of
the funeral arrangements, if you would be so good."

The rest of our conversation was concerned with the various things which
had to be done during the next day or two, and it left with a feeling of
the warmest gratitude to this quiet and rather dry man of business, whose
sympathy took such a practical and acceptable form.

It was past six o'clock when the red-eyed Jessie came to the study to
announce that Mr. Otway was waiting in the drawing-room; and there I
found him wandering restlessly round by the walls and making a show of
examining the pictures. He was still very pale and looked haggard and
weary, but yet he held out his hand to me with a certain confidence.

"I think, Helen," said he, "that you will be a little relieved at my
news. I have seen Dr. Bury, and he tells me that the coroner will be
satisfied with his evidence and Dr. Sharpe's."

"Do you mean that there is to be no inquest?" I demanded, with sudden
suspicion.

"No, no," he replied. "Of course, there will be an inquest. But the
coroner thinks that the circumstances do not call for a post-mortem. I
thought you would be glad to know that. The--er--body will remain where
it is until the jury have viewed it, and then it can be brought here for
the--ah--the funeral."

I nodded but made no comment on this statement, and he continued after a
brief pause:

"I suppose, Helen, you would like me to act for you in regard to the
funeral arrangements."

"Thank you, Mr. Otway," I replied, "but Mr. Jackson has very kindly
undertaken that for me."

He looked somewhat crestfallen at this, and said, deprecatingly:

"I am sorry you did not leave the arrangements to me. It would have
looked better." Which it undeniably would--from his point of view.

As I made no rejoinder, there followed a slightly uncomfortable pause,
during which he was evidently bracing himself up for what was the real
object of his visit. At length he began nervously:

"Have you been able to give any more consideration to my proposal,
Helen?"

"Yes," I answered; "I have thought about it a good deal. Perhaps we had
better go into the study, which is more out of the way of the servants
than this."

We crossed the hall, and, when we had entered the study and closed the
door, I resumed:

"I may as well say, Mr. Otway, that I am prepared to accept your
statement. On reflection, I believe that your account of what happened is
true."

"Thank God for that!" he ejaculated. "I felt sure you believed me, Helen;
but it is an unspeakable relief to hear you say so. And I am sure you
will agree with me that the--the apparently incriminating circumstance
need not be mentioned."

"I might even agree to that," I replied; "but there must be a clear
understanding. I am not going to say anything that is not strictly true."

"Oh, certainly not!" he agreed. "All that I ask is that you refrain from
volunteering a perfectly unnecessary and misleading statement. Will you
promise to do that?"

"I am not sure that I have any right to make such a promise, Mr. Otway;
but still, on the conditions that you mentioned, I am prepared to do so."

His relief was really pathetic. Its intensity made me understand what
torments of terror he had been suffering. He flung out his hands as if he
would have embraced me, but drew back, as I said, coldly:

"You are prepared on your side, Mr. Otway, to carry out your part? You
agree to execute a deed of separation, as I asked?

"If you insist," he replied. "It's a hard bargain, but if you hold me to
it, I have no choice. Would not a short, informal separation do?"

"No, Mr. Otway," I replied firmly, "it would not. I am acting somewhat
against my conscience in agreeing to suppress this fact, and I want full
compensation for doing so. I must have a legally valid deed of
separation."

"Very well, Helen," said he; "if it must be, it must. I hope that, later,
you will take a kinder view of our relations, but meanwhile I will do
exactly as you wish. I have drafted out a deed, in a simple form, with as
little legal verbiage as possible. If its terms satisfy you, I will copy
it out and sign it."

He handed me a sheet of paper on which the deed was drafted, and I read
it through carefully. Like the other documents that he had drawn up, it
was lucid, simple and concise, and set forth quite fairly the conditions
to which he had agreed, with one exception. It determined automatically
at the end of three months.

"I can't agree to that," I said. "There must be no specified time; it is
to be just a separation."

"But," he exclaimed, "you don't propose that the separation should last
for ever, do you?"

That was precisely what I did propose, but I thought it politic not to
express myself too definitely.

"It is impossible," I replied, "to say what may happen in the future; but
if you make the separation determinable by mutual consent, that will
provide for all eventualities."

He agreed, with a somewhat wry smile, that this was so, and then asked
how soon I should like to have the deed executed.

"As it must be signed before I give my evidence," I replied, "it had
better be done now. If you will make two copies, I will go and fetch the
maids to witness the signatures."

"Dear me, Helen!" he exclaimed. "What an extra ordinarily business-like
young lady you are! But I suppose you are right; only I would suggest
that you do not acquaint the witnesses with the nature of the document.
We don't want to take the world into our confidence, especially just
now."

This was reasonable enough, though it would obviously be impossible to
keep the world in the dark as to our position, particularly after what I
had said to Mr. Jackson. However, I agreed to maintain a discreet
reticence, and when he had made the two copies--which I carefully read
through--I went out and called Jessie and the cook.

"I want you," said I, "to witness my signature and Mr. Otway's to a
couple of documents. You have just to see us sign our names and then sign
your own underneath."

The two women came into the study with an air of mystery and awe, gazing
furtively from me to Mr. Otway. The two documents lay on the table, each
with a sheet of blotting paper spread over it, exposing only the blank
spaces which were to receive the signatures, on each of which a red wafer
seal had been stuck. Mr. Otway signed first, and then, indicating to the
cook the place where she was to write her name, placed the pen in her
hand.

"That's right," said he, when she had painfully and with protruded
tongue, executed the signature of 'Ivy Stokes.' "Now you will do the same
with the other paper as soon as Mrs. Otway has signed."

The cook gazed curiously at me as I signed the second document, and then,
in the same strained and laborious fashion, traced the scrawling
characters over the name that I had lightly pencilled in for her
guidance. Having watched with feverish interest while I marked the next
space, she drew back and made way for Jessie, who, by watching her
colleague, had learned what was required of her.

When the formalities were completed and the two maids dismissed--to
discuss these strange proceedings, doubtless, in the kitchen--Mr. Otway
handed me the copy, bearing his signature, and, taking the other, rose to
depart.

"Before I go, Helen," he said, "there is one matter to settle. In the
document I thought it best to say nothing about an allowance--"

"You were quite right," I interrupted. "Of course, I should not ask for,
or accept, any allowance under the circumstances."

"You won't need one at present," said he. "We know there are five
thousand pounds lying to your father's credit at his bank--"

"That money was not his," I said, "and it is not mine. As soon as the
will is proved it will be paid to you on behalf of your clients."

"But that is quite unnecessary, Helen," said he. "The use, for an
unspecified time, of that sum of money was the consideration in respect
of which you agreed to marry me. As the marriage has taken place, it is
only fair and reasonable that you should receive the consideration. In
effect, that five thousand is yours by the terms of our agreement."

I was on the point of replying that our agreement was null and void, and
that I had no intention of carrying out its conditions; but prudence
whispered that I had better keep my intentions to myself, at least as to
my ultimate conduct. Besides which, Mr. Otway's statement was not
entirely correct, as I proceeded to point out.

"The use of this money," I said, "was to relieve my father, who was
assumed to be insolvent. But it appears that he was not insolvent; and it
is my intention that all his debts shall be paid, in so far as there are
funds to meet them. It is certainly what he would have wished."

"But," Mr. Otway protested, "supposing the payment of these debts should
consume all the available assets? How are you going to live?"

"I suppose I shall do as other women do when they have no independent
means. I shall work for my living. But it is premature to discuss that
until I have had Mr. Jackson's report. I don't suppose I shall be
absolutely penniless."

He shook his head gloomily. "You are Quixotic, Helen, and wrong-headed,
too. There is no reason why you should work for your living. As a married
woman, you are entitled to maintenance, and I am willing, and even
anxious, to maintain you. But I won't press the matter now. If you want
money, you know that you can have it, not as a favour but as a right, And
now there is just one other matter that I want to speak about. In the
deed of separation I said nothing about our relations other than was
actually necessary. I made no stipulation as to your keeping me informed
of your whereabouts; but I ask you now, if you should be leaving
Maidstone, to let me have your address and to allow me to keep up
communication with you. It is a reasonable request, Helen, and I am sure
you will not hesitate to accede to it."

I did hesitate, however, for some time. In truth, I was not at all
willing to agree to this proposal. My wish was to sponge Mr. Otway, once
and for all, out of my life and to make a fresh start. Still, the request
was a reasonable one, and could, I suspected, have been enforced as a
demand; and, in the end, though very reluctantly, I yielded.

"Thank you, Helen," said he, holding out his hand; "then I won't worry
you any more just now. It is understood that I am not to lose sight of
you, and that if you should want help, pecuniary or other, you will let
me know. And I may rely on you to say no more at the inquest than is
actually necessary?"

I gave him the required assurance on this point, and, having somewhat
frigidly shaken his hand, accompanied him to the hall door and let him
out.

As I stood in the open doorway, watching him walk away up the street in
his heavy, elephantine fashion, a man entered at the gate, and,
approaching with a deferential and rather uncomfortable air, took off his
hat and offered me a small, blue envelope, which bore the superscription
"Mrs. Lewis Otway." I took it from him, and, closing the door, went back
to the study, where I opened the envelope and extracted the little slip
of blue paper that it enclosed; which turned out, as I had expected, to
be the subpoena to the Inquest. I glanced through the peremptory phrases
of the summons, and, laying the slip of paper on the table, went up to my
own room to be quiet and think upon all that lay before me.

But thought--orderly, useful thought--was impossible. Everything around
me spoke of the life that had been so tragically broken off, rather than
of the future that loomed so vague and empty before me. The open book on
the reading-stand, the hastily scribbled notes upon the writing-block,
the unanswered letters and a little pile of rough drawings on the table,
all seemed to call to me to take up afresh the thread that had been
dropped; seemed to interpose the unfinished past before the uncommenced
future. Restlessly I wandered down to the workshop--where the coal
scuttle still stood on the bench, a mute but eloquent memorial of that
tragic final evening--only to gather a fresh sense of loss and
desolation. And so, for the rest of the day, I haunted the house like
some unquiet spirit, watched with pity, not unmixed with fear, by the
awe-stricken servants, tearless and outwardly calm, but inwardly torn by
grief and a sense of bereavement that seemed to intensify moment by
moment.

And yet, when, in the silence of the night, the tears came at last, and
my sorrow, no longer mute, voiced itself in sobs and moans of pain,
still, under the feeling of utter bereavement and desolation, was a
half-felt sense of peace, of respite, and reprieve.

Chapter IX--Testimony and Counsel

THOSE who are apt to refer in contemptuous terms to the artificiality of
the plots of the novelist must have failed to observe the orderly way in
which events arrange themselves in real life; how the circumstances of
the vital and essential happenings of our lives may, if attentively
considered, be separated out in a coherent group of causes and effects as
closely knit and inevitably connected as the parts of the story-teller's
plot.

The reflection is suggested to me by the distressing experiences of the
inquest on my father's death. Clearly enough, indeed, did I realise at
the time that this would never have been but for those fateful words so
calamitously overheard by me, and for my ill-considered, though
well-meant, efforts to avert the apparently impending catastrophe. But I
realised not at all--as, indeed, how should I?--that this day of
sorrow, of shame and humiliation, was not only the harvest of the
irrevocable past but the seed-time of an even more momentous future.

As I approached the school-house in which the inquest was to be held, I
observed Mr. Otway pacing slowly up and down the little court-yard. He
was pale and haggard, and though he preserved his usual ponderously
reposeful manner, it was not difficult to see that he was in a state of
intense, nervous excitement and suppressed anxiety.

He was evidently waiting for me, and turned to meet me as I entered the
gate.

"I thought we had better go in together, Helen," he said, as we exchanged
a formal greeting. "They know that we are married, and, of course, they
don't know that our--ah--our arrangements are in--ah--in suspense.
And it would perhaps be as well if no reference were made to--ah--to
those--ahem--temporary modifications which--ah--in short, to our
provisional agreement."

He looked at me deprecatingly and I nodded. There would be quite enough
painful detail to be dragged into the light of day without this sordid
addition. Besides, any reference to the deed of separation would start
enquiries which neither of us desired, as was plainly evident to Mr.
Otway; for he continued in a husky undertone, as we approached the
schoolroom door:

"And you will fulfil your part of our covenant faithfully, Helen, I am
sure."

"Most undoubtedly I shall," I replied. "But you will remember that our
covenant does not include false evidence. I shall say as little as is
possible, but if I am asked a direct question I must answer it, and
answer it truthfully."

"Of course you must," he agreed: "but it is often possible to ward off an
inconvenient, question which may lead to others still more inconvenient."

"You make take it," I said, "that I shall carry out my part of our
bargain in the spirit as well as in the letter."

With this assurance he appeared to be satisfied, and we now moved slowly
towards the door of the school-house. While we had been talking, a party
of men--the coroner and his jury--had filed past us and entered; and
when we followed a minute later, we found them already in their places
and the proceedings about to begin. We seated ourselves on the two chairs
placed for us, which were next to those of the two medical witnesses, and
as I glanced round the Court, I observed Mr. Jackson sitting near the
coroner, and by his side a gentleman whose face I seemed to recognise,
but to whom I could not give a name. Some dim recollection connected the
quiet, strong, intellectual face with my father and the happy past, but
not until near the close of the inquiry was I able to bring my memory to
a clear focus.

The attitude of the coroner and jury alike--they were all local men and
most of them known to me--made my difficult task as easy as was
possible. They were all anxious to spare me to the utmost and to make the
best of what the coroner described as "a grievous and terrible calamity."
Moreover, they restrained in the most delicate manner their evident
curiosity as to the relations of Mr. Otway and myself. But, of course,
the facts had to be given, and very distressing and humiliating it was to
me to have to confess to what must have looked like a mere sordid
intrigue with the uncouth creature at my side.

As the only person present when the death occurred, Mr. Otway was
necessarily the first witness; and a very nervous, hesitating witness he
was; and very fortunate was it for him that he had so sympathetic a
court. As he stammered out his evidence I noted, again and again, the
searching, grey eye of the strange gentleman fixed upon him, not indeed
with any obvious distrust, but with the most concentrated attention.

"Do we understand," asked the coroner, "that Mr. Vardon was angry and
excited when he arrived at your house?

"Yes--furiously angry."

"Do you know why he was angry and excited?"

Yes, the witness did know. And as he proceeded to relate, in husky,
uncertain tones, the circumstances of the secret marriage, more than one
of the jurymen glanced from him to me with hardly-concealed astonishment;
and I felt my face burning and my eyes filling with humiliation.

"Was there any reason for this secrecy?" the coroner asked.

"Yes. The deceased had already refused his consent to the marriage."

"But that is hardly a reason for secrecy in the case of an adult. Could
he have prevented the marriage from taking place?"

"No. But it seemed better to--ah--to avoid discussion and
unpleasantness."

The coroner looked dissatisfied. He considered a few moments, and then
asked: "Do you know why the deceased objected to the marriage?

"I think he considered that the--ah--the inequality of age was
undesirable," Mr. Otway replied.

Still the coroner looked dissatisfied, and as he paused to reflect, and
the jurymen looked at him expectantly, Mr. Otway furtively wiped his
forehead with his handkerchief. Evidently, he was profoundly disturbed,
as well he might be; for if this line of inquiry were pursued much
farther, it must inevitably lay bare the real nature of the transaction.

At length the coroner turned to the jury. "Well, gentlemen," said he, "I
suppose the question is not very material. It is clear that the deceased
was extremely excited and angry. The ultimate cause of his anger is,
perhaps, not very relevant to the subject of our inquiry."

To this the foreman of the jury readily agreed, and I could almost see
the sigh of relief with which Mr. Otway hailed the passing of this
perilous incident--a relief in which I participated to no small extent.

The narrative was now resumed, and as it proceeded, Mr. Otway's voice
became more and more husky and his speech more hesitating. He had a
difficult course to steer, and his nerves were at their utmost tension.
He had to tell a consistent story without telling the whole truth, and he
had to bear in mind that my evidence was yet to be given. It was a
position that might have shattered the nerve of a much bolder man than
Mr. Otway.

"You tell us that the deceased was violent and threatening in his manner.
Do you mean that he was physically violent?

"Yes--at least he threatened to use physical violence."

"He did not actually assault you?"

"Not actually. The blow that he aimed--at least that he was about to aim
--ah--did not--er--did not take effect."

The coroner's brows puckered into a puzzled frown. "This is not quite
clear," said he. "Did he or did he not aim a blow at you?"

"He did--at least, that is to say, he appeared--" here Mr. Otway mopped
his streaming forehead--"well, I think he actually raised his--ah--his
--ah--his clenched fist."

"Did you have to restrain him?"

"No," replied Mr. Otway, with rather unnecessary emphasis. "No, I did
not. I stepped back, and--ah--the incident--ah--passed. In fact, it
was at this moment that the fatal attack occurred."

"Tell us exactly what happened then."

"He suddenly turned very pale," said Mr. Otway, speaking now with more
fluency as he got back to the narration of the actual events, "and seemed
to stand unsteadily. Then he staggered backwards and fell, striking his
head on the corner of the mantelpiece."

"Did he appear to have fainted before he struck his head?

"I should say, yes, but--ah--I would not--ah--I was very agitated and
alarmed--and--ah----"

"Naturally. But you would say that the fainting attack preceded the blow
on the head?"

"There was no blow," Mr. Otway exclaimed quickly; and then, perceiving
his mistake, he added, hastily, "that is to say, you are referring to his
striking the corner of the mantelpiece?"

"That is what you were telling us about."

"Yes. I should say that he struck--or rather that he fainted and
staggered and that he struck his head in falling."

Once more the coroner paused and seemed to reflect; and in the intense
silence and stillness that enveloped the court my eye travelled from the
huge, ungainly figure of the witness to the face of the tall stranger by
Mr. Jackson's side. And a very striking face it was: a handsome,
symmetrical face, but strangely--almost unhumanly--reposeful and
impassive. Yet, though it was as immobile as a mask of stone, it conveyed
an impression of intense attention--almost of watchfulness; and the
clear, grey eyes never moved from the face of the witness. To me there
was something a little uncanny and disturbing in that immovable mask and
that steady, unrelaxing gaze. I found myself hoping that those searching
grey eyes would not be fixed on me in that relentless observation when my
turn came to give my evidence. And even as this thought flitted through
my mind, I remembered who this stranger was. He was a Dr. Thorndyke, an
old, though not very intimate, friend of my father's, a famous criminal
lawyer and a great authority on medical jurisprudence. I had met him only
once, when he had dined, many years ago, at our house; but I had often
heard my father speak of him in terms of the highest admiration.

When the coroner resumed his interrogation, it seemed that the crisis was
past, so far as Mr. Otway was concerned, for his first question was:
"What did you do when the deceased fell down?

"For a moment or two," was the reply, "I was too bewildered to do
anything. Then his daughter--my wife--came into the room, and, as he
appeared to be dying or dead, I went off to fetch a doctor."

This virtually concluded his evidence, and the next name called was my
own, which, in its new form--Helen Otway--I heard with a start of
surprise and something like disgust. As I rose to approach the table, I
caught an instantaneous glance--a terrified, imploring glance--from Mr.
Otway; and as my eye lighted immediately afterwards on Dr. Thorndyke's
face, I felt that this momentary look, too, had been noted by that
inexorably attentive grey eye. But I was relieved to observe that he did
not look at me, but, as I gave my evidence, fixed a steady, introspective
gaze upon a spot upon the opposite wall.

My task turned out to be easier than I had hoped, though perhaps it might
have been less easy if I had had more time to reflect on the significance
of the questions. The coroner began by expressing the sympathy of the
court with my bereavement and apologizing for imposing on me the painful
duty of attending the inquiry. Then he asked: "You have heard the
evidence of Mr. Otway with reference to your marriage and your father's
attitude in regard to it. Do you confirm what he has said?

"I do," I replied.

"You were not present at the interview of Mr. Otway with the deceased?"

"No, I was not. When I entered the room my father was lying on the floor
and appeared to be already dead."

"Had you seen your father since the solemnization of the marriage?"

"I saw him from the window as he entered Mr. Otway's garden."

"Did you notice anything unusual in his appearance?"

"Yes; his appearance alarmed me very much. He seemed excessively excited,
and his face was deeply flushed and of a strange, purplish colour."

"Had you any special reason to be alarmed?"

"Yes. I knew that his doctor had warned him to avoid all excitement and
exertion on account of the weak state of his heart."

"You did not hear what passed between your father and Mr. Otway?"

"I heard my father ask where I was, and I heard Mr. Otway tell him that
the marriage had taken place."

"Did you hear anything more?"

"My father then called Mr. Otway a scoundrel, and was still speaking
loudly and angrily when the study door closed and I heard no more."

"What made you go to the study?"

"I heard and felt the shock when my father fell."

"Would you mind telling us again in what condition you found your
father?"

"He appeared to be dead. His face was at first a livid grey, but it faded
to marble whiteness as I looked at him. There was a small wound on the
right side of his forehead and a drop of blood had run down on to his
cheek and on his temple."

The coroner glanced at the jurymen. "I think, gentlemen," he said, "that
is all we need ask Mrs. Otway?"

And when the foreman had acquiesced, and he had thanked me for "the very
clear and lucid manner" in which I had given my evidence, I was permitted
to resume my seat.

"I can never thank you enough, Helen," whispered Mr. Otway, as I sat
down. "You managed admirably--admirably."

To this I made no reply; for now that the ordeal was over I began to be
assailed by certain doubts as to whether I had been quite candid. I had
told all that was really material to the inquiry; but--however, at this
point Dr. Sharpe approached the table and picked up the Testament.

His evidence practically settled the verdict. He testified that my father
had suffered for some years from a dilated heart and arterial
degeneration. "I warned him frequently to avoid excitement and undue
exertion, for he was inclined to be careless and take liberties with
himself."

"You considered his state of health precarious?"

"I thought he might fall down dead at any moment."

"You have heard the evidence of the two previous witnesses. Does that
evidence contain any suggestion to you as to the cause of death?"

"It suggests to me that the deceased hurried to Mr. Otway's house in a
towering rage, and that, during the interview, he worked himself up into
a fury. I should say that the combined exertion and excitement brought on
a fatal attack of syncope."

"You think that death was caused by heart failure?"

"I have no doubt of it."

Dr. Bury's evidence was much to the same effect, though less positive.

"The deceased had apparently been dead about half an hour when I arrived.
The cause of death was not obvious, but the appearances were consistent
with the account given by Mr. Otway. There was a small, contused wound at
the junction of the forehead and right temple, apparently caused by the
violent impact of some hard and blunt body. Judging by the small amount
of bleeding, the wound had been sustained immediately before death. A
single drop of blood had trickled down on to the cheek, and one or two
drops on to the temple."

"You have heard Mr. Otway's account of the way in which that wound was
occasioned. Do you consider that the appearances are in agreement with
that account?"

"There is no disagreement. The appearance of the wound was consistent
with its production in the manner described."

"Would you say that it was probably so produced?"

"That," replied Dr. Bury, "is a question for the jury. It might have
been. I can't go beyond the appearances."

"No, of course you can't. And is that all that you have to tell us?"

"That is all," was the reply; and this virtually brought the inquiry to
an end. After a brief summing-up by the coroner, the jury held an equally
brief consultation and then unanimously returned a verdict of "Death from
natural causes."

On the announcement of the verdict everyone rose, including myself and
Mr. Otway, and the latter, turning to me, said in a low voice:

"I think I won't wait. I want to get home and be quiet; but I shall call
on you to-morrow, if I may, to make--ah--any--ah--arrangements that--ah--in
fact, to speak to you about the--ah--the funeral."

"Very well," I said, reluctantly--for, deeply as I loathed him, I could
not exclude him even from that sacred ceremony without creating an open
scandal. "You had better come early in the forenoon." and with this I
dismissed him with a stiff bow, and made my way to where Mr. Jackson and
Dr. Thorndyke were standing. As I held out my hand to the latter and
recalled to him our meeting years ago, Mr. Jackson said: "Dr. Thorndyke
happened to be in Maidstone to-day and to call at our office, so I
prevailed on him to come here and watch the proceedings on our behalf in
case any complications should arise. But everything has gone off quite
smoothly."

"Very smoothly indeed," Dr. Thorndyke agreed, with, as it seemed to me, a
certain degree of emphasis.

"Both the coroner and the jury were most considerate," pursued Mr.
Jackson.

"Most considerate," assented Dr. Thorndyke; and again I seemed to detect
a note of emphasis, as also, I think, did Mr. Jackson, for he glanced
quickly at our companion, though he made no remark.

"I wonder," said I, "if you two gentlemen would care to come and take a
cup of tea with me?"

Mr. Jackson had an engagement at the office, and as Dr. Thorndyke
appeared to hesitate, I added quickly: "I should be very glad if you
could, though I don't wish to take up your time if you are busy."

"My time is my own for the next three hours," said Dr. Thorndyke, "and if
I should really not be an inopportune visitor, I should like very much to
have tea with you."

"Let us go, then," said I. "Mr. Jackson will accompany us as far as
Gabriel's Hill, won't you?" And as my old friend assented with a prim,
little bow, we set forth.

"I have offered no condolences, Mrs. Otway," said Dr. Thorndyke. "I knew
your father, I saw you and him together, and I realize what this loss
must mean to you. There is nothing to say except that you have my most
real sympathy."

"Thank you," I said, and for a time we walked on in silence. And as we
walked I found myself recalling, with a strong, speculative interest,
that curious, subtle emphasis which Dr. Thorndyke had conveyed into his
agreement with Mr. Jackson. At length, when we had dropped the latter
near the Town Hall, I summoned up courage to raise the question.

"I have an impression, Dr. Thorndyke, which may be quite a mistaken one,
that you were not completely satisfied with the way in which the inquest
was conducted. Am I mistaken?"

"Well," he replied, slowly, "the coroner's methods were not what one
would call rigorous."

"I suppose they were not. But in what respect are you disposed to find
fault with them?"

"Principally," he replied, "in his failure to elicit a really conclusive
verdict. The verdict of the jury was based upon Dr. Sharpe's opinion as
to the cause of death. That opinion was probably correct, but it was
based upon reasoning which was not sound. His position was this: If
certain circumstances--excitement or exertion--should arise, there
would be a great probability of their causing sudden death. But those
circumstances had actually arisen and sudden death had actually followed.
Therefore the death was due to the factors of the said circumstances. But
this conclusion is fallacious. It does not prove a fact: it merely
indicates a probability."

"But are not all verdicts statements of probability?"

"Too often they are. But it is a coroner's business to bring the
conclusions of his court, as far as possible, into the region of
ascertained fact. The immediate cause of death can usually be
demonstrated by scientific methods, and the inquiry can then be built up
on a foundation of certainty. Opinion should never be accepted where
knowledge is obtainable."

"Do you think, then, that the verdict was not a proper one?"

"I am not criticizing the verdict," he replied, "but the methods by which
it was arrived at. I think that the cause of death should have been
established beyond all doubt before any contributory circumstances were
inquired into."

"But otherwise; apart from that one point?"

"I thought the examination of the witnesses rather easy going. No doubt
it elicited all the relevant facts. But that is impossible to decide on.
One cannot judge of the relevancy of a fact until one has got the fact. I
think, for instance, that most counsel would have pressed your husband a
good deal more closely. The coroner appeared to decide that the matter
was not relevant without being quite clear as to what matter he was
dealing with."

This, I must confess, had been my own impression, but I had been so
relieved at the manner in which the difficult passages had been allowed
to pass that I had been little disposed to criticise the considerate and
sympathetic coroner. Nor did it seem quite safe to pursue the present
discussion much farther, for it was tending in a rather dangerous
direction. My own reservations began to weigh on me somewhat--and Dr.
Thorndyke was not quite the same type of listener as the coroner.
Nevertheless, the conversation pleased me, though I could not but be
struck by the oddity of this detached discussion of a matter which was of
such vital moment to me. But that very oddity was itself an element of
gratification; for a woman is naturally flattered when an intellectual
man appears to credit her with the power of impartial judgment of her own
conduct and affairs--that faculty not being one by which our sex is
peculiarly distinguished.

But at this point, our discussion was brought naturally to an end by our
arrival at my house--as I must now call it; and here a quick glance of
surprised recognition on my companion's part gave me a new note of
warning and prepared me for the inevitable question.

"You are living at your father's house, I see."

"I am, for the present. Mr. Otway remains in his own house."

"Yes. I suppose it will be more convenient to settle everything up here
before joining your husband."

I was on the point of temporising by a vague assent; but my lips refused
to frame the implied falsehood. It may have been my natural dislike of
secrecy and concealment, it may be that my womanly pride resented the
very idea of association with that unwieldy human spider. At any rate, an
irresistible impulse drove me to say:

"I am not going to join my husband at all, Dr. Thorndyke. I am not going
to live with Mr. Otway."

I did not look at Dr. Thorndyke as I made this statement, and he made no
comment beyond a matter-of-fact "Indeed." But I had the feeling that, in
the silence that followed, he was fitting this new fact into its place in
some ordered scheme; that he was docketting it as an appendix to Mr.
Otway's evidence.

Nothing more was said until we had entered the house and I had given
instructions for tea to be brought to the study. But in that interval I
was aware of a growing impulse to have done with this miserable secrecy--this
sordid fencing and dodging, which must come, in the end, to
downright lying--and tell this strong, wise man the whole wretched
story. Besides, I wanted counsel and guidance: and who was so fit to give
them as he?

Accordingly, when the tray had been laid on the study table, I re-opened
the subject.

"I did not mention this matter in my evidence," I said. "It had no
bearing on the inquiry."

"I am not clear," he replied, "that you were entitled to make any
reservations. A witness's duty is to state the whole truth. The question
of relevancy is for the court to consider."

"But unfortunately there were other reservations that had to be made. Dr.
Thorndyke, I want to tell you the whole story--in confidence--and to
ask your advice."

"I counsel you to make no confidences," he said, gravely, "unless you
really wish to consult me in my professional capacity."

"That is what I wish to do," I said.

"Very well," said he. "That places us in the secure relation of lawyer
and client; and I need not say that your father's daughter is very
welcome to any help or advice that I can give."

With this encouragement, I poured forth the story that I have told in
these pages and in almost as much detail. But still I held back one fact.
I said nothing of my having found Mr. Otway grasping my father's loaded
stick. That single reservation had to be. Not only was I bound by a
solemn promise; my silence on that point was the price of my release. The
letter of the covenant, indeed, had reference only to my evidence at the
inquest; but its spirit sealed my lips even in this my most intimate
confidence.

And so, once again, a secret guarded from a friendly eye remained, like a
seed dropped in a summer's drought, to germinate and bring forth its
fruit in its season.

Chapter X--The Turning of the Page

DR. THORNDYKE listened to my recital of the history of the tragedy, not
only with patience, but with close attention and apparently keen
interest, interrupting me only at rare intervals to ask a question or
elucidate some point that was not quite clear. When I had come to an end
I was disposed to be apologetic, for I had told the story in the fullest
detail, with only the single reservation that I have noted.

"I am afraid," I said, "that I have been rather victimizing you and
trespassing on your very great patience."

"By no means," he replied. "Men and men's actions and motives are my
merchandise. If I could listen to a story like yours without the deepest
interest I should not be in my present profession. But, now that I have
heard it, I think I can guess the subject on which you wish to consult
me. You would like to annul your marriage with Mr. Otway."

"Yes; if it is possible."

"It is very natural that you should wish to recover your freedom. I
sympathize with you entirely, and I wish I could give you some
encouragement. But I fear that you have no remedy."

"It seems rather hard," I said, "that I should be bound for life to this
man whom I detest and who has done me such grievous injuries."

"It is very hard," he agreed, "and, humanly speaking, there ought to be
some remedy. But the law provides none; nor is it really possible for the
law to make provision for every imaginable contingency. Yours is a very
exceptional case."

"Yes, I see that; but it seems unreasonable to compel two people to
maintain a relationship which is not only unsuitable but quite unreal."

"It does," he admitted. "But the law takes a very unsentimental view of
these matters. It regards marriage as an institution concerned with the
establishment of families and the orderly devolution of property, and its
interference is, in the main, limited to circumstances connected with
that assumed function. Of the human aspects of marriage it takes little
account. In a purely legal sense--which is what we are considering--your
position is this: You were competent to contract a marriage and you
did contract one, of your own free will, without any compulsion or
misrepresentation that the law would recognise. The circumstances that
appeared to exist before the marriage still appear to exist. No new facts
have come to light which would affect the competence of either party. It
is a case in which one of the parties has disregarded the old legal
maxim, Caveat emptor--buyer beware! You bought, at a high price,
something which turns out to be of no value. You agreed to marry Mr.
Otway for a consideration--the release of your father from his
embarrassments--which seemed to be valuable enough to justify the great
sacrifice that you contemplated. But it turned out that your father
needed no release; and the consideration thereupon ceased to have any
value. As far as the law is concerned, you have simply made a very bad
bargain."

"Does the law attach no importance to fraud?" I demanded.

"But has there been fraud?" he objected. "No representations, true or
false, were made to you by Mr. Otway. You acted on knowledge which you
assumed that you possessed. You laid down the conditions; he accepted
them. You demanded a certain consideration; he furnished the
consideration demanded. Even with regard to the letter from your father,
we may--and do--suspect that he knew that it was in the box, and
probably guessed at its contents. But we have no proof. Moreover, if he
did know that it was there--even if he had opened it and read it, he was
under no obligation to communicate its contents to you. Your agreement
made no such provision. It laid down specific conditions, and with these
Mr. Otway had fully complied. On the plea of fraud, I am afraid you would
have no case."

"Apparently not," I agreed. "You are most horribly convincing, Dr.
Thorndyke."

"I am putting the case as a lawyer, and very much against my own feeling
as a man. But my present office is rather like that of a Devil's Advocate
in a theological council. I think that this marriage ought to be
annulled, but I am sure that, in point of law, it is not voidable.

"But there is yet another aspect of the case, and you must forgive me if
I put it rather bluntly. There are not many women to whom I should have
spoken in as downright a fashion as I have to you, and I shall continue
to pay you this rather unpleasant compliment. Mrs. Otway, even if,
legally speaking, you had a case, you could not take it into court."

"Why not?" I asked, more than a little startled.

"Because of the incidents of the inquest. You have spoken of certain
reservations in your evidence. But in the case of Mr. Otway there was
more than reservation. There was deliberate mis-statement, and that, too,
in respect of a question that was highly material to the inquiry. He was
asked the reason of your father's resentment of this marriage, and he
stated it to be the disparity of age. But that was not the reason, and he
knew it was not. Your father would have raised no obstacle if you had
really wished to marry Mr. Otway. He resented the marriage because it had
been brought about by means which he regarded as--morally speaking--fraudulent.
Mr. Otway's evidence was false evidence, and it was
deliberately given with the intention of misleading the jury."

"But it was a small point and of no importance. Besides, Mr. Otway's
evidence is no concern of mine."

"Pardon me," Dr. Thorndyke objected, gravely, "the point was of very
great importance. It would have started a train of entirely new issues.
And Mr. Otway's evidence is very much your concern. You heard it given,
you were asked if you confirmed it, and you did confirm it. There upon,
Mr. Otway's evidence became your evidence.

"Now, if you were to embark on a suit for the annulment of your marriage,
the plea of fraud, on which you would base your claim, would have to be
supported by evidence which would conflict with that given by you at the
inquest. Your position would be a very uncomfortable one, and it would be
made more so by the fact that your evidence was in agreement with Mr.
Otway's. When two witnesses agree in a departure from the actual facts
known to them, a suspicion of collusion is apt to be raised; and
collusion again suggests purpose and motive. I am afraid, Mrs. Otway,
that the Devil's Advocate is making out a diabolically complete case. But
that, you know, is his business. The conclusion is that a malignant fate
has woven around you a mesh of circumstances from which there is no
escape, and that the less you struggle the less irksome will be your
bonds."

To this conclusion, unsatisfactory as it was, I assented with a readiness
born not only of conviction but of a certain amount of alarm. I had heard
my father speak with admiration of Dr. Thorndyke's amazing power of
analysing evidence and extracting its essentials, and I now began to
wonder how much of the actual truth he had extracted from the evidence at
the inquest, elucidated by my narrative. His warning as to a possible
suspicion of collusion with "a purpose and a motive" in the back ground,
set me speculating as to whether he, himself, entertained such a
suspicion; and his next question was by no means reassuring on this
point.

"You spoke," said he, "of having decided not to live with Mr. Otway, and
of having communicated your intention to him. Do I understand that he
assents to a separation?"

"Yes. He sees that the position would be quite impossible."

"Is your arrangement with him merely a verbal one or has it been placed
on a regular footing by a document of some kind?"

"Mr. Otway has executed a deed of separation, which I think is quite
regular. But I had better let you see it."

With some trepidation, I produced the deed and nervously watched him as
he read it through, which he did with an inscrutable expression, and--as
it seemed to me--a horrible appearance of seeing through it to the
rather questionable circumstances that had brought it into existence.

"Yes," he said, as he handed it back to me; "it is quite regular. You may
congratulate yourself on finding Mr. Otway so compliant. It is more than
one would have expected of him."

"He could hardly have done otherwise," I answered hastily. "We couldn't
possibly have lived together after what had happened. Still, I am glad he
took the reasonable view. It leaves me free to make my own arrangements
for my future."

"And what arrangements do you propose--if your legal adviser is not too
inquisitive."

"Not at all. I was going to ask you to advise me. I don't think there
will be enough to support me, and, of course, I can't accept any help
from Mr. Otway. I shall have to earn my living in some way."

"You could compel Mr. Otway to support you, but I appreciate your
unwillingness to accept an allowance and thereby recognise the
relationship. Have you any means of livelihood in your mind?"

I hesitated a little shyly. For I had; but my plan might sound rather an
odd one, at least to a stranger.

"I thought," said I, at length, "of trying to get a living by doing what I
have been accustomed to do as a hobby--by making simple jewellery and
small, ornamental metal objects. I am afraid you will look on it as
rather a wild scheme."

"No," he answered. "It is an unconventional scheme, but not in any way a
wild one. I think we often appreciate insufficiently the wisdom of the
artist's choice of his profession. In choosing a means of livelihood we
are choosing the way in which we shall spend the greater part of our
lives. We have something to sell--the bulk of our waking lives; and we
are apt to think too much of its selling price--its value to the
purchaser--and not enough of its value to ourselves. A man, such as a
navvy, a miner, a bank-clerk or a factory hand, barters for the means of
subsistence so many hours a day spent in doing something that he does not
want to do. He sells the best part of his life. But the artist or
craftsman makes a much better bargain, for he contrives to obtain a
subsistence by doing what he enjoys doing and what he would elect to do
for his own satisfaction. He sells only the by-products of his life; the
whole of that life he retains for his own use, to be spent as he would,
in any case, wish to spend it. But there is an inevitable proviso; his
acceptable occupation must really yield a subsistence. His wares must be
of value to the purchaser, and he must be able to find a market. Do you
think you could satisfy those conditions?"

"I think I could make the things pretty well, but, as to selling them,
that is a different matter. I have to find that out. May I show you some
of my work?"

"I should like very much to see some of it," he replied.

"I will fetch a few pieces. And meanwhile, that clock on the mantelpiece
is partly my work. My father made the clock, itself; but I made the dial,
the hands and the case."

Dr. Thorndyke rose, and, stepping over to the mantel piece, looked at the
work with keen interest. It was a little bracket-clock with a bronze
dial, a silver circle for the figures, silver-gilt hands and a simple
wooden case decorated with gesso. Leaving my visitor to inspect it, I
went away and collected a few samples of my work in metal; a bronze
candlestick, an enamelled silver belt-buckle, a gold pendant set with
opals, and one or two silver spoons; all of which Dr. Thorndyke examined
with that friendly interest--unmistakeable to the artist or craftsman--that
evinces some knowledge of and liking for the thing examined.

"Well," he said, as he laid down the last of the spoons, "these things
answer the first question. They are quite workmanlike, and they are
attractive and tastefully designed. The next question is the economic
one. Could you sell them? and if so, would they realize a price that
would furnish a reasonable livelihood? You would have to compete with
commercial products made in large numbers by cheap processes. Your
hammered, embossed and chased work would compete with work stamped from
steel dies or with comparatively rough castings. Of course, your work is
infinitely better value; but this is a commercial age, and buyers are bad
judges. And then you would have to sell to dealers who would demand not
less than fifty per cent profit, which, I am afraid, would leave you a
pitiable, small return for your labour and skill."

"Yes," I agreed. "That is all quite true. But still, I think I will try.
The work would be interesting and pleasant, and, as you implied just now,
an artist cannot expect to be paid as much for doing what he likes doing
as another man receives for doing what he dislikes. Pleasant work is, to
some extent at least, its own reward; and if my work doesn't yield enough
to live on, I shall have to try something else. But I don't suppose I
shall be absolutely without means when my father's estate has been wound
up."

"Do you think of continuing to live here?" Dr. Thorndyke asked.

"No. As soon as everything is settled, I propose to go to London. It will
be much easier--or, at least, less difficult--to dispose of my work
there."

"Undoubtedly. And have you any definite arrangements in your mind--where
and how you are going to live, for instance?

"None whatever, at present."

"I ask because I happen to know of a place where you could put up, at
least temporarily; where you would be comfortably lodged, well fed and
cared for, and where you could pursue your labours under good working
conditions and at small expense. There is only one drawback, but you may
consider that a fatal one. It is in the immediate neighbourhood of
Ratcliff Highway--or, as it has been renamed, St. George's Street."

"Is that a very dreadful place?"

"It is far from being an aristocratic locality. But let me describe the
establishment. It is conducted by a Miss Polton, who is the sister of my
laboratory assistant--a most expert and talented mechanician. Miss
Polton was at one time a nurse; but when her brother entered my
employment, he was able to help her to set up in Wellclose Square,
Ratcliff, a boarding-house for mercantile marine officers. At the same
time, she, being like her brother, a highly-capable, ingenious person,
got herself a hand-loom and took up weaving as a hobby. But since then
times have changed. Sailing ships have to a great extent disappeared, and
Miss Polton's clients with them, while the hobby of making excellent
cloth has turned out quite a profitable one. So Miss Polton plies her
shuttle industriously, and, in the place of the merchant seamen, has
collected a little family of women who also work at handicrafts for their
living. I believe they form quite a happy little community, and, of
course, they are able to assist one another in disposing of their wares.
So that is the position. I know that Miss Polton has room for another
boarder, for it is quite a large house--Wellclose Square was once the
abode of well-to-do shipowners and retired sea-captains--and I am sure
she would welcome another novice to her community. The drawback, as I
have said, is the neighbourhood, which is--to put it bluntly--just a
trifle squalid."

"I don't see that the neighbourhood matters," said I; "and in every other
respect it sounds like the very thing I want."

"I think you would be quite well-advised to give it a trial. You would be
among friends and fellow-workers, and, if you found that the
neighbourhood was too much for you, you would be in London and could seek
a new residence at your leisure. I will write the address on one of my
cards, and if on reflection you decide to give Ratcliff a trial, you can
write to Miss Polton and me at the same time."

He wrote the address, and, handing me the card, stood up and glanced at
his watch.

"How long will it take me to walk to the station?" he asked.

"Less than twenty minutes."

"I have half an hour, so I can walk easily. Good-bye, Mrs. Otway. I wish
I could have given you a better account of your position. But I can only
advise you to make the best of a bad bargain and keep your own counsel."

"You have been most kind, Dr. Thorndyke," I said, earnestly, "in giving
me so much time and patient attention. I don't know how I can thank you."

"I will tell you," said he. "By keeping a good heart and letting me know
how your affairs progress."

He shook my hand heartily, and, when I had let him out, strode down the
garden path, the very personification of manly dignity, alertness and
vigour. At the gate he turned to raise his hat, with a smile of friendly
farewell; and I closed the door and turned back into the house, feeling,
for the first time since my father's death, that I was not alone in the
world, but that, if the need should arise, the strength of this strong,
commanding man was at my call.

The short remainder of my life at Maidstone I shall pass over briefly. It
comes back to me in scenes like those of a play, separate but related. I
see the interior of the parish church, noble, spacious, cathedral-like; I
hear the voice of the clergyman reciting reverently those flowers of
ancient poetry rendered into perfect English speech that usher the
departed into the realms of silence with so gracious a dignity; I see the
flower-strewn coffin sink into the grave wherein sleeps my unremembered
mother, while the russet-sailed barges glide past the churchyard on the
placid river below towards the mills at Tovil. And so farewell for ever
to the best of fathers and the kindest, most lovable of friends.

These closing weeks, in which I wound up my old life and made ready for
the new, were full of bustle and unrest. I had written to Miss Polton and
Dr. Thorndyke, and from the former had received a kindly letter assuring
me of the warmest welcome: and now I was busily collecting my tools and
workshop appliances and packing them into travelling boxes to be
dispatched with my heavier luggage. There was the furniture to be stored
or set aside for sale, the servants to be placed in new situations, and
various business to be transacted with Mr. Jackson, who, indeed, relieved
me of all that lay within his powers.

Then there was Mr. Otway, from whom I received an abject letter and with
whom I must needs have a rather distressing interview. He was really
horrified at my proposed mode of life (I suspect he had never done a
stroke of manual work in his life), and even more so at my proposed place
of residence; and was, I believe, sincerely distressed at my firm refusal
to permit him to make me an allowance. Indeed, the devotion which he
professed for me, little as I wanted it, seemed to be as real as was
possible in the case of a man so self-centred and so callously egoistic.
But the very sight of him hardened my heart and lighted up afresh my
indignation at the havoc that he had wrought in my life. What I had
agreed to do, I did; but I made no hair's breadth of concession. I gave
him my future address, and agreed to his addressing letters there; but I
refused resolutely to receive any visits from him, or even to enter into
any correspondence other than that which circumstances might render
necessary.

And now the last day has come; the day of final parting. I see myself
wandering through the empty house, stripped of all but the barest
necessaries and filled with new and strange echoes; the van drawn up at
the gate to take away the last of the furniture, and the tearful Jessie
carrying my two little portmanteaux down the path to the porter's barrow.
I see her return, wiping her eyes and gazing at me in dumb appeal, and,
with a sudden impulse of tenderness, I kiss her and stroke her hair;
whereupon she bursts into tears and throws herself sobbing on to my
breast.

It was hard to close the old life, which had been so sweet and peaceful,
so full and satisfying; to bid farewell to the beautiful old town which
was the only place I had known and which I had loved so well. As I took
my way through the streets, attach\E9-case in hand, all my old friends
seemed to look on me reproachfully and call on me to stay. The quaint
plaster-fronted house in Week Street, the venerable medieval pile at the
corner of Gabriel's Hill, the grinning masks on the corbels of the old
house-fronts of Middle Row; all the old familiar landmarks, had suddenly
grown dear and precious, and each exacted its twinge of regret as I
looked my last on it. On the bridge I halted to survey the upper river,
with the church and the Old Palace, both embowered in trees and brooding
over the quiet water. Often as I had looked upon that view, it had never
seemed to me so pleasant and desirable as now. And with this last
impression--to be recalled how often in the troubled future!--I turned
away and headed resolutely for the station.

BOOK II--ROMANCE

Chapter XI--A Harbour of Refuge

IT was the cabman who first made it clear to me that my town address was
somewhat out of the common. He had stowed my two portmanteaux on the roof
(it was a four-wheeled cab), and, descending to hold the door open for me
to enter, shut it after me with a bang and waited while I stated my
destination.

"I beg your pardon, Miss," he said, incredulously; "did you say Wellclose
Square?"

"Yes. Number sixty-nine."

Again he regarded me with wrinkled brows. "That won't be Wellclose Square
down by the Docks?" he suggested.

"I don't know if it's near the Docks," I replied, "but it isn't far from
Ratcliff Highway."

"That's the place, sure enough," said he. "Number sixty-nine, Well, I'm
jiggered." With this he turned and slowly climbed to the box, looking in
at me through the front window as he mounted; and even when he had taken
his seat and gathered up the reins, he took yet another confirmatory
glance over his shoulder before starting. These mysterious proceedings
occasioned me some surprise, not entirely unmixed with anxiety. Dr.
Thorndyke had admitted that the neighbourhood was squalid, and the
question arose, How squalid was it? The first part of the journey,
through Eastcheap and Great Tower Street, was rather reassuring; and as
we crossed Tower Hill and the grey pile of ancient buildings loomed up
above the trees, I was quite pleasantly impressed. But then came a change
for the worse. Long streets of characterless houses, all of a dingy, grey
colour--the colour of all-pervading dirt--and growing greyer and
dingier as we proceeded; populated by men and women, and especially
children, of the same cobwebby tint, with something foreign and
unfamiliar in their aspect and manners--a deficiency of artificial head
covering with a remarkable profusion of the natural, and a tendency to
sit about on doorsteps; these, with a general outbreak on the shop signs
of Wowskys, Minskys, Stems and Popoffs, were the features of the
neighbourhood that chiefly attracted my attention as the cab rattled
eastward. But there was not much time for extended observation, for I had
barely noted these appearances when we turned into a short side-street
and emerged into a square, the dingyness of which was somewhat relieved
by a group of faded trees in the central enclosure.

Round the square the cab trundled slowly until it drew up opposite a tall
house of the Georgian type, with white window frames and a green door. As
the cab stopped, the green door opened and a small elderly lady came
forth, while three younger women lurked in the background. Escaping from
the cab, I advanced to meet the elderly lady, who received me with a
singularly pleasant smile and a few quietly-spoken words of welcome; a
proceeding that was observed with furtive interest by the cabman as he
transferred my portmanteaux from the cab-roof to the pavement and thence
to the hall; nor did his curious observation of me cease until it was
brought to an end by actual invisibility, for, as the cab moved out of
the square, I saw his face still turned towards me over the roof, with
the same I expression of puzzled surprise.

"You would like to see your room, I expect," said the elderly lady whom I
had correctly assumed to be Miss Polton; "then we will have tea and talk
over your arrangements." She moved towards the stairs (up which I had
just seen one of the young women hopping with surprising agility, with
one of my portmanteaux in either hand), and conducted me to a room on the
second floor, where the portmanteaux had been duly deposited, though the
bearer had vanished.

"It's rather bare," said Miss Polton, "but you can have some pictures and
ornaments if you like. My young ladies usually prefer to have their own
things and arrange them in their own way. Your workroom is downstairs. I
consulted my brother about it, and he said he thought you would like a
room with a stone floor if you were going to do hammered work and use a
furnace. So, as I had one with quite a good light, I have kept it for you
--that is, of course, if you like it."

"I expect I shall," I replied. "A wooden floor is dreadfully noisy when
one is hammering on a stake, and not very safe when there are red-hot
crucibles about."

"Yes," she agreed, "and you can have a mat for your feet when you are
sitting at the bench. And now I will leave you and go and see about the
tea."

Left to myself, I looked around at my new home. The room, though
spacious, was undeniably bare, but yet it gave me an impression of
comfort. For its bareness was due merely to the absence of superfluities.
The empty walls, distempered a pale cream colour, were severe to
baldness; but how much better than the usual boarding house walls,
covered with staring flowered paper and disfigured with horrible prints
or illuminated texts. They, like the empty book-shelves, were ready to
receive the personal touches and to become friendly and sympathetic. Of
actual necessaries there were more than in many an over-furnished room; a
small wardrobe, a good-sized, firm table, a chest of drawers with a
looking-glass on it, a small writing chair, a comfortable folding
arm-chair, a washing-stand and a sponge bath, besides the book-shelves
aforesaid, and a daintily-furnished bed, gave me a foundation of material
comfort and convenience on which it would be easy to build and make
additions. As I concluded my survey and refreshed myself with a wash, I
decided that, whatever the surroundings of the house might be like, its
interior seemed to have the makings of a home.

Nor was I less favourably impressed when I went down stairs. The
dining-room, in which I found the ladies assembled, was pervaded by an
air of spotless cleanliness with a severity approaching bareness. The
absence of superfluous furniture and useless ornaments and bric-a-brac
struck me, indeed, as rather odd in a household composed--so far as I
knew--entirely of women.

"I must introduce you to the family," said Miss Polton, with a pleasant
wrinkly smile, "at least those who are at home. There are three more who
will come in to dinner. This is Miss Blake, and these ladies are Miss
Barnard and Miss Finch."

I shook hands with my new comrades--the last being the little lady who
had skipped up the stairs so actively with my luggage--and then we sat
down to the table, at the head of which Miss Polton presided, and made
the tea in a delightful Delft teapot from a brass kettle on which I cast
an expert and somewhat disapproving eye, for it was of a blatantly
commercial type and quite unworthy of the teapot. At first, conversation
was spasmodic and punctuated by considerable pauses. Miss Polton was
evidently a silent, self-contained woman, though genial in a quiet,
restful way. Miss Finch, too, who sat by me, was quiet and a little shy,
speaking rarely but silently plying me with food. Miss Blake, on the
other hand, had a restless manner, and, though she spoke little at first,
was undisguisedly interested in me, for whenever I looked at her I caught
her wide-open, blue eyes fixed on me with an intensity that was almost
embarrassing. She was a rather remarkable-looking girl, with a wealth of
red-gold hair, a white and pink complexion, and a profile which, with its
sharp, projecting chin and retrouss\E9 nose, might have been taken direct
from one of Miss Burne-Jones's allegories; indeed, my first glance at her
made me think of the "Briar Rose" and the "Golden Stairs."

And now, as I caught her intense gaze again and again, I had the feeling
that she was wanting to say something to me; and the more so since I
thought I detected a certain expectancy in the expression of her
neighbour, Miss Barnard. Nor was I mistaken; for, after one of the
periodic pauses in the conversation, she leaned over the table towards me
and said in low, portentous tones: "Mrs. Otway, I want to ask you a
question, if you won't think me too inquisitive." Here she paused--and
Miss Barnard also paused in the conveyance to her mouth of a large piece
of bread and marmalade.

Miss Polton explained that "Miss Blake was somewhat of a mystic."

"Like her famous namesake," said I.

"And ancestor," Miss Blake added, eagerly.

"Really!" I exclaimed, clutching at this straw; "you are actually a
descendant of William Blake? And I dare say you are a great admirer of
his works?"

"I should think she is!" exclaimed Miss Barnard. "You should just see her
fashion plates."

Recalling Blake's usual rendering of the human figure and its
unadaptability to the conditions of our climate, I secretly resolved to
take an early opportunity of examining those fashion plates. Meanwhile, I
remarked, "I was thinking of his poems rather than the drawings."

"Yes," said Miss Blake; "though the drawings are very spiritual, too. But
to return to my question. You see, I had been looking at your face. It is
a face, you know, in which the workings of the subconscious appear, as it
were. It's an extraordinary psychic face, do you know?"

"Is it?" said I, noting that Miss Barnard had broken out into a slow
smile, which she was trying to obliterate with the lump of bread and
marmalade.

"Oh, very. Intensely so."

"I don't suppose your question would be too inquisitive," I said,
guardedly.

"It isn't really," said she. "You know, I have been I have been looking
at your face, watching it with deep interest, and I have been hoping
that, at last, I had met with a kindred spirit. I do hope--I feel
convinced--that I have. I've been wondering if you are, as I am, a
dweller in the larger world beyond that inhabited by the conscious self,
beyond the mere material universe. Is it not so, Mrs. Otway?"

Now this was a "facer." As my dear father would have expressed it in his
playful fashion, it "knocked me side-ways." I cast a bewildered glance
round the table, and was aware of a very extensive outbreak of tact: Miss
Polton was blandly indulgent, her face transformed into a network of
amiable wrinkles; Miss Finch was engaged in an intense scrutiny of the
bowl of a jam spoon; while Miss Barnard's feats, with the bread and
marmalade, were becoming positively dangerous.

"I am not sure I understand your question, Miss Blake," I managed to
respond at length.

"Perhaps I did not put my question very clearly--it is difficult to be
very definite when one is speaking of the psychic life; but I was
wondering if you had ever had experiences that had made you aware of that
larger world beyond the world of mere matter and sense-perception; if you
had sometimes felt the thoughts of other minds stealing into your own
without the aid of speech or bodily presence and even, perhaps, held
converse with those dear to you who, while they have passed out of this
little, material world, still share with you the greater world in which
soul speaks to soul unhampered by the limitations--"

The humorous wrinkles had suddenly faded from Miss Polton's face, leaving
it grave and quiet; and now, in a quiet, grave voice, she interposed:

"I think, Lilith, dear, that Mrs. Otway's griefs are too new and too
real--"

"I know!" Miss Blake exclaimed, impulsively. "I am an egotistical wretch.
It was horrid of me to be so wrapped up in my own interests. I am so
sorry; so very, very sorry. Please forgive me, dear Mrs. Otway! Let us
talk of something else."

"I don't think we must talk of anything much longer," said Miss Polton.
"We have finished tea and we ought to get on with our work. Besides, Mrs.
Otway will want to unpack her things and set her room in order."

On this there was a general up-rising. Miss Finch immediately fell to
work gathering up the debris and returning the cups and saucers to the
tray, while Miss Blake renewed her apologies and expressions of sympathy.
Then Miss Polton took possession of me, and, having shown me my workshop
--a smallish, well-lighted room, with a paved floor and a large window
looking on an unexpectedly pleasant garden--took me upstairs to a
box-room in which my personal luggage had been deposited.

"Supper is at eight o'clock," said she. "We have made it rather late so
that everyone may have a good, long day's work and all the wanderers may
have come home. It is the social event of the day. And now I will leave
you to your unpacking."

She tripped away up a narrow flight of stairs that opened from the
landing, towards what I took to be the attics; from whence presently came
a rhythmical "click-clack" that I associated with the loom of which Dr.
Thorndyke had spoken. Meanwhile, I fell to work on my trunks, with a view
to transferring their contents to my room; but I had hardly got them open
when Miss Finch appeared at the open door.

"Can I help you?" she asked. "If I carry some of the things down you
won't have so many journeys."

"But aren't you busy?" I asked in return.

"Do I look like it? No, I'm lazy this afternoon, but I should like to
help you, if you will let me."

Of course I was only too glad, and forthwith loaded her with an armful of
books, following her with a second consignment. For some time we
continued our journeys up and down the stairs with very little said on
either side, and gradually my room began to lose its emptiness and
severity, and to take on the friendly aspect of an inhabited apartment.

"It doesn't look so bad," said Miss Finch, surveying it critically.
"Looks as if someone lived in it. Do you like the wash-stand?"

"I've been admiring it. It's so simple and so tasteful and unusual."

"Yes; and yet it is only stained deal, with a few touches of gesso.
Phillibar made it--Phyllis Barton, you know. You'll meet her at supper."

"Is she a carpenter?"

"No; she makes frames for mirrors and pictures; wooden frames decorated
with gesso, or compo, or else carved. But she's very thorough. Does it
all herself. Makes up the frames from the plank, makes the compo and the
moulds and does the gilding. And she is quite a good wood-worker and
carves beautifully."

"And does she make a pretty good living?" I asked, bearing Dr.
Thorndyke's observations in mind.

"She does quite well now, though she had a hard struggle at first. But
now she works direct for the artists and gets as much as she can do. You
will often see her frames in the exhibitions. The floor-cloth is rather
nice, too, isn't it, though it is only stencilled sacking. You'd be
surprised to see how durable it is. The more it is worn, the better it
looks--if it is properly done. This is stencilled with a stain. Lilith
did it."

"Lilith? Is that Miss Blake?"

"Yes. Her name is really Winifred, but we call her Lilith because she
looks as if she had come out of a stained-glass window. You might think
that she was a little--well, a little barmy. But she's awfully clever."

"She does fashion-plates, doesn't she?

"Yes, poor Lilith! She hates them, but she does them rippingly all the
same. She would rather paint pictures or mural decorations or design
tapestries, but you've got to do what you can sell, you know, if you want
to make a living; and Lilith has a little brother whom she keeps at
school--an awfully nice little kiddie. She's a really good sort, you
know, though frightfully spooky--planchette, crystal ball and all that
sort of tosh; and she thinks she has found a fellow-spook, so you will
have to look out."

As Miss Finch paused to take another survey, her eye and mine fell upon
the wash-stand, or rather on what it supported.

"I think," I remarked, "that I shall have to treat myself to some new
crockery. That jug and basin are hardly worthy of Miss Barton's
masterpiece."

"No; they're horrid, aren't they? Regular Whitechapel china-shop stuff.
But I believe I've got some--I'll just run up and see."

She tripped away up the stairs and presently returned, bearing a basin
and pitcher of simple, reddish-buff earthen ware glazed internally with a
fine green glaze.

"They are frightfully crude and coarse," she said apologetically (and
with cheeks several shades redder than the ware), "but they aren't
vulgar. Would you like to have them until you can get something better?"

"I shall have them a long time, then," said I. "They are charming--delightful,
and they suit the wash-stand perfectly. What a house this is
for pottery! I noticed the teapot and the beautiful cups and plates, all
so interesting and uncommon. And now you produce these wonderful things
like some benevolent enchantress. How do you do it? Do you keep a crystal
ball, too?"

Miss Finch laughed and blushed very prettily. "We all do our little bit
towards making the home presentable and saving expense. Miss Polton
distempered these walls, and Joan Allen painted the woodwork--you'll
like Joan, I think; she paints portraits when she can get them, and fills
in her time by doing magazine covers and book-wrappers. We shall expect a
diploma work from you, too. You're a goldsmith, aren't you?"

It was my turn to laugh and blush as this magnificent title was applied
to me. "Not exactly a goldsmith," I protested. "Say, rather, a very
elementary jeweller and metal-worker, or perhaps a coppersmith. And, as
we have finished with this room for the present, I had better begin to
get my workshop in going order."

"And you'll let me help you with that, too, won't you?" said Miss Finch,
with a wheedling air; and as I gladly accepted her help, she linked her
arm in mine and we descended together to the scene of my future labours.

My experience of various workers has led me to observe that manual skill
is a much more generalized quality than is commonly realized. The old saw
of the "Jack of all trades and master of none" is entirely misleading;
for manual skill acquired in the practice of one art is largely
transferable to others. The acquirement of a particular kind of skill
results in the establishment of a generally increased manual faculty, so
that a person who has completely learned one handicraft is already more
than half-way towards the attainment of skill in any other. This fact was
impressed upon me as I watched little Miss Finch and noted her
extraordinary handiness with probably unfamiliar appliances and her
instant comprehension of the uses of things that she had probably never
seen before. My two benches--the jeweller's and the general bench--had
fortunately been made in a portable form, and now had to be joined up
with their screw-bolts. But my little assistant took this in at a glance,
and, before I had half finished unpacking the tool cases, she had the
bench-tops up-ended, had sorted out the legs, struts and the appropriate
bolts, and was hard at work with the spanner. Yet, as she worked, she
kept an alert and interested eye on the tools and appliances that came
forth from the cases.

"What a jolly little muffle!" she exclaimed, as I deposited the small
enamel furnace on the floor, pending the erection of its stand; "but
won't it eat up the gas. You'll have to have your own meter--watch it,
too, to see that your earnings don't all go to the gas company. And what
a little duck of an anvil! But what on earth are those things?" pointing
to a bundle of body-tools and snarling irons.

I explained the use of these mysterious appliances and of sundry others
and so, with a good deal of gossip, partly personal and partly technical,
we worked on until the sound of the first supper-bell sent us to our
rooms to make ourselves presentable; by which time the fitting out of the
workshop was so far advanced as to make it possible for me to begin work
on the morrow.

The great social function of supper introduced me to the rest of my
comrades; Phyllis Barton, who turned out, to my surprise, to be a tiny,
frail-looking middle-aged woman of meek aspect--I had pictured her as a
large, muscular, boisterous young woman; Joan Allen, who really
corresponded somewhat to this description, and whom I detected more than
once in the act of inspecting me with one eye closed; and a tall, rather
shy girl, by name Edith Palgrave, a scrivener and calligrapher, who, I
learned from Miss Finch, wrote, by choice, Church service books and
illuminated addresses, but, by necessity, gained her principal livelihood
by writing shop-tickets.

It was a pleasant genial gathering: homely, informal, and yet quite
regardful of the indispensable social amenities. What the social
class of my companions might have been I could hardly guess. They were
all educated women, of good intelligence and pleasant manners, all keenly
interested in one another's doings, but each fully occupied with her own
activities. The agreeable impression was conveyed that, in this little
human hive, the companionship arising from the community of domestic life
tended in no way to hinder a self-contained person like myself from
living her own life and pursuing her own interests and satisfactions.

And so, when, somewhat early, I retired to my room to spend an hour with
my books before going to bed, my thoughts turned gratefully to Dr.
Thorndyke, and I congratulated myself not a little on having found this
quiet anchorage in which to rest after the stormy passages of my troubled
life.

Chapter XII--The Hidden Hand

I HAD been settled in my new home about a month when I received a letter
from Mr. Jackson. It was principally devoted to a report on business
matters concerned with the disposal of my father's practice and the sale
of the surplus furniture and effects, but it contained one passage that
gave me considerable food for thought. The passage in question had been
added as a postscript, and ran thus: "You have probably heard that Mr.
Otway has left Maidstone. I fancy things had become rather uncomfortable
for him. From what transpired at the inquest, an impression got abroad
that he was, to a great extent responsible for your father's death, and
there was consequently a rather strong feeling against him. I don't know
where he has gone, but rumour has it that he has migrated to London."

This was, in more than one respect, somewhat disquieting news. I turned
it over again and again as I sat at my bench and tried to estimate its
significance. The inquest had "gone off quite smoothly," as Mr. Jackson
had expressed it, but it was clear that some, at least, of the persons
present had read a meaning into the evidence which the coroner and his
jury seemed to have missed. Dr. Thorndyke was one of these; but, as no
rumour could be traceable to him, there were evidently others. What did
this portend? To Mr. Jackson it meant no more than a local prejudice. To
me, conscious of a secret covenant which I had not dared to confide even
to Dr. Thorndyke, it conveyed an uneasy feeling that suspicion was
abroad, that it might become cumulative, and that, even yet, that
covenant might be dragged into the light of day which it would bear so
ill.

Ever since my talk with Dr. Thorndyke, my conscience had been somewhat
ill at ease. I felt that, as a witness giving testimony on oath, I had
been at least uncandid, if not positively untruthful; and the word
"collusion" had acquired an unpleasantly personal quality.

And then, what of Mr. Otway? Had he slipped away out of my life to hide
himself where suspicion would not reach him? Or had he really migrated to
London, and would his sinister shadow presently fall upon my new life as
it had done upon the old? My hopes pictured him driven by his fears--for
he was a timorous man--far afield, perhaps beyond the seas; but a
presentiment whispered that I had not heard or seen the last of him.

It was a few days later, in fact, that I returned from a walk to find a
letter from Mr. Otway, requesting me to see him. I met him the following
day at the Tower Wharf. He was more agitated even than usual, and rose to
greet me with a audible explanation of relief. "Miss Vardon--that
is--Mrs--ah--Helen. I have received a letter."

"Your correspondence is of no interest to me." I told him coldly.

"But the contents of this one are so extraordinary that I ventured to
write to you about it. I hoped you would--er--respond to my appeal. It
is strange," he added, "considering what our relations are and what your
feelings are towards me, that I seem to look to you, and to you alone,
for support and counsel in this--er--this unexpected trouble."

"I don't suppose," said I, "that any counsel of mine will be of much
value to a man of your experience. But perhaps you had better tell me
what the trouble is--Shall we sit down here? You spoke of having
received a letter."

"Yes," he replied, as we sat down on a seat near the bridge. "It is an
anonymous letter, and its purport is--ah--very singular, and is--ah--to
the effect that--er--in fact--"

"Is there any objection to your repeating the actual wording of the
letter?" I asked.

"Well, no. Certainly not. Perhaps it would be better. You are really
remarkably business-like and clear-headed. I suppose it is your
upbringing and being so much with your father. No, there is no objection.
In fact,"--here he produced from his pocket, with evident reluctance, a
leather wallet, from which he extracted a folded paper--"in fact, you
may as well see the letter for yourself."

I took the paper from him, and opening it found it to be a quite short
letter, typewritten upon ordinary typist's paper, without any address or
other heading, and undated save for Mr. Otway's written and signed
endorsement. There was no signature, but in place of one was written in
typed characters, "A Well Wisher" and this is what it said:

"Mr. Lewis Otway,

"The undersigned is writing to put you on your guard because Somebody
knows something about how Mr. Vardon came by his death, and that somebody
is not friend, so you had better keep a sharp look out for your enemy and
see what they mean to do. I can't tell you any more at present.

"A WELL WISHER."

I read it through twice, noting, the second time, the peculiar
construction, the faulty grammar and punctuation, and especially the
confusion in the pronouns which is so characteristic of the writing of an
uneducated person. Of course, these peculiarities might have been assumed
as a disguise; but they established a probability that the writer was a
person of indifferent education; to which class, indeed, the bulk of
anonymous letter-writers belong. I handed the document back to Mr. Otway,
and asked: "Does this letter convey anything to you?"

"Nothing," he replied. "Absolutely nothing. It speaks of somebody knowing
something. But that is impossible. There was no one in the house but you
and I and--er--your father. Besides, there is nothing to know--excepting
what you know."

"Have you any idea or suspicion as to who the writer of this letter may
be?"

"None whatever. I have not the faintest clue. You see, there is nobody in
the world who has any--er--any special knowledge of the--ah--the
exact circumstances but yourself." He paused for a few moments, and then,
in a lower tone, asked hesitatingly: "I suppose, Helen, you cannot--er--guess
or--ah--surmise who might have--"

I looked up quickly and caught a furtive glance which was instantly
averted; and in a moment it was borne in on me that he suspected me of
either being the writer or concerned in writing of this letter.

"Mr. Otway," said I, speaking slowly and quietly, the better to command
my temper, "if you have any idea that I know anything of this wretched
production, dismiss it. If you have any idea that there lurks in my mind
any suspicion that your account of my father's death was untrue, dismiss
that, too. If I had known, or even had the smallest grounds for
suspecting, that my father met with foul play, you would not have had to
wait till now to hear from me; nor would my communication have reached
you in this form or through these channels."

As I said this, looking at him, I do not doubt, sternly and forbiddingly
enough, he turned horribly pale and seemed to shrink visibly. He was
completely cowed; so much so that, cordially as I detested him, I felt
really sorry for him.

"You mistake me, Helen. You misjudge me," he protested, huskily; "you do,
indeed. I had no intention--I never, for one moment, suspected--but why
do I say this? Of course, you must know I did not. I merely thought it
possible that you might be able to guess--you might know of some
person--"

"I do not, Mr. Otway," said I. "No one connected with me has any
knowledge that is not public knowledge. Nor do I believe that anyone else
has. I should say that this person--apparently a person of the lower
class--is just a common blackmailer, who was present at, or has read the
report of, the inquest, and is trying to make you believe that some
suspicion attaches to you." I could not but admire the adroitness with
which Mr. Otway made me a participator in his own difficulties and
secured me as an ally against his unseen enemy. And the blackmailer is a
rather formidable enemy to a man who is concealing an incriminating fact.
We were partners in an unlawful act. That, I had already recognised; and
the different significance of that act in our respective cases did not so
very much affect our position in the present circumstances.

"Probably you are right, Helen. But you notice that there is no threat--no,
direct threat, at least--and that there is no suggestion of any
attempt to obtain money from me."

"Perhaps that will come later," said I.

Again he drew a long breath and cast a furtive glance at me. "Perhaps it
will," he agreed. "This may be the preliminary move, the laying of
ground-bait, so to speak. It's a harassing business, Helen. What do you
think I had better do? You see, I rely on you for counsel, although I am
so much older. But you have your father's gift of clear judgment and
perfect coolness in emergencies."

It was rather a tactless observation, for it recalled vividly my dear
father's coolness in that last, fatal emergency; his composure and
unruffled cheerfulness when the menace of ruin and disgrace--set up by
Mr. Otway--had seemed poised over his head, ready to fall at any moment;
and the recollection did not tend to increase my present sympathy.

"For my part," I said, coldly, "I should do nothing at present. I should
ignore this letter and wait for the writer to show his hand more clearly.
If he should make any threats or demands for hush-money, I should at once
put the matter in the hands of the police."

I could see that this advice--particularly the latter part of it--did
not greatly commend itself to Mr. Otway. Nor did it to me. But
circumstances offered no choice. Any risk is better than that of
life-long subjection to a blackmailer.

"It would be very unsafe," said Mr. Otway, "to have--any dealings with
the police. They are pretty severe on blackmailers, but they are
naturally ready to listen to anyone who professes to have information to
give them. And a blackmailer may be very dangerous if he is brought to
bay. We couldn't afford to have any enquiries made that might seem to
establish what they would call collusion to suppress evidence. We know
that the facts that we withheld were not material. Other people would
not."

I had nothing further to say, but to repeat that I should ignore the
letter; and for a time we sat silent, looking out on the river. Mr. Otway
drew a deep breath and reflected gloomily. Perhaps my suggestion was not
a very comforting one, for an uncomfortable aspect of the case was that
he was right.

"Well," said Mr. Otway, at length, "so be it. We will wait and see what
happens. And now let us put this miserable affair away and talk about
your future. I have seen some of your work, and I am sure that you could
get good prices for it if it were placed in the proper quarter. But the
ordinary shops would be of no use to you. The common retailer does not
know or care anything about individual work. He just buys from the
wholesaler or the manufacturer, and sells to the public. He would
probably not look at your work, or if he were willing to buy it, he would
pay no more than he pays to the manufacturer who rattles off his goods by
the thousand, with the aid of cheap labour and machinery.

"But there are people who know the difference between artists' works and
manufactured goods, and are willing to pay for the better things. And
there are dealers who supply them. Mr. Campbell is one. I have known him
for many years, and I can assure you that he is an excellent judge of
works of art and very anxious to get the best for his customers, who are
mostly good judges, too. He is well known in artistic circles, and, as he
is able to dispose of things of real value, he can afford to pay the
artist a fair price. I strongly advise you to give him a trial. Of
course, I would infinitely rather that you accepted an allowance from me,
but, if you really--"

"It is very good of you, Mr. Otway, but I assure you that it is out of
the question."

"Very well, then. If you are quite resolved, I can only advise you to
make the most profitable use of your talents. Go to Mr. Campbell, and I
am sure that you will be treated fairly."

I thanked him for his advice and promised to act on it; and very shortly
after this I brought the interview to an end.

As I took my way slowly back to Wellclose Square, I reflected on the new
developments that my meeting with Mr. Otway had disclosed. That some
mischief was brewing there could hardly be a doubt. The disguise of the
"Well Wisher" was too thin to create any illusion. As to the somebody who
knew something, he was an obvious myth, for, as Mr. Otway had said, the
circumstances did not admit of anyone knowing even what was known to me.
My own explanation was that some person, who had been present at the
inquest, had observed Mr. Otway's excessive nervousness and had marked
him as a likely subject for blackmailing operations. It was a chance shot
and nothing more.

But Mr. Otway's evident alarm was not difficult to account for. He was a
naturally timorous man; he had been subjected to a great and prolonged
strain, and he had an incriminating secret. His position was, in fact,
one of appreciable danger, as he fully realized. If the details of my
father's death had been fully disclosed at the inquest, Mr. Otway's
statement and explanation would probably have been accepted without
demur. But the suppression of certain material facts put a different
complexion on the matter. If the inquiry were now revived, he would have
to explain, not only the original circumstances, but his motives for
suppressing them. He had very good reason for alarm.

And yet his abject terror produced an uncomfortable impression on me. I
could not disguise from myself that the whole tragedy of my father's
death was due to an error of judgment on my part. The secret marriage was
the out come of a mistake. Woman-like, I had acted on a strong
conviction; and that conviction had been wrong. What if I had once again
acted on an erroneous belief? I had assumed that Mr. Otway's account of
my dear father's death was correct. There had seemed to be excellent
reasons for the assumption. But what if I had been wrong, after all? If I
had actually misled a Court of Justice to shield the murderer of my
dearly loved father? It was undeniably possible. I had formed my opinion
on mere probabilities, backed by a statement that, however plausible, was
manifestly worthless as evidence. And that opinion might have been
utterly wrong. It was a dreadful thought. So dreadful that, though I
tried to put it away and remind myself that I did not entertain and never
had entertained it, it haunted me during the whole of my walk home, even
to the exclusion of the menace to myself that lurked in this
blackmailer's letter.

Chapter XIII--A Crystal-Gazer and Other Matters

THE cheerful atmosphere of the old house in Wellclose Square soon
dissipated my gloomy thoughts. It was nearing supper-time when I arrived,
and an agreeable clink of china proceeded from the dining-room,
accompanied by a faint aroma suggestive of curry. On my landing I found
Lilith and Miss Finch engaged in earnest discussion, and both greeted me
as if I had returned after a long absence.

"We have been wondering," said the former, "what had become of our Sibyl,"
(she had bestowed this title on me, presumably, by reason of my
peculiarly 'psychic' cast of countenance). "As for the poor Titmouse,"
(this was Miss Finch's pet name), "she has been wandering about like a
cat that has lost its kitten."

"Or like a kitten that has lost its cat," I suggested, bestowing an
affectionate pinch on my little comrade's ear. "Well, I haven't been far
afield, but I have done quite an important stroke of business."

"You don't mean to say you've sold something!" the Titmouse exclaimed,
incredulously.

"Not actually sold. But I have discovered a market. I have tidings of a
benevolent person--of the Scottish persuasion, I believe--who traffics
in works of art and other productions of the human hand."

"A Scotchman!" exclaimed Miss Finch. "I thought all art dealers were
Jews. When are you going to call on the Laird?

"It is hardly worth while to call on him until I have a fair collection
of work to show him," said I.

"I don't agree with you, Sibyl," said Lilith. "The first thing to do is
to catch your dealer. To do that, you must find out what he wants. He is
sure to have his own personal fancies, and he knows what he can sell most
easily. Take him all that you have ready. He will be able to see from
that what you can do, and he will tell you what kind of work he will take
from you. And don't lose any time. I should go to-morrow if I were you."

"Does an artist have to work to order, then, like salaried journeymen?" I
asked.

"Practically, yes," replied Lilith. "And why not? He makes things that he
wants people to buy. Surely it is only reasonable that he should consider
the needs and the wishes of the buyers. And all good craftsmen do.
Chippendale's chairs were not only good to look at; they were comfortable
to sit on and serviceable in use. The only difference between an artist
craftsman and a commercial producer is that the artist always does his
best, for his own satisfaction apart from the question of payment;
whereas the commercial producer thinks of the profit only, and turns out
the worst stuff that the buyer will put up with."

"But surely an artist may choose what he will make," said I.

"Of course he may," replied Lilith, "if he is willing to keep the thing
when he has made it. Not if he is going to ask someone to pay him money
for it."

I was inwardly somewhat taken aback by this exhibition of hard-headed
reasonableness on the part of the mystical Lilith; so much so that, when
she had gone to her room, I remarked on it to Miss Finch.

"Yes," she agreed; "Lilith is an extraordinary girl. In fact, there seem
to be two Liliths; one is as cranky as a March hare, and the other is
perfectly sane and really very shrewd. I sometimes wonder whether she
really believes in all that crystal-gazing tosh and telepathic bunkum.
But she practices what she has just been preaching. She does her
fashion-plates according to orders--but ever so much better than she
need--and does other work to please herself and is content to keep it.
You should look in at her studio and see her at work; then you'd
understand."

"And you think I had better take her advice?"

"I do. First catch your dealer; and if he wants to keep you turning out
the same things over and over again, try to catch another dealer who
wants something different. The great thing is to get a market. It's
frightfully disheartening to keep on doing good work and having it all
left on your hands."

Impressed by this wise counsel, I betook myself after supper to my
workshop and reviewed my stock. A month's work had produced no great
accumulation, for I was still a slow worker, though the continuous
practice was improving that. On the other hand, I had brought with me a
certain number of unfinished pieces as well as some of my finished work;
so that I had enough to give Mr. Campbell the means of judging my
capabilities. When I had looked over the collection and withdrawn one or
two pieces that were not up to my present standard, I packed the approved
specimens in a hand-bag which I took up with me in readiness for the
morrow. I was just opening the door of my room when Lilith came running
up the stairs.

"You see," I said, holding up the hand-bag. "I am acting on your advice.
I have packed up a selection from my stock to take to the dealer
to-morrow morning."

"I am glad of that," said she. "The business side of art is tedious and
disagreeable, but you have got to sell if you are to live by your work.
Would you mind giving me a private view of your masterpieces?"

"I shall be proud to show them to you," I replied, conducting her into my
room and placing the arm-chair by the table, "Let us put out the whole
collection."

I emptied the bag of its contents, which I set out on the table to the
best advantage, and she examined the pieces one by one.

"They are charming," she exclaimed, enthusiastically. "I can't judge the
work, though it looks most expert to my inexpert eye, but the design is
delightful. They are all so individual and full of character, and so
simple and restrained. You have a fine colour-sense, too. I think your
use of enamel quite masterly, and I like your employment of bronze in
place of the precious metals. It is fortunate that your dealer is a
Scotchman, for the Jews, from Solomon downwards, have always had a
leaning towards gold."

"Yes," said I; "bronze is my favourite material, even for personal
ornaments. And it is capable of great variety in the patina, especially
if one uses the Japanese methods of surface treatment. I wish it took the
enamel better."

"You seem to have overcome the difficulties pretty completely," said
Lilith. "This pendant, for instance, is beautiful, and so is the
belt-clasp. Do you know, Sibyl, I think we might collaborate. Some of my
designs might very well include metal ornaments--clasps, buckles, and
buttons forming part of the decorative scheme. We must talk it over. And
now, my dear Sibyl, I want to say something to you--something quite
serious--and I want you to listen without prejudice."

I looked at her, and was instantly aware of a change that had come over
her. The shrewd, business-like, capable Lilith had suddenly become
transformed into the mystic--wide-eyed, dreamy, yet intense.

"I have avoided talking to you about the things that are to me the
great things of life," she said in low, earnest, tones. "I have wished
to, but I have been fearful of intruding on your strongly individual,
self-contained personality. But I have felt that you have great
gifts--great psychic gifts. You are a woman of power. The common herd
live their little lives locked up in the prison of the visible and the
conscious. If they would convey their thoughts to other minds they must
use the unwieldy means of speech and visible signs. What they know
of their fellow-immortals reaches them crudely through the organs of
sense; and through those primitive and inadequate media they must needs
communicate with others, bound by the limitations of time and space and
mere material contact--at least, so long as they are prisoned within a
material body. But there are others for whom no such limitations exist;
specially gifted souls who can see without mere material eyes, who can
hear without ears, who can speak their thoughts across the gulfs of
time and space; who can look into the remote past, and even into the
future; who can make their will-power operate at limitless distances
and without the aid of gross bodily action. And you are one of these,
Sibyl. I am convinced that you are endowed with these powers. But they
are latent, unsuspected, because you have never tried to exercise them;
because you have never sought to bring the subconscious within the
domain of the conscious, or rather to make a contact between the two."

To this strange and rather wild harangue (which the matter-of-fact
Titmouse would have called "barmy") I listened with grave attention,
though with little enough conviction--for I could not but recall my
ignorance and my mistaken judgment in the greatest crisis of my life--noting
how like a prophetess the picturesque Lilith looked, with her
golden aureole of auburn hair and her great, blue eyes and parted lips.
But I made no reply--there was, indeed, nothing to say--and after a
short pause she continued:

"Don't think I am saying this with any impertinent intention of trying to
force my own views on you. I have a definite practical purpose. You are
going to-morrow to make your first essay in a vitally important branch of
an artist's calling. On your success depends the possibility of your
following art as a profession--that is, if you have not enough to live
without work."

"I have not," said I.

"Then artistic success is not sufficient. You must achieve industrial
success; you must get a livelihood out of your work. As far as the
creation of beautiful things is concerned you are quite competent and
will become more so with more practice. Now you have to learn how to
dispose of those works profitably; how to make people buy them."

"But surely that will be decided by the suitability of the things
themselves."

"Partly, no doubt. But you mustn't leave it at that. You must learn to
exercise the power of silent willing combined with suggestion."

"I don't think I quite understand," said I.

"We must talk about this more fully some other time," said Lilith, "and
go into the theory and the results of experiments. For the present you
must try to take my word for the fact that silent willing and suggestion
are real powers. I don't ask you to believe it without proof--I will
give you the proof later--but I do beg you, dear Sibyl, to give the
method a trial. If it fails in your hands you will be none the worse; but
it won't fail if you make up your mind to succeed."

"What do you want me to do, Lilith?" I asked, not a little bit bewildered
by her mysterious and rather vague expressions.

"I will tell you what I do myself," she replied. "When I take a batch of
drawings to a publisher, I stand outside the office for five minutes and
silently will that he shall accept them. Sometimes I write on a piece of
paper a command to the publisher to accept my work, and while I am
waiting for the interview I keep my eyes fixed on the writing and
mentally endorse the command. The writing, you see, helps me to
concentrate my will-power. Then, at the interview, I use the method of
suggestion. Whatever the editor or publisher may say, whatever objections
he may make to my work, I continue steadily to impress on him that he is
going to accept it, that, in fact, he has accepted it. If he refuses it,
I ignore the refusal and go on talking as if he had accepted it--not
rudely, of course; one must do these things tactfully--and all the time
that he is talking, I continue silently to concentrate my will-power on
him."

"And what is the result?" I asked.

"The result, my dear Sibyl, is that I sell all the drawings that I offer
for sale."

This sounded convincing enough, and would have been more so if I had not
happened to know that Lilith's drawings were of the very best of their
kind, and that she submitted them to the most rigorous criticism before
letting anyone see them. Still, the fact that she sold her work was
undeniable, and it was impossible to say how many excellent drawings had
failed to gain acceptance. Certainly every capable artist is not a
successful one.

"And what is it exactly that you want me to do?" I asked.

"I want you," she replied, "to do just what I do myself. I want you to
stand outside the shop for five minutes and silently will that this
dealer shall buy your work. It would probably help you if you were to
write down the command and keep your eyes fixed on the writing while you
are willing; but if the dealer himself should happen to be visible, it
would be well to fix your eyes on him so as to direct the will-force with
more precision. And when you go into the shop, keep on willing with the
greatest concentration that you can command, and when you are talking to
the dealer, talk as if he had bought your work; keep on impressing on him
that he has bought it, and don't take any notice of contrary statements
on his part. If he seems to think that he has refused it, you must
correct his mistake and guide his thoughts into the proper channels."

I suppose I must have looked somewhat dismayed at this rather startling
programme, for Lilith continued, eagerly: "Now, don't raise objections,
Sibyl, dear. It will be quite easy if you will only make up your mind.
You have abundant will-power, and I am certain that you have the gift of
projecting your mental states into the minds of others. And I am so
anxious that you should succeed and that your great gifts should not be
wasted. Say you will try, Sibyl, if only to please your friend."

What could I do? Utterly as my mind refused to accept the connection
between the alleged cause and effect, I could not say that no such
connection existed. I was completely unconvinced; but my unconviction
might conceivably be less rational than Lilith's whole-hearted belief.
For she declared herself able to support her belief with proof, whereas I
had to admit that my scepticism was largely a matter of temperament. And
she was so eager, and it was so sweet of her to be so full of anxiety on
my behalf, that it would have seemed ungracious to make difficulties. The
end of it was that I agreed to carry out her plan of conquest, on which
she further inducted me into the arts of silent willing and suggestion
and even supervised me while I wrote out, at her dictation, a peremptory
command to the dealer, which I promised to use, as directed, for the
reinforcement of my will-power at the appropriate time.

On the following morning, after a careful study of my father's atlas of
London, which I had brought with me from Maidstone, I set forth, hand-bag
in hand and encouraged by the good wishes of my comrades and of Lilith in
particular. Entering the Underground Railway at Mark Lane, I came to the
surface at Charing Cross Station and bore away northwards across
Leicester Square. During the journey, I had turned over in my mind the
plan of attack to which I stood committed, with increasing distaste, I
must admit, as the time for its execution drew nearer. And as my dislike
grew, so also did my scepticism. I found myself recalling the fact that
Lilith, successful as she claimed to be, was yet a fashion-plate artist
very much against her own wishes, and reflecting that, if her silent
willing were as efficacious as she believed it to be, she might surely
compel the purchase of the kind of work that she enjoyed doing, instead
of being herself compelled to follow a distasteful occupation. However,
it was useless to think about it now. I had promised to give the method a
trial and must carry out my promise.

These reflections brought me to the bottom of Wardour Street, and my
attention was now fully occupied by the search for Mr. Campbell's shop.
Mr. Otway had omitted to give me the number of the house, but I
remembered his saying that it was on the west side near the Oxford Street
end; so I walked slowly up the east side and scanned the shop-fronts
across the road. Near the top of the street my eye lighted on a smallish
shop, above the window of which was inscribed in faded gold lettering
"Donald Campbell," and I immediately crossed the road, becoming aware as
I did so of a sudden access of nervousness. For this was a new experience
to me. Hitherto all my transactions with shopkeepers had been in the
character of a purchaser; and my transformation into a vendor was
accompanied by a diffidence and shyness that I had not expected or
foreseen. Indeed, in the course of that short journey across the road, my
bashfulness increased so much that I had nearly forgotten my promise to
Lilith and was on the point of entering the shop when it flashed into my
mind.

But even when I recalled Lilith's instructions, they were not easy to
carry out. I swerved from the shop door to the side of the window and
stood there trying to concentrate my will-power. But it would not be
concentrated. In the window was displayed a fascinating array of base
metal spoons which instantly riveted my attention; particularly a set of
the late seventeenth century, wrought in a fine-coloured latten, and
exhibiting in a most charming manner the combined effect of delicate
workmanship, with the patina of age and the softening of outlines from
use and wear.

Unconsciously, I had begun to compare them with my own cruder productions
before I realized that my will-power had escaped control. Then I jerked
myself back from the spoons to my present task, and, hastily drawing the
paper from my pocket, fixed my eyes on the written command and struggled
to concentrate my thoughts on it and to suppress a growing consciousness
of the absurdity of the whole proceeding. Presently I raised my eyes from
the paper, and as they sought to dodge the spoons, they encountered
another object equally disturbing. "It was only a face at the window," as
the ridiculous song has it, but it instantly engrossed my attention and
transported me in spirit, not to any Highland glen, but straight away to
the banks of the Jordan; a fattish face, framed with glossy, black hair
that broke out at the temples into rows of little crisp curls like a
barrister's wig; a face with small, grey eyes, full under the lids, and
surmounted by strong, black eyebrows, with full, red lips and a rather
sketchy nose of the general form of a William pear with the stalk
uppermost. It was clearly not Mr. Campbell's face, but it appertained to
the establishment; and, recalling Lilith's instructions to direct my will
power with more precision by fixing my eyes on the dealer, I directed a
stony stare at the face and willed silently. But here I was countered
again; for the owner of the face was also apparently possessed of psychic
gifts, and fixed on me a gaze of such intensity that I was covered with
confusion. On this I straightway forgot all about will-power, and,
hastily pocketing the paper, walked nervously and guiltily into the shop.

The proprietor of the face confronted me impassively across the counter;
and such was my trepidation that, although he obviously was not Mr.
Campbell, I could think of nothing better than to ask him if he was;
whereupon he completed my discomfiture by replying in the affirmative.

"I am Mrs. Otway," said I; at which he suddenly grew keenly attentive,
and I continued: "I understand that Mr. Otway--Mr. Lewis Otway--has
written to you about me. I had a letter from him to that effect."

"Yes," said Mr. Campbell, "he has; and, if I remember rightly, he
suggested that I might be able to dispose of some of your work. I think
he said you did some repouss\E9 or something of the kind."

Apparently Mr. Campbell was preparing to treat me as an amateur, and my
work as the product of a hobby. This would not do at all. Before saying
anything further, I opened my bag and handed out the pieces one by one,
setting them on the counter before him.

"Oh!" said he. "Yes; ha--hum; this isn't exactly what I expected." He
picked up a teaspoon, turned it over between his fingers, closely
examined the joining of the shank and bowl and the little bust that
formed the knob, and then held it at arm's length with his head on one
side. There was something in the action and the facial expression that
accompanied it which encouraged me even before he spoke.

"Nithe thpoon that," was his comment as he laid it down (I observed that
he tended to develop a lisp when preoccupied or off his guard); "well
made, well designed; quite original, too. Spoons are my fancy--you saw
that set in the window. If I could afford it, I would specialize in them
more than I do. Not but what I'm fond of all goldsmith's work if it's
good--or any other art work, for that matter; but I do love a good
spoon."

This was pleasant hearing, for I had a weakness for spoons myself. They
are useful objects, they admit of infinite variety in design, and their
small size adapted them peculiarly to my rather limited resources.

"But there is one thing that you must bear in mind," continued Mr.
Campbell. "Single spoons are not very saleable unless they are antique or
collectors' pieces. Modern spoons are bought for use as well as ornament,
and buyers like them in sets; not all alike, of course, but with a
general design running through the set. Twelve spoons, all different, but
all brothers; that's what they want."

"Like the apostle sets," said I.

"Yes," he replied, "but we don't want any more apostles. Too many on the
market already. The apostles are done. They're a back number. Everybody
does them because they can't think of anything else connected with the
number twelve. But there is an opening for something original. If you can
do me a set with a good striking design, I think I know where I can place
them at a liberal price."

I made a note of this proposal, and Mr. Campbell proceeded with his
examination of my samples, accompanying the process with shrewd comments
and useful hints. "Now, I'm rather doubtful about this," said he, picking
up a bronze paper-weight on which was a little figure with an open book;
"it's pretty and might take the fancy of a bookish man, but I question
whether you'll get paid for the work that you've put into it. People
don't always realize the value of a bronze casting. You must have done
this by the cire perdue process."

"I did."

"Well, I should save that for more important pieces. Simple modelling and
sand-casting is good enough for paper-weights. And you are too lavish
with your silver. Just feel this candlestick. You could have done it with
half the silver and got paid just as much. The extra cost of the
unnecessary silver will have to come off the workmanship--at least, that
is the tendency, although it is nominally sold by weight."

As Mr. Campbell was speaking, a woman came out of an inner room and
advanced to the counter. I glanced at her casually and then looked again
more attentively, for I had instantly the feeling of having seen her
before, though I could not recollect where. She was a Jewess of the dark
and sallow type, about my own age, and of a sombre and rather forbidding
aspect; and the glance that she cast on my samples, though impassive, was
faintly disparaging.

"This is Mrs. Otway, me dear," said Mr. Campbell. "You remember the
letter I showed you about her. And these pretty things are her work."

Mrs. Campbell--as I assumed her to be--raised her eyes and bestowed on
me a quietly insolent stare, but made no remark. Then she cast another
disparaging glance at my wares and said coldly: "They are all right of
their kind; but you don't want to fill the place up with modern stuff."

Disagreeable as the remark was, its matter impressed me less than its
manner. For again I was sensible of a certain vague familiarity in the
voice, the intonation and the accent. She gave me, however, no
opportunity for studying either, for, with the curt observation that "she
supposed he knew his own business," she retired to the inner room without
taking any further notice of me.

"Well," said Mr. Campbell, "there's some truth in what my wife says. I
can't afford to lock up my capital in things that I can't sell. But I
like your work. It is good work, and you'll improve. I am willing to buy
this lot of pieces--at a price. But it will have to be a low price,
because I don't know how they will go. If you take my advice, you'll
leave them with me and let me try the market with them. When I have sold
one or two I shall know what I can do with them, and then I can offer you
a fair price based on what they fetch. How will that thoot you?"

It seemed, on the whole, the most satisfactory arrangement, though I
should have liked to have some definite idea as to the value of my work.
I mentioned this, pointing out that I wanted to know if it would be worth
my while to continue this kind of occupation.

"Well," said Mr. Campbell, "you leave the things with me, and I will look
them over carefully and weigh the silver. Then I will make you the best
offer I can for the lot, and you can either accept it or refuse it, or
wait and see what the things fetch. Give me your address and I will write
you out a receipt for what you leave. Will that do?"

I replied that it would do admirably, whereupon he supplied me with a
slip of paper and pen and ink, and retired to the desk with my collection
to write out the receipt. I had taken off my glove and was beginning to
write when somebody entered the shop with a quick, light step, suggesting
a young and active man. Just behind me the footsteps shopped short, and a
pleasant, masculine voice addressed the dealer.

"All right, Mr. Campbell; don't let me disturb you. I'm in no hurry."

"I'm afraid, sir, your things are not quite ready, but if you don't mind
waiting a moment I'll make sure."

"I suspected," the voice rejoined, "that I might be a little
over-punctual. However, you finish what you are doing, while I browse
round the museum."

At the first sound of the voice my pen stopped short; and it seemed as if
my heart stopped, too--though it soon began to make up for lost time. I
was disconcerted and vaguely annoyed that a small surprise should set up
such a disproportionate disturbance. Perhaps, too, I was a little
startled to find a voice so long unheard elicit such instant and
undoubting recognition. But I recovered immediately and resumed my
writing, though, to be sure, the pen-point no longer traced the firm and
steady lines of the first-written words. Meanwhile, Mr. Campbell had
completed his receipt and we now exchanged our documents, I checking his
list of my sample works, and he scanning my address with apparent
surprise.

"Wellclose Square," he read out. "There is a Wellclose Square somewhere
down Wapping way. It won't be that one?"

"Yes. But I think it is actually in Ratcliff. When shall I hear from
you?"

"I will write and post the letter this evening."

"Thank you, Mr. Campbell. Good morning."

As we exchanged bows, I turned and met the newcomer approaching the
counter. He glanced at me, at first without recognition; then he looked
again.

"Why, surely it is Miss Vardon!" he exclaimed.

"Wrong, Mr. Davenant," said I. "It is Mrs. Otway. But that is a mere
quibble. I am the person whom you knew as Miss Vardon."

"Well, well," said he, "what a piece of luck to meet you--and here of
all places!"

"Is this a peculiarly unlikely place, then?" I asked.

"Well, I suppose it isn't, really; at any rate, I mustn't let Mr.
Campbell hear me say that it is. Do you mind waiting a moment while I
settle my little business with him? I want to hear all your news."

His little business amounted to no more than an arrangement that he
should call in about three days for his "things," whatever they were, and
when this had been settled, we left the shop together.

"Which way are you walking?" he asked.

"I really don't know," I answered. "I think I had some dim idea of seeing
the town and taking a look at the shops."

"Then," said he, "as you are a country mouse, whereas I am a town sparrow
of the deepest dye, perhaps I may be permitted to act as conductor and
expositor of the wonders of the Metropolis, while you give me the news
from Maidstone."

"There is little to tell you excepting that I have lost my father. He
died quite suddenly, about two months ago, from heart failure."

"Ah!" said Mr. Davenant, "I had a presentiment that it was so. Seeing you
in mourning, I was afraid to ask after him; and I need not tell you how
deeply I sympathise with you. I remember how much you were to one
another. What a mercy it is that you were married!"

To this I made no reply, and for a time we walked on slowly without
speaking. But though nothing was said, much was thought, at least by me.
For I had to make up my mind now, and once for all, on a point that I
felt to be of vital importance. Should I tell him how things were with
me? Or should I let him think that all was well, and that I was a normal
married woman? Something--I did not ask myself what--urged me to tell
him everything. But caution, prudence, whispered--and that none too
softly--that it were better not. The sudden wave of emotion that had
surged over me at the sound of his voice was still a vivid and startling
memory; and it counselled reticence.

Thus two opposing forces contended; on the one hand, an emotional
impulse, on the other the admonitions of reason; and it is needless to
say that reason played losing game. Swiftly I argued out the issues.
Sooner or later, the inevitable question must come, and with it the
choice of an evasion or a straightforward answer. If it was to be
evasion, then I put Jasper Davenant out of my life at once and for ever,
for the evasion could never be maintained; must shut out this gleam of
sunshine that came to me from the old, happy days as if to light up my
sombre, lonely life, and wend on my pilgrimage without a friend save the
companions of my working days.

And reason whispered again that it were better so.

Chapter XIV--Jasper Davenant

THE silence that had fallen between me and my companion remained unbroken
(with one exception, when he briefly drew my attention to the old stone
name-tablet, inscribed "Wardour Streete 1686") until we came opposite a
church, standing back from the road, and distinguished by a sort of
tumour--containing a clock--on its spire. Here Mr. Davenant halted, and
looking up at the tower, remarked:

"A quaint-looking church, this; odd and ugly, but yet not without a
certain character and picturesqueness. Quite an aristocratic church, too,
for it is the burial place of a king."

"Indeed," said I. "Which of the kings is buried there?"

"He was but a shabby little king--Theodore of Corsica--and he has the
shabbiest little moralizing monument. But he was a somewhat original
monarch in his way, for, being in acute financial difficulties, he
conceived the brilliant idea of making over his kingdom to his creditors.
Would you care to see the monument?"

I assented, without enthusiasm, and we mounted the steps to the grimy
churchyard, where presently, against the wall of the church, we found the
monument. And still, as we deciphered the weathered inscription, I
debated the question whether I should or should not tell him; and still I
reached no conclusion.

"By the way," my companion said, suddenly, "I am acting the showman on
the assumption that you are the complete and perfect country bumpkin. But
perhaps you are, by now, a fully acclimatized Londoner. How long have you
been living in town?"

"About a month."

"Then the hay-seed is still in your hair, so to speak. I still address a
country cousin, and have not presumed unduly; though, no doubt, you are
beginning to learn the rudiments. I heard Mr. Campbell speak of Wellclose
Square, for instance, as a region known to you."

"Yes. That is where I live."

As I caught his look of astonishment my heart began to race; for I knew
that the inevitable question was coming.

"I suppose your husband is connected with the docks?"

"No," I replied. "And he doesn't live at Wellclose Square. I am not
living with my husband, Mr. Davenant. I never have lived with him, and it
is not my intention ever to live with him."

The deed was done. The murder was out. And though I knew that I had taken
the wrong course, I drew a deep breath of relief. As to Mr. Davenant, he
was, for a few moments, too much taken aback to make any comment. At
length he said, somewhat gloomily:

"I am sorry to hear this, Mrs. Otway. Very sorry. It sounds as if your
domestic affairs were not very comfortable."

"They are not," I answered. "But, as I have told you so much, I should
like to tell you what the position really is. Would you mind?"

"Mind!" he exclaimed. "Of course I want to know, if you are willing to
tell me. Aren't we old friends? I am most concerned about you."

"Thank you, Mr. Davenant. I should like to tell you how this
extraordinary position has come about. Shall we sit down? This place is
quieter than the street."

He dusted the wooden bench with his handkerchief, and we sat down just
below the shabby monument of the poor, little, bankrupt king. And there I
told once again that tragic story of cross-purposes and well-meant
blundering. I had intended to give him but a bare outline of the
catastrophe; but it could not be. For the bald fact was that I had sold
myself to Mr. Otway for money; and my womanly pride and self-respect
would not be satisfied with anything short of a complete justification
such as might be accepted by a scrupulous, high-minded man. And as I
poured out my miserable history, glancing at him from time to time, I was
surprised and almost alarmed at the change that came over him. He was a
sunny-natured man, buoyant, high-spirited, playful and humorous, though
all in a quiet way. But now, as he listened to my story, the genial face
grew rigid, the humorous mouth set hard and stern, and the short, sharp
questions that he put from time to time, came in a voice that was strange
to me.

"So now," said I, when I had come to the end of my recital, "you will
understand why I refuse to recognize this marriage; and why I elect to
live the life of a spinster, though without a spinster's privileges."

In a moment his face softened, and his clear, hazel eyes looked into mine
with grave tenderness.

"Yes," he said; "I understand. I wish I could say more. I wish I could
tell you adequately how I grieve for you--for all the sorrow that you
have had to endure and for the maimed life that lies before you. But
words are poor instruments." He laid his hand on mine for an instant, and
added: "Yet I hope you will feel what I want to express in these
threadbare phrases."

I thanked him for the sympathy, which he had indeed made very clearly
evident, and for a time neither of us spoke. Nevertheless, I could see
that he was cogitating something. Once or twice he seemed about to speak,
for he looked at me, but then again bent his gaze reflectively on the
ground. At length, with some hesitation, he said:

"I hope you won't think me inquisitive or impertinent, but I feel rather
anxious as to--as to how you are placed. I gather that this man Otway
does not--er--contribute--"

"He is quite willing to. But I can't allow him to maintain me if I
repudiate the marriage."

"No; at least I think you are quite wise not to. But--you don't mind my
asking, do you? Are you properly provided for? I'm really not--"

"Of course, you're not," I interrupted, smiling at his diffidence. "As to
my means--well, I don't quite know what they will be eventually, but at
present I am living in a reasonable state of comfort. I am not anxious
about the future."

My answer did not seem to satisfy him completely, for he continued to
cogitate rather uneasily. But, now that I had the key, I could read
pretty clearly, without the aid of any magic crystal, what was passing in
his mind. He knew that I lived in a squalid east-end neighbourhood. He
had seen me at the dealers, and evidently surmised that I was not there
as a buyer; that I was in straitened circumstances--perhaps in a state
of actual poverty--and that I was disposing of my jewellery and
valuables to enable me to live. That, I had no doubt, was what he
suspected; and the question that he was debating so earnestly was whether
he could, without impertinence, extract any further information and
whether our friendship was intimate enough to allow of his making any
kind of offer of help.

I should have liked to set his mind at rest, but, in truth, I was none
too confident about my future. That depended largely on the nature of Mr.
Campbell's offer; on my ability to earn a reasonable livelihood.

"Well," Mr. Davenant said, at length, "I hope your confidence is
justified. But in any case, I suppose you have friends?

"There's no need for you to worry about me," I replied, evasively--for I
had no near relatives from whom I could claim assistance. "I am in quite
comfortable circumstances at present. And now let us put away my bothersome
affairs and talk of something more pleasant."

"Very well," said he. "Let us choose an agreeable topic and discuss it in
all its bearings as we used to do." He drew his watch from his pocket,
and, glancing at it, continued: "It is now nearly one o'clock. What do
you say to the question of lunch as an agreeable topic for our debate?"

I admitted that the subject was not without its attractions.

"Then," said he, "I will suggest that a club is an appropriate place in
which to consume it, and that a mixed club satisfies the most extreme
proprieties."

"I should hardly have suspected you of a mixed dub."

"In strict confidence," he replied, "between you and me and our friend
Theodore of insolvent memory, I have another--unmixed--for normal club
purposes. This one is my lunch club. It is quite near to my chambers, and
is quieter and more pleasant than a restaurant. And it has a special
character of its own, as is indicated by its name. It is called the
'Magpies' Club."

"That sounds rather ominous."

"Doesn't it? But it isn't a burglars' club. Its members are collectors
and connoisseurs--furniture and china maniacs and so forth; and the main
function of the club is to enable them to show their specimens to one
another and to exchange or sell duplicate pieces. May I take it that you
consent to honour the 'Magpies'?"

I accepted the invitation gladly, for a month's residence in the East End
had made me decidedly appreciative of the amenities of the more civilized
regions. We decided to walk to Essex Street, in which the club had its
premises, and to go by way of the side streets for greater quiet and ease
of conversation.

"You spoke just now of your chambers," said I. "Does that mean that you
are in practice now?"

"Yes. But not in the law. I finished my legal studies and got called, but
then I decided to give up the Bench and the Woolsack, though they shouted
for me never so loudly, and return to an old love. I am now an
architect."

"Is a barrister allowed to practice as an architect?"

"On that I am not quite clear; but it really doesn't matter to me. It is
a question for the benchers or other authorities."

"Have you been in practice long?"

"Exactly three weeks to-day. And when I tell you that I have already
received a commission to design and erect a greenhouse no less than
twelve feet by eight in plan, you will realize that I am mounting the
ladder of professional success, with the speed of an eagle with a balloon
attachment. My client, by the way, is a member of the club."

Thus gossiping, we made our way by devious routes through the less
frequented streets, by Garrick Street, Covent Garden and Drury Lane,
until, by the Law Courts, we emerged into the Strand, crossed to Essex
Street, and presently arrived at the roomy, old-fashioned house in which
the Magpies had their meeting-place.

It was a pleasant, homely club, and certainly there could be no question
as to its eminent respectability, for the aspect of the members--mostly
middle-aged and many of them elderly--bordered on the frumpish. The room
in which we selected our table was a large, oblong apartment, quietly
furnished and decorated and provided with a glazed museum case, which
occupied the centre; while a sort of dais at one end was devoted to the
display of pieces of furniture exhibited by the members. I noticed, too,
that the walls were occupied by pictures, each of which bore a written
descriptive label.

"Are you interested in ancient ivories?" Mr. Davenant asked, as we looked
into the glass case, in which a collection of very brown and cracked
specimens were exhibited by a Mr. Udimore-Jones. "For my part, I find it
difficult to develop great enthusiasm over the dental arrangements of
superannuated elephants, carved into funny shapes by piously-facetious
middle-agers. Look out! Here comes my client. Let us sneak off to our
table. Aha! Too late! She's seen us."

"Which is your client?" I asked, looking round furtively.

"The elderly damsel with the smile--a Miss Tallboy Smith. There! She has
caught my eye now. Did you ever see such a set of teeth? She had better
be careful or Udimore-Jones will have her."

We were edging away towards our table, with a feeble hope of escape, when
she caught us.

"Now, I don't believe you've seen my cup," she exclaimed, with an
engaging smile. "You must see it. It is not only genuine Nantgarw, but
the roses on it are unquestionable Billingsleys."

"Observe," said Mr. Davenant, "the pride of the inveterate collector.
You'd think she had painted those roses herself."

"Indeed, you wouldn't," retorted Miss Tallboy-Smith; "not if you had seen
them and knew anything about ceramic painting. And as to pride, isn't it
something to be proud of? Nantgarw porcelain is rare, and roses painted
by Billingsley are rare; and when you have them both in a single piece,
why then, you see, you--"

"Then," said Mr. Davenant, "you multiply the rarity of the one by the
rarity of the other, and the product of the multiplication is the rarity
of the piece as a whole."

"Isn't he absurd?" she simpered, "treating me to a complete private view
of the 'ancient ivories.'"

"Perfectly incorrigible. Don't you agree with me, Miss--Mrs--"

"Otway," said I.

"Oh, really! Now I wonder--my brother knew a Mr. Otway--oh, but he was
a money-lender. That wouldn't be--but won't you come and look at my
cup?"

We returned to the glass case, of which Miss Tallboy Smith opened a door
and lifted from its shelf a dainty porcelain teacup.

"Just feel how thin and light it is," she said, holding it out to me.

"I wouldn't if I were you," said Mr. Davenant. "This Nantgarw stuff
crumbles like a baked egg-shell; and it's hideously valuable."

"Don't take any notice of him," said Miss Tallboy Smith. "Just feel it--it's
positively delicious to touch; and look at the lovely roses; no one
but William Billingsley could have painted those roses. And, if there
could be any doubt, you have only to turn the piece up and look at the
bottom. There is Billingsley's personal mark--the number 7. That's
infallible."

I took from her hand the delicate, translucent cup, and was admiring the
freedom and softness of the flower painting when she drew nearer and said
in a warning whisper: "Here comes Major Dewham-Brown. If he tries to sell
you anything, don't buy it. He only brings his bad bargains here."

She had barely uttered her warning when a brassy voice behind me
exclaimed: "How d'you do, Miss Tallboy Smith? and how are you, Davenant?"
and a tall, smart, rather stupid-looking man with a large nose--which
seemed to have been produced at the expense of his eyes and chin--sailed
into my field of vision.

"Ha!" said he. "Pretty cup, that. Worth a pot of money, too, I expect,
though I don't know much about 'em. And that reminds me that I've got
rather an interesting thing that I picked up the other day; bit of old
church plate; seventeenth century, if not earlier. Like to see it?"

Without waiting for a reply, he fished out of a "poacher's" pocket a flat
object wrapped in a silk handkerchief.

"Curious piece, this: interested me very much. The repouss\E9-work on it is
remarkably fine." He unfolded the handkerchief as he spoke, and at length
extracted, with a sort of conjuror's flourish, a small, circular, silver
platter--apparently a paten, to judge by its size. This he handed to
Miss Tallboy-Smith, who grinned at it indulgently and passed it to Mr.
Davenant, who, having looked it over without enthusiasm, handed it to me.
A very brief inspection, with the piece in my hand, was enough to make
Miss Tallboy-Smith's warning unnecessary; for, apart from the unsuitability
of the ornament--if it was really meant for a paten--it was an obvious
electrotype, which had, however, been pickled, polished and sulphured
with intent to deceive. Having noted this fact, I returned the piece to
its owner with a few words of polite and colourless commendation of the
design; and the Major, chilled by the lack of enthusiasm, invested his
treasure once more in its silken wrapping and went off in search of a
more appreciative audience. Under cover of his parting courtesies to Miss
Tallboy-Smith, Mr. Davenant and I retreated to our table.

"That antique of the Major's looked to me rather like fake," said my
companion, when we had ordered our lunch. "It was so very venerable."

"It is an electrotype, sulphured to give an appearance of age," said I.

"Is it, by Jove? Now, how did you spot it as an electrotype?"

"It was the disagreement between the back and the face that first
attracted my attention. The face was repouss\E9--pretty coarse too--but
there was not a vestige of a toolmark on the back, where, of course, most
of the punch-marks would be; nothing but the smooth surface of the
deposited metal."

Mr. Davenant chuckled. "I seem to have imported an expert Magpie. Oh! But
I remember now that you and your father used to do all sorts of wonderful
works in metal. Ha, ha! Poor old Dewham-Brown! He little suspected that
he was dealing with a practical artificer."

Here the advent of food put a temporary stop to conversation, for we were
both pretty sharp-set; but during the progress of the meal I looked about
me and was vastly entertained by the proceedings of the Magpies. The
glass case was the centre of interest, around which a small crowd of
enthusiasts gathered, eagerly discussing the exhibits, which the proud
owners expounded, with their noses flattened against the glass, or
tenderly lifted out for closer inspection. And now and again a new
exhibitor would arrive with a bag or attach\E9 case, from which fresh
treasures were disgorged into the glazed sanctuary.

"I suppose," said I, "your members will have nothing to do with any but
antique works?"

"Not as a rule," Mr. Davenant replied. "The collector is usually a lover
of old things. But there are exceptions. A good many of the pictures
shown here are modern; some, I suspect, are shown by the artists
themselves. Then we have one member who collects modern pottery
exclusively--not commercial stuff, of course, but the work of modern
artist-potters, like De Morgan, the Martin Brothers and other individual
workers. Fine stuff it is, too. I have a few pieces myself. And, talk of
the old gentleman--there he is. I'll fetch him over and make him show us
what he has got in that bag."

He rose from the table, and crossed the room, and I saw him accost a very
tall, pleasant-looking young man who was bearing down on the glass case
with a good-sized hand-bag, but readily allowed himself to be led over
our table.

"Now, Hawkesley," said Mr. Davenant, "my guest wants to see what really
high-class modern pottery is like. What have you got?"

"I have only three pieces with me," replied Mr. Hawkesley, "and they are
all of the same type; what I call 'mystery-ware.'"

"What is the mystery about it? Mr. Davenant asked.

"The mystery is, who makes it? As far as I know, there is only one dealer
who has it, and he absolutely refuses to say where he gets it. I have
never seen any of it exhibited--excepting here--and nobody can tell me
the name of the potter or anything about it beyond the fact that it seems
to be the exclusive monopoly of this one dealer, and that he has very
little of it, and charges accordingly. But it is wonderful stuff." He
lifted out of his bag a couple of jars and a bowl--handling them with
that curious delicacy that one often notices in persons with large,
strong, supple hands--and placed them carefully on the table.

"You see," he continued, "there are two methods of treatment, which are
sometimes combined, as on this jar; and these two styles are based on two
very different types of old work--the old English slip-ware, such as the
Wrotham and Staffordshire and Toftware, and the old French Henri Deux, or
Oiron ware. In the one, the ornament is produced by laying on pipes or
threads of coloured slip--that is, clay in the semi-liquid state; in the
other by inlaying coloured paste or enamel in cavities in the body, which
seems to be made with tools like those used by book binders. This covered
jar--which looks almost like a piece of fine Japanese cloisonn\E9--and
this bowl show the inlay method, and this other jar is an example of the
slip decoration, but with one or two spots of enamel inlay."

"I think I prefer the pure inlay," said Mr. Davenant.

"So do I," said Mr. Hawkesley, "and so, I think, does the artist. All his
finest work is done by the inlay method, though he uses the slip
decoration with such skill and taste that it is virtually a new method.
The old Wrotham and Toftware looks very primitive by the side of this
scholarly, refined work."

I turned the three pieces of pottery over in my hands and warmly
commended the judgment of the collector. No modern work that I had ever
seen approached it for perfection of finish or grace of design; while the
colour-scheme combined richness, delicacy and restraint in a truly
marvellous manner. It seemed to unite the brilliancy of enamel to the
sober beauty of old tapestry. And even the little blue bird, inlaid on
the bottom of each piece to form the potter's mark, was finished with
care and taste.

"May one inquire as to the local habitation and name of the dealer?" Mr.
Davenant asked.

"You may," was the reply. "His name is Maurice Goldstein, and he is to be
found at Number 56, Hand Court, Holborn. And I should like to wring his
neck."

We both laughed at the vindictive tone in which this benevolent wish was
uttered, and at the sudden ferocity of aspect that swept over the usually
good-humoured, kindly face.

"Why this homicidal craving?" Mr. Davenant asked.

"Don't you see," the other demanded, indignantly, "that this infernal
Goldswine--I beg your pardon--"

"You needn't," said I.

"That this miserable huckster is grinding the face of some poor artist;
that he is not only devouring the earnings of this industrious,
painstaking worker, but--for his own paltry profit--he is robbing that
artist of the credit--of the fame--to which his genius and his
enthusiasm entitle him. Look at this lovely jar! I gave that mean worm ten
guineas for it. How much do you suppose he gave the potter?"

"Ten shillings, perhaps," suggested Mr. Davenant.

"Probably not much more, though there is getting on for a week's work in
it."

"Still," I said, with a mischievous desire to stir up his indignation
afresh, "the potter probably enjoys making these beautiful things. The
work is its own reward."

"I can't agree to that," Mr. Hawkesley rejoined, warmly. "He doesn't
enjoy being hard up and having to work for a pittance. Besides, it isn't
just. This man makes a jar that is going to give me a life-long pleasure.
I want to pay him for that pleasure. I want to know who he is, to shake
his hand and thank him and tell him that he is the salt of the earth. And
this Shylock hides him away and just feeds on him like the beastly
parasite that he is."

He gathered up the treasured masterpieces, and having wished us adieu,
with a sudden return to his customary geniality, crossed to the glass
case to find a vacant niche for his samples of "mystery ware."

"I like Jack Hawkesley," said my companion; as we watched him.

"So do I," I agreed warmly. "He takes a human interest in the artist. I
wish more collectors were like him."

"Yes," said Mr. Davenant. "He is a good type of rich man. Would that
there were more Hawkesleys." He poured out the coffee which the waitress
had just brought and then asked: "What do you think of this club--as a
feeding and resting place, I mean?"

"It seems a comfortable, homely place, and the members and their exhibits
are quite interesting."

"I find it so. You wouldn't care to join, I suppose? It is cheap, as
clubs go: five guineas a year and no entrance fee. I should think you
would find it a great convenience, living so far from the centre of
town."

"It would be a great convenience. But should I be eligible? I am not a
collector, you know."

"No, but you are something of an expert. At any rate, Hawkesley and I
would manage the formalities. Think it over, and if you decide to honour
us, drop me a line. This is my address--56, Clifford's Inn."

He handed me his card, and when he had made a note of my address, I
prepared to depart.

"I have wasted a fearful amount of your time, Mr. Davenant," said I; "but
it has been a very pleasant interlude for me."

"Has it really? I hope it has. For my part, I have enjoyed myself just as
I did in the old days when you used to let me wag a philosophic chin at
you, and I am reluctant to let you go so soon. Mayn't I see you to the
station, or wherever you are going?

"I thought of walking back to get myself acquainted with London."

"Then let me put you on the right road and show you some of the short
cuts."

"But what about your work?"

He regarded me with that quaint, humorous smile that I had always found
so attractive. "My work is, at present, of a somewhat intermittent type.
This is one of the intermissions. Let us fare forth and study the
architectural beauties of the Metropolis."

And we fared forth accordingly.

The short cuts discovered by my companion did not in the least conform to
Euclid's definition of a straight line; and their brevity was relieved by
sundry excursions into alleys and by-streets and incursions into churches
and other ancient buildings. They led us by way of the Temple and its old
round church, Mitre Court, Fetter Lane, Nevill's Court, Gough Square, and
so to St. Paul's Churchyard and into the Cathedral; thence by Paul's
Alley, Paternoster Row, Cheapside and Lombard Street, dropping into one
or two churches on our way, until we came out on Great Tower Hill, and
drifted slowly down Royal Mint Street. And all the while we gossiped
pleasantly of this wonderful city and its wonderful, inexhaustible past;
and my guide expounded, with all his old gaiety and brightness--and with
astonishing knowledge of his subject--until I had almost forgotten
Wellclose Square and the sinister shadow that hung over my life, and
seemed to be back in the untroubled days of my girlhood.

But not quite. For, even as I talked--or more often listened--with the
liveliest interest and pleasure, a project was maturing in my mind. I
had, in fact, conceived a brilliant idea. Mr. Davenant's suggestion that
I should join the club had started a train of thought that ran as an
under-current--in the subconscious mind, perhaps, as Lilith would have
said. It had begun vaguely when I saw the modern pictures on the walls,
and the modern works in the glass case and the Major hawking round his
little platter. Here was a place in which the work of the unknown artist
could be shown and perhaps sold; my own work, Lilith's work, the
Titmouse's, Philibar's, even Miss Polton's. For five guineas a year I
could open this emporium, not only to myself, but to my fellow-workers;
could slip past the dealer and secure his profits for us all. I say it
was a brilliant idea--at least, it appeared so to me; and throughout
that long peregrination, made delightful by the sympathetic companionship
of my newly-recovered friend it germinated and grew until, as we halted
to say good-bye at the corner of Cable Street, it had grown to full
maturity.

"I have been thinking," said I, "of your suggestion--about joining the
club, you know. It would be nice to have a place to go to for a rest or a
meal, in the centre of town. And I shall often want such a place."

His face brightened perceptibly--perhaps at the implied assurance that I
could afford to spend five guineas.

"Then, may I put your name up for election?"

"Will you be so kind?"

"Won't I? It will be jolly, and we shan't lose sight of one another
again; though that was my fault for not writing. I was often on the point
of sending you a letter, and then I felt a silly diffidence--thought
that you might consider I was presuming on a mere acquaintanceship.
However, I will propose you for membership at once, and in about a week's
time you will be a full-blown Magpie. Then I will send you a line,
though, of course, you will get the official notification."

He handed me my bag, and with a hearty hand-shake, we said "Good-bye,"
and went our respective ways.

It was but a few minutes' walk to Wellclose Square, and I took it slowly;
for now that my companion was gone and I was bereft of his buoyancy and
vitality, I was suddenly aware of intense bodily fatigue. Moreover, I
felt a certain reluctance to bring to a definite close what had been an
interval of quiet but perfect happiness. And so, in spite of my fatigue,
I sauntered on, loitering awhile in St. George's churchyard and stopping
to look up at the quaint stone name-tablet at the corner of Chigwell
Lane, until weariness and growing hunger drove me homewards. And even
then, it was not without regret that I pulled the brass bell-knob and, as
it were, wrote "Finis" to this pleasant and eventful chapter.

Chapter XV--The Magic Pendulum

THE weighty question whether my handicraft would yield me a livelihood
was answered on the following morning by the arrival of a letter from Mr.
Campbell; and it was answered, though not very emphatically, in the
affirmative. The prices that he offered, provisionally--and advised me
not to accept--were appallingly low; very little above those of mere
commercial goods. But even so, it would be possible, by hard work and
spare living, to eke out a bare subsistence. And it was fair to assume
that Mr. Campbell's offer was, as indeed he explicitly stated, a minimum,
on which an advance might be expected. Accordingly, I declined the offer
and decided to await the results of actual sales to his customers.

I was turning these matters over at the breakfast table, when Lilith came
and took a vacant chair by my side.

"Well, Sibyl," she said, in a low voice, "how did you fare yesterday? Did
you have any success?

"Yes. I came back with an empty bag."

"And a full purse?

"Ah! That is another matter. The tide of handicraft doesn't seem exactly
to lead on to fortune."

"I want to hear all about it," said Lilith. "But we can't discuss it
here. Let us have a quiet talk up in my room after breakfast. If you will
run up when you've finished, I will join you in a few minutes."

I assented gladly, for Lilith, apart from what the irreverent Titmouse
characterised as her "crystal-gazing tosh," was a sound adviser on
business affairs; and a few minutes later I betook myself upstairs to her
studio. I had scarcely seen this room before, for there was an unwritten
law, sternly enforced by Miss Polton, forbidding the boarders to enter
one another's workrooms except by invitation and on specific business,
and I now looked about me with a good deal of curiosity.

It was a queer room. The two sides of Lilith's personality, like two
separate persons, seemed to have parcelled it out into two distinct
territories. There was the working territory, neat, precise,
business-like, strangely free from the usual muddle and disorder of a
woman-artist's studio; the big water-colour easel, the orderly painting
cabinet, the papier-mache lay figure, quaintly arrayed in a walking
costume such as might have been seen in a Regent Street shop window
(miraculously built up, as I observed, of draperies, pinned, tied or
lightly stitched together), the charcoal studies from the figure, pinned
up on the wall for reference, with careful pencil drawings of heads,
hands and feet, and one or two casts of faces and hands. The working
department was a model of matter-of-fact efficiency.

In curious contrast to this was the domain of Lilith, the mystic. In a
well-lighted corner stood a small table supporting a black velvet cushion
on which reposed a crystal globe of the size of a cricket ball. Above the
table a couple of book-shelves exhibited a collection of volumes treating
of Spiritualism, Telepathy, Apparitions, Psychical Research and other
occult subjects. On the upper shelf stood a box filled with the letters
of a dissected alphabet; while, hanging on the wall, was a small
heart-shaped object with tiny castors, which I assumed to be Planchette,
and by its side a single Egyptian bead suspended at the end of a silken
thread.

Yet these two aspects of this strange girl's character were not without a
connecting link. On the walls were several framed paintings signed
"Winifred Blake," mystical figure subjects, recalling, but not imitating,
the works of Burne Jones and Rosetti, exquisitely drawn and delicately
painted in water-colour. The work on the easel was a similar drawing of a
frieze-like character, the figures nude but with lightly indicated
draperies; and one of the nude figures had been traced on to a
fashion-plate board and was already partly clothed in the walking
costume.

My survey of the room and its contents was interrupted by the arrival of
its occupant, who having seated me in the easy chair, perched herself on
her painting-stool and opened the examination.

"Now," said she, "I don't want to be inquisitive, but I do want to know
just how you got on. Did you carry out the methods that I proposed?

"I did--at least as far as the silent willing was concerned--though not
very thoroughly. I don't think I did much in the way of suggestion."

"And did you sell your work?"

"Yes, I think I may say I did," and here I gave her an account of Mr.
Campbell's two alternative offers.

"You have done admirably, Sibyl," she said enthusiastically. "Your first
essay has been a perfect success. And now, tell me: are you convinced?"

As I could not truthfully say that I was, I took refuge in polite
evasion, which, however, Lilith brushed aside with some impatience.

"I can never understand this kind of scepticism," said she. "You have the
cause and effect before your eyes, but yet you refuse to recognise the
connection. You take your work to this man. Outside the shop you will
that he shall buy it. You go in and he does buy it. What more could you
want?"

"But he might have bought the things if I hadn't willed, you know."

"Yes," she agreed; "he might. But that is not the way we reason about
material things. I strike a match and apply it to a laid fire, and the
fire burns. It might have burned if I had not applied the lighted match,
but no one doubts the connection between the lighted match and the
lighted fire. Physical causes and effects are accepted with unquestioning
faith, but as soon as we come to spiritual or psychical phenomena, this
extraordinary scepticism springs up--this curious refusal to admit and
accept the obvious."

"I am not asserting that there was no connection between the silent
willing and the purchase of my work," said I. "All I say is that I don't
regard the connection as proved. I can't decide for or against because
there doesn't seem to be enough evidence either way."

"Yes; I suppose you are right," she admitted, reluctantly. "But I should
like to convince you, because I am sure you have very unusual powers."

She was silent for a short space, and then, suddenly, she asked: "Have
you ever been to a s\E9ance, Sibyl?"

"Never," I replied.

"Well," said she, "you ought to go to one--not to any of those silly
public shows conducted by mere mountebanks, but to a private s\E9ance,
carried out by really earnest people who are seeking to extend our
knowledge. Would you care to come to one with me?"

"It would be rather interesting," I replied, without much enthusiasm.

"It would," said she. "You were speaking of evidence just now. Well, at a
genuine s\E9ance you would obtain evidence that I think would convince you
of the reality of psychical phenomena. I have a friend--a Mr. Quecks--who
has given me some most remarkable demonstrations, and I have no doubt
that he would be very pleased for you to accompany me to one of them."

"Is Mr. Quecks a medium?" I asked.

"No; I shouldn't describe him as a medium, though he is very sensitive
and has most extraordinary powers. But he is a profound student of
super-normal phenomena and deeply interested in psychical research. May I
ask him to show you some of his experiments?"

"Thank you, Lilith; and I hope you will find me less disappointing than
you have to-day. I am really quite curious about these things, although I
admit a rather sceptical frame of mind. I was wondering, before you came
up, what you do with that bead on the string."

"That," replied Lilith, all agog at the question, "is the _pendule
explorateur_--the magic pendulum. It is an instrument of the kind known
in psychical science as an autoscope--an appliance for, as it were,
bringing the subconscious into view."

"But how does it work?"

"It works by the influence of the subconscious mind upon the muscles. Let
me show you--but you shall try it yourself because you are an
unbeliever."

She removed the crystal ball and its cushion from the table, and taking
the bowl of loose letters, turned out its contents and rapidly arranged
the letters in a circle, forming a clock-wise alphabet. Then she took the
pendulum down from its hook.

"Now," said she, "what you have to do is this: you rest your elbow on the
table to steady your hand, and you hold the string with the thumb and
finger, letting the bead hang just clear of the table in the centre of
the circle; and you must keep your hand perfectly still and steady."

"But if I do, the bead will remain still, too."

"No, it won't, excepting just at first. Presently it will begin to swing,
apparently of its own accord, but really in accordance with your mental
state. For instance, if you let it hang inside a glass and you will that
it shall strike the hour, it will strike the hour. If you will--or I
hold your other hand and will--that it shall swing round in a circle to
the right or left, it will swing round in the direction willed. But that
is an exercise of the conscious will. In the experiment that we are
making now we tap the subconscious. If there is any thing or person
occupying your subconscious mind, the pendulum will spell out the name of
that thing or person by swinging towards the letters. Let me put the
chair comfortably for you, so that you can keep quite still."

As I listened to Lilith's explanation I began to wish heartily that I had
never embarked on this experiment. Of course, I did not believe for a
moment that this absurd pendulum would develop the occult powers that
Lilith claimed for it; but yet her confidence shook mine. And I had a
very strong feeling that, on this day of all days, I should prefer to
keep my subconscious mind to myself. However, there was no escape; so I
seated myself and proceeded to carry out Lilith's directions.

For nearly half a minute the bead hung quite motionless from my steady
hand. Then it began almost imperceptibly to oscillate. My eye had already
taken in the positions of the letters which might be incriminating, and
now I observed with uneasy surprise that the faint oscillations of the
pendulum were taking a direction towards the letter J. I could detect no
movement in my hand, but, nevertheless, the oscillations grew wider and
wider until the bead, as if possessed by a private demon, swung briskly
half-way across the circle.

"That is pretty definite," said Lilith. "It is swinging towards U--or is
it J? The circle ought to have been bigger, so that the letters need not
have been opposite to one another. But I'll write down both; U or J."

The swing of the pendulum now began to shorten; and then, almost
abruptly, it changed its direction to one at right angles, and I observed
with astonishment that it was pointing direct to A.

"It's either A or P," said Lilith. "I'll put them both down."

Once again the pendulum changed the direction of its swing, and Lilith
noted down E or S; and so, to my growing consternation, it continued to
take up quite distinct changes of direction until six variations had
occurred, when the pendulum became stationary and then began to swing
round in a circle.

"It has finished," said Lilith--whereupon I instantly dropped the
pendulum. "It is a word of six letters: U or J, A or P, E or S, A or P, E
or S, F or R. Let us see if we can make out what the word is. It is a
pity the letters were opposite; it muddles it up so. They ought to be in
a half-circle, but then they would be too close. But let us try a few
combinations. U P E A S F; it can't be that. U P S A S F; it can't be
that. We'll try it with J--J A E P E F; that isn't it. J A S B S F; that
can't be the word. Do the letters suggest anything to you, Sibyl? Is
there any name that might be lurking in your subconscious mind, beginning
with U or J? Try to think. What did you do in town yesterday?

"Oh, various things. I went to the dealer, of course; and then I went to
a private show of pottery and antiques."

"Pottery," mused Lilith, scanning the letters that she had written down.
"Let me see: Upchurch? No, that won't do." She looked the letters through
again and then asked eagerly: "There wasn't any Wedgwood there, I
suppose?"

Now it happened that while Mr. Hawkesley was talking to us I had noticed
an old gentleman tenderly placing a very fine green Wedgwood cup and
saucer in the show case. So I could, and did, answer truthfully.

"Yes, there was; a beautiful green Jasper-ware cup and saucer."

"There!" Lilith exclaimed triumphantly. "Jasper! That is the word! And
yet I don't suppose you have given that cup and saucer a thought since
you saw it."

"I had forgotten its existence until you spoke of Wedgwood."

"Exactly," said Lilith. "And that is the mysterious peculiarity of the
subconscious. You see a thing or a person perhaps only for a moment, and
straightway forget it. It seems to be gone for ever. But it is not. It
has sunk into the subconscious, to remain there unnoticed possibly for
years until some chance association, or perhaps a dream, brings it to the
surface. But all the time it has been there. And at any moment it can be
brought into view by the use of some kind of autoscope such as the
pendulum or the crystal."

"The crystal is an autoscope, too, is it?" I asked.

"Yes; but of quite a different kind. The pendulum acts by the effects of
the subconscious mind upon the muscles; the crystal by the effects of the
subconscious mind on the centres of visual perception."

"That sounds very learned; but tell me exactly what you do with the
crystal."

"As to me, personally," replied Lilith, "I do very little with it.
Crystal vision--or 'scrying,' to use the technical term--is a rather
rare faculty. I am a very poor scryer. But in the case of a really gifted
observer, the most astonishing results are obtained. The method of using
the instrument is this: The scryer sits in a restful position with the
crystal before her (all the best scryers, I think, are women) and gazes
steadily at the bright lights in it, keeping the conscious mind in a
passive state--thinking of nothing, in fact. After a time the lights in
the crystal grow dim; a kind of cloud or mist seems to float before it,
and in this cloud, and gradually taking its place, the picture or vision
appears; sometimes dim and vague, but often quite clear and bright, like
the little pictures that you see in a convex mirror or a silver ball."

"And what is this picture? I mean what is its subject?

"That varies. It may be a scene from the past that had been forgotten by
the conscious memory, or something that never happened at all--just a
jumble of bits of memory like a dream. Or it may be the picture of some
event that is going to take place in the near future."

"But," I objected, "how can an event which has not yet occurred be in
your subconscious mind?"

"I know," said Lilith. "The whole subject of pre-recognition is a very
difficult one. But there seems to be no doubt that prophetic visions do
really occur. And then there is clairvoyance--seeing across space and
through obstacles. A really gifted scryer, by concentrating her thought
on a particular person or place as she looks into the crystal, can see
that person or place, no matter how great the distance may be; can see
exactly what the person is doing or what is happening at the place."

"Really!" I exclaimed. "That sounds like rather an undesirable faculty.
Doesn't it strike you, Lilith, as a very great intrusion on the privacy
and liberty of the subject to scry a person without his or her consent?
Supposing the scryer should happen to discover the scryed one in the act
of taking her--or his--morning tub. Wouldn't it be rather a liberty?"

Lilith laughed (but I could see that the idea was new to her): "You are
dreadfully matter-of-fact, Sibyl. But, of course, you are quite right. We
shouldn't misuse our powers. As for me, I have very little power of the
kind to misuse, for I have never seen anything more than a sort of vague
picture of unrecognisable figures in undistinguishable surroundings. But
I think you might do better, for I am still convinced that you have
special gifts. Would you like to try the crystal, Sibyl?

"Not now, thank you, Lilith. We ought to get to work after all this
gossip. And that reminds me that, before you came up, I was looking at
your exquisite paintings and wondering if you are not, to some extent,
wasting your great talents."

"In what way?" she asked.

"Of course," I said, "these designs would make magnificent tapestries or
wall decorations. But if you can't get a wall, you might condescend to a
smaller surface. Have you ever tried designing and painting a fan?"

"No," she replied.

"I wish you would," said I. "You would do it splendidly with your power
of design and your delicate technique. And Phillibar could make the
sticks and carve the guards, or I could do you a pair in silver repouss\E9,
and a jewelled pin and loop. Will you think over the proposal?"

Lilith picked up the crystal on its cushion and, smiling at me, said:

"I will make a bargain with you. If you will take the crystal to your
room and give it a thorough trial whenever you have time, I will get out
a design for a fan. Do you agree?"

I held out my hand for the crystal. Primarily, my desire was to introduce
Lilith to Fame and Fortune through the medium of the Magpies Club; but
the startling success of the magic pendulum had aroused my curiosity in
regard to the other "autoscope," though I have to confess that, when I
had borne it to my room, I concealed it guiltily in a locked drawer,
where it should be secure from the prying eyes of the servant-maid, and
above all from the observation of the sarcastic and sceptical Titmouse.

But there were other matters than crystals and magic pendulums to be
thought of. There was, for instance, the set of twelve spoons which Mr.
Campbell had asked me to make and to which he had again referred in his
letter. I knew now that I should be paid for them at a reasonably
remunerative rate, and this, and the congenial nature of the task,
encouraged me to get to work. But before I could begin there was the
motive of the design to be considered; and since the apostles were ruled
out as obsolete, I had to find some other group of twelve related
objects. After a whole day's anxious thought, I fixed upon the Signs of
the Zodiac as furnishing a picturesque and manageable motive, and with
this scheme in my mind, I fell to work in earnest, first with the pencil
and then with the wax and metal.

But busy as I was, and happy in the interest of my work, I was yet aware
of a change, of a something new that had come into my life. From the
little workshop which had been my world, I found my thoughts straying out
into the larger world, and particularly that part of it which is adjacent
to Temple Bar; and if at times I viewed this change with some misgivings,
I was more often conscious of a sense of exhilaration such as one feels
when embarking on some new adventure.

In due course I received notice of my election as a member of the Magpies
Club, and by the same post a letter from Mr. Davenant asking me to
celebrate the event by lunching with him there; and, as I had occasion to
go into town to replenish my silver and some other materials, I accepted
his invitation, intending to return to Wellclose Square in the afternoon.
But it appeared that a loan collection of antique silver was being
exhibited at the South Kensington Museum, and that he had hoped to have
the pleasure of inspecting it under my expert guidance. Now, to a
craftsman (or crafts-woman) of small experience, there is no technical
education to compare with the study of admitted masterpieces. I felt that
strongly, and I felt that I needed that technical education; furthermore,
I felt that the attempt to explain the merits of the old work to an
attentive and sympathetic listener would help me to concentrate my own
attention. And perhaps it did. At any rate, I spent a long and pleasant
afternoon at the museum, and we subsequently discussed the exhibits (and
various other matters) very companionably over the dinner table at the
club.

"It has been a jolly day for me, Mrs. Otway," said Mr. Davenant, as he
wished me 'good-bye' at the Underground Station. "I've learned no end
about silver--you are a perfect encyclopaedia of knowledge in regard to
goldsmith's work. And the delightful thing to think of is that we've
only scratched the surface of the museum. The place is inexhaustible. Do
you think I may hope for the pleasure of another visit there with you
before long?"

I gave what I intended to be an ambiguous answer. But it was not
ambiguous to me; and I suspect that Mr. Davenant went on his way with a
feeling that a precedent had been created.

When I arrived home, I found a letter awaiting me from Mr. Otway. It was
not entirely unexpected, for I had felt pretty certain that he would
presently hear further from his mysterious correspondent. It now appeared
that he had received one or two short letters, ostensibly of the nature
of warnings, but actually threatening, though in vague, indefinite terms,
and one more recently of a more explicitly menacing character. These he
wished me to see and discuss with him, and he asked me to make an
appointment, at my convenience, to meet him for that purpose. I replied,
suggesting, as before, the Tower Wharf; and there, a couple of evenings
later, I met him.

In appearance he had by no means improved. His pale face had a strained,
wild expression, his eye-lids were puffy and covered with curious, minute
wrinkles. His hands were markedly tremulous, and his fingers bore the
deep stains that mark the inveterate cigarette smoker. His dress was
noticeably less neat than it had used to be; indeed, he presented a
distinctly shabby and neglected appearance. Oddly enough, too, he seemed
to have grown somewhat stouter.

I should have been less than human if these plain indications of
sustained misery had awakened in me no feeling of pity. That his
sufferings were the indirect result of his indifference to the happiness
or misery of others, could not entirely stifle compassion, and I found
myself speaking to him in a tone almost sympathetic.

"I am afraid, Mr. Otway," said I, "you are letting these nonsensical
letters worry you quite unnecessarily. You are not looking at all well."

"I am not at all well, Helen," he replied, dejectedly.

"And I think you are smoking too much."

"I am. And I am drinking too much--I, who have been a temperate man all
my life. And I have to take drugs to get a decent night's rest. This
worry is breaking me up."

"Oh, come, Mr. Otway," I protested, "you mustn't give way in this manner.
What is it all about, after all? Just a wretched blackmailer whom you
know to be an impostor, whose threats you know to be mere empty
vapourings."

"That is not quite true, Helen. The man is an impostor, no doubt. He
doesn't really know anything. There is nothing for him to know. But he
could create a great deal of trouble. He could, in fact, cause the--ah--the
inquiry to be re-opened and--ah--"

"Exactly. And if it were re-opened? There would be unpleasant comment on
the fact that a detail of the evidence had been withheld at the inquest.
But that is the worst that could happen."

Mr. Otway looked at me with a sort of dumb gratitude that was quite
pathetic, but his gloom was in nowise dispelled by my optimism.

"It is very good of you, Helen," said he, "to speak in this cheerful,
confident tone. But I assure you, you minimize the danger. There is no
saying what construction might be put upon the suppression of that
detail; what considerations of motive might be read into it--especially
as there was what they would call collusion between us to suppress it.
But let me show you the last letter--the others are of no consequence."

He produced his wallet, and, after some awkward fumbling, drew out the
letter, which he held out to me with a hand that shook so that the paper
rattled. Like the last, it was typewritten unskilfully, and characterized
by the same semi-illiterate confusion in the wording, which ran thus:

"Mr. Lewis Otway,

"The writer of this warns you once more to look out for trouble. The
person that I spoke of knows that some thing was held back at the inquest
at least they say so and that they know why your wife won't live with you
and that she knows all about it too and that someone knows more than you
think anybody knows. This is a friendly warning.

"FROM A WELL WISHER."

I returned the letter to Mr. Otway after reading it through twice, and I
must confess that my confidence was somewhat shaken. If the writer was
merely guessing, he seemed to have an uncanny aptitude for guessing
right. As to his claim to possess some further knowledge, I did not see
how that could be possible. When the fatal interview took place between
my father and Mr. Otway, there were--to the best of my belief--only
three persons in the house. Of those actually present at the interview
there was only a single survivor--Mr. Otway himself--and he alone knew
with certainty what occurred. The claim was therefore almost certainly
false. And yet, even as I dismissed it, there crept into my mind once
again a vague discomfort, a doubt whether there might not be something
that I was unaware of, and that Mr. Otway knew; some dreadful secret that
I, of all persons in the world, had been instrumental in guarding from
discovery. And as I glanced at Mr. Otway--haggard, wild, trembling, and
terrified out of all proportion to the danger, so far as it was known to
me--the horrid doubts seemed to deepen into something like suspicion.

"Of course," said he, when he had returned the letter to the wallet, "I
realize that you are right; that there is nothing to be done but to wait
for this person to show his hand more plainly. It would be madness to
apply to the police. They would immediately ask if there had been any
evidence withheld and why you were not living with me. And if they
succeeded in getting hold of the writer of this letter, we should have
more to fear from them than from the writer himself. He may be, as you
believe, a mere blackmailer who is preparing to extort money, but if he
were brought to bay he would try to justify his threats."

With this I could not but agree. The implied allegations in this letter
were, in point of fact, true; and any attempt to obtain help from the
police would probably result in their truth being made manifest.

"Have you no idea whatever," I asked, "who might be the writer of this
letter? He can hardly be a complete stranger. Have you no suspicion? Can
you think of no one who might have written it?"

He looked at me furtively and cleared his throat once or twice before
replying; and when he did answer, his manner was hesitating and even
evasive.

"Suspicions," he said, "are--er--not very--ah--helpful. I have no
facts. The mere--ah--conjecture that this person or that might possibly
be concerned--if a motive could be supplied--and--ah--if one can
think of no motive--"

He left the sentence uncompleted, giving me the vague impression that he
was reserving something that he did not wish to discuss.

We were silent for some time, and I was beginning to consider bringing
the interview to an end when he suddenly turned to me with a gesture of
appeal.

"Helen," he said earnestly, "is it not possible for me to prevail on you
to--ah--to reconsider your decision and--ah--to--to--to terminate
this--er--this unhappy separation. Consider my loneliness, Helen, my
broken health and this trouble--which is our joint trouble--and--ah--"

"Mr. Otway," I answered, "it is not possible. I assure you it is not. I
am deeply distressed to think of your unhappiness and to see you looking
so ill, but I could not entertain what you suggest. You must remember
that we are strangers. We have never been otherwise than separated. As we
are, so we must continue."

"You don't mean that we must always remain apart?" he exclaimed. "It was
only meant to be a temporary separation."

"At any rate," I rejoined, "the time has not come to consider a change.
But I shall be glad to hear how things go with you and to give you any
help that I can."

I rose and held out my hand, which he took reluctantly (though it was the
first time that I had ever offered to shake hands with him).

"I am driving you away, Helen," he said.

"No, indeed," I replied. "I had to go. You will write to me if anything
fresh happens?"

He promised readily, and we turned and walked away in opposite
directions. When I had gone a little way, I paused to look back at him;
and as I noted his dejected droop and his air of something approaching
physical decrepitude, I felt a pang--not of remorse, but of regret that
I could not in some way lighten the burden of his evident misery. It is
true that his unhappiness was of his own making, and that in wrecking his
own life he had wrecked mine and my father's. But vindictiveness is a
character alien to the civilized and developed mind. For what he had done
I still loathed him; but it pained me to think of the haunting dread, the
abiding fear that was his companion night and day.

Chapter XVI--The Sweated Artist

I HAD told Mr. Otway that I had to go; but I did not tell him why. If I
had, he would probably have been considerably startled. For the fact is
that while we were talking I had formed a resolution which had rapidly
matured--the resolution to go to Dr. Thorndyke and make a clean breast
of the whole affair. He had invited me to call on him and report from
time to time, especially if I should be in need of advice or help, and I
had been intending to write and propose a visit. Now, however, I decided
to call on the chance of his being disengaged, and if he should be unable
to see me, to make an appointment.

From the Tower Wharf I made my way quickly to Mark Lane, noting as I
entered the station that it was a quarter to six; and as the train
rumbled westward I turned over the situation and decided on what I should
say. That some trouble was brewing I had little doubt, and though I did
not share Mr. Otway's alarm, I was more than a little uneasy. For, at the
best, the re-opening of the inquiry into my father's death must entail a
scandal and exhibit my conduct in a decidedly questionable light; and
such a scandal would be a disaster. As a discredited witness, how could I
face my comrades at Wellclose Square? And how should I stand with Jasper
Davenant? These were unpleasant questions to reflect on. And underneath
these reflections was the uneasy feeling that perhaps there was something
more in Mr. Otway's fear than was known to me; something of which I had
hardly dared to think.

From the Temple Station I found my way without difficulty to Dr.
Thorndyke's chambers at Number 5A, King's Bench Walk, and was relieved to
find the outer oak door open and a small brass knocker on the inner one
tacitly accepting the possibility of visitors. I plied it modestly, and
was immediately confronted by Mr. Polton, whose countenance, at the sight
of me, became covered with a net work of benevolent and amicable
wrinkles.

"The doctor is up in the laboratory looking over his apparatus, but I
expect he has nearly finished. I'll go and tell him you are here. Have
you had tea?"

I had not and admitted the fact, whereupon Mr. Polton nodded meaningly,
and having offered me an arm-chair, took his departure. In a minute or
two Dr. Thorndyke entered the room and greeted me with a cordiality that
put me at my ease instantly.

"I have been wondering when you were coming to see me; in fact, I have
seriously considered calling at Wellclose Square to see how you were
getting on. Polton will bring you some tea in a moment, and then you must
tell me all your news. I hope you are comfortable in your new home."

"I am very happy, indeed, Dr. Thorndyke, and very grateful to you for
finding me such a congenial home. And I have made quite a promising start
in my new profession, too. But I have really come to ask your advice--and
to make a confession."

"A confession," said Dr. Thorndyke, looking at me gravely. "Is it
necessary? and have you given it due consideration?"

"Yes, I think so. There is only one point. I should have told you this
secret before, but as another person is involved in it, I felt that it
would be a breach of confidence. But I now feel that my legal adviser
should be told every thing."

"That is so. Advice can only be based on known facts. And I may say that
anything that you may tell me in my professional capacity is a privileged
communication. A lawyer cannot be compelled to reveal anything that his
client has told him, and is, in fact, forbidden to do so. You are,
therefore, committing no breach of confidence in giving me any necessary
information."

"I am glad to know that, because, when I last spoke to you about my
affairs, I held back something that you may consider important."

"Something relating to the inquest?" he asked.

"Yes. Did you suspect that I had?"

"I suspected that Mr. Otway was holding something back when he gave his
evidence--but here is your tea, with all the little lady-like extras,
just to show you what an old bachelor can do in the way of domestic
miracles. I am ashamed of you, Polton. I call that embroidered tea-cloth
sheer ostentation."

Mr. Polton laid out the dainty service, beaming with satisfaction at the
doctor's recognition of his efforts to maintain the credit of the
establishment, and as he went out I heard him close the outer door.

"Polton evidently smells a conference," commented Dr. Thorndyke. "The
infallible way in which he always does the right thing without a word of
instruction almost makes me believe in telepathy--which might be awkward
if he were not as secret as an oyster. Now don't hurry, but tell me
quietly what you want me to know."

Thus encouraged, I gave him the suppressed facts relating to the loaded
stick that I had seen in Mr. Otway's hand, and then told him about the
mysterious letters. He listened very attentively, and seemed deeply
interested, for he questioned me at some length about Mr. Otway's
establishment at Maidstone, his mode of life and such of his antecedents
as were known to me.

"Is the stick in your possession or has Mr. Otway got it?" he asked.

"I suppose he has it. At any rate, I have never seen it since that day."

"And you know nothing of any of his associates, other than the
housekeeper?"

"Nothing whatever."

"Is Mrs. Gregg still with him?"

"I believe so, but I am not sure."

"And you know nothing of his present mode of life excepting that he lives
in Lyon's Inn Chambers?"

"No. I really know nothing about him."

"It is very satisfactory for you," Dr. Thorndyke observed. "You are quite
in the dark. These letters suggest an intention to extort money, but they
may come from a personal enemy or from someone who has some design other
than direct blackmail. And the question is, what cards does that person
hold? Is he acting on a mere guess or has he any actual knowledge? The
problem involves two questions: was there anyone in the house, that
morning, besides you, your father and Mr. Otway? and did anything occur
on that occasion beyond what Mr. Otway told you? The answer seems to be
in the negative in both cases; but we cannot be certain on either point.
Meanwhile, your position is very unpleasant, and Mr. Otway's still more
so, for his apprehensions, though perhaps exaggerated, are not entirely
groundless. He has behaved with consummate folly. Whether his account of
the tragedy be true or false, if he had had the courage to give it in
full at the inquest, it must have been accepted in the absence of
contrary evidence. But that is by no means the case now. If the inquiry
were re-opened, a jury would tend to regard his suppression of certain
facts as evidence of the importance of those facts.

"As to advice: there is nothing that you can do but try to forget these
menacing letters. I will make a few cautious enquiries--though we have
very little to go on; and you must let me know at once if there are any
fresh developments."

This ended the conference, but not the conversation, for Dr. Thorndyke
insisted on a full account of my progress as a craftswoman, and even
called down Mr. Polton to give an expert opinion on Mr. Campbell's
prices; which opinion was to the effect that they were as good as could
be expected.

"So," said Dr. Thorndyke, as I rose to depart, "you have justified your
rather bold choice of a profession. You have already made it an economic
success, and with more experience on the commercial side, you will
probably earn a very satisfactory livelihood."

This was encouraging enough, backed as it was by Mr. Polton's practical
experience. But with the other results of this conference I was much less
satisfied. Indeed, my talk with Dr. Thorndyke, though it had relieved me
of the burden of concealment, so far from setting my apprehensions at
rest, had rather increased them. Not only was it evident that he regarded
these mysterious letters as indications of a real danger, but he clearly
entertained the possibility that Mr. Otway might have something more than
I knew to conceal; in fact, I was by no means sure that he did not
suspect Mr. Otway of having killed my father.

Here, then, was abundant matter for reflection, and that none of the most
pleasant; and during the next few days my mind was very full of these new
complications, of this dark cloud which had arisen over my brightening
horizon. Again and again I recalled in detail the incidents of that
terrible morning when my dear father was snatched from me, but no new
light, either on the tragedy itself or on these sinister echoes of it,
came to me. I even tried Lilith's crystal--having first locked my door--but
either my faith was weak or I lacked those special psychical gifts
with which its owner credited me. I did, indeed, get as far as the cloud,
or mist, of which Lilith had spoken; which gathered before my eyes and
blotted out the crystal. But that was all. When the mist cleared away, no
picture emerged from it, but only the crystal ball with the diminutive
image of my own head reflected on its bright surface.

But anxieties sit lightly on the young and healthy. As the days passed,
the gloomy impressions faded and I became once more absorbed in my work.
The Zodiac spoons were progressing apace, and were going to do me credit;
and daily I became conscious of growing facility, of increasing skill,
which not only lessened my labour but was itself a source of pleasure. To
do a thing with ease is to do it with enjoyment; and, incidentally, added
skill means added speed and greater earning power. Already I began to
speculate on what Mr. Campbell's idea of "a good price" would turn out to
be.

Moreover, there were other distractions. Once or twice a week I looked in
at the club, and these visits had a pleasant way of developing into
impromptu jaunts--to picture galleries, exhibitions, museums, and even
on one or two occasions a concert or a matin\E9e. Of the relations which
were growing up between Jasper Davenant and me I did not care to think
much. Perhaps the ostrich is a wiser bird than we are apt to imagine, for
it does, at least, avoid the pains of anticipation. Sooner or later, no
doubt, some understanding would have to be arrived at; but meanwhile Mr.
Davenant was a delightful companion--gay, cheerful, buoyant, humorous,
but withal a man of earnest purpose and a serious outlook on life. In all
our junketings was little, real frivolity; the fun and gaiety were but
the condiments to season the more solid and serious interests. In so far
as a friendship between a young man and a young woman, which must
necessarily stop at friendship, can be, our friendship was
unexceptionable. But; of course, there was the qualification. However, as
I have said, I let the future take care of itself and drifted pleasantly
with the stream.

About this time, I made quite a startling discovery. It happened that in
one of my journeys to town I had seen in a bookseller's window a book on
studio pottery, and, thinking that it might be useful to Miss Finch, I
had bought it, but had forgotten to give it to her. In the middle of my
morning's work I suddenly remembered the book, which I had put in a
cupboard in the workshop, and got up from my bench to take it to her. Her
"works" were at the bottom of the garden, in an outhouse which had once
been a ship-smith's shop; but, close neighbours as we were, and close
friends, too, I had only once been in her workshop, when, on an off day,
she had shown me her wheel, her lathe and her small glass kiln. About her
work she was extraordinarily secretive; but then, she was a reticent girl
in general, so far as her own affairs were concerned, though she showed a
warm interest in her friends, and was, indeed, very affectionate and
lovable.

As I came round the clump of bushes that hid her premises from the house,
the silence and repose of the place gave me some qualms, and for a moment
I hesitated to interrupt her work. However, I pocketed my scruples and
rapped boldly on the door; whereupon the familiar voice at its highest
pitch--several ledger lines above the stave--demanded who was there.

"It is I, Peggy; Helen Otway," I replied apologetically. There was a
pause of nearly half a minute, and then she unlocked and opened the door,
looking rather embarrassed and very pink.

"I always lock myself in when I am at work," she explained.

"Well, Peggy, don't let me disturb you. I've only brought you a book that
I got for you in town."

"Oh, come in, Sibyl," said she. "Of course I don't mind you."

She took the volume from me, and quickly turning over the pages and
glancing at the illustrations, exclaimed, "What a ripping book! I shall
enjoy reading it. And how sweet of you to think of getting it for me!"
She linked her arm affectionately in mine and conducted me into her
domain, passing through the outer room, which was devoted to plaster work
--the making of moulds and "bats"--to the clay room, where the little
gas engine and the mysterious wheel stood idle and a general tidying up
appeared to have taken place. Here we stood chatting rather disjointedly,
she still turning over the pages of the book with approving comments, and
I looking about me with a craftsman's curiosity respecting the materials
and appliances of an unfamiliar craft. And here I got my first surprise;
for, on a side bench I noticed a collection of what were evidently
bookbinder's tools. Was it possible that the secretive Titmouse was a
bookbinder as well as a potter? I determined to inquire into this, but
meanwhile my attention was attracted by the bench at which she had
evidently been working, as suggested by the displaced stool. On this
bench stood an object of some size--about twelve inches high--enveloped
in a damp cloth. By its side were a spray-diffuser, a number of little
spatulas and tiny modelling tools, and several little covered pots of a
creamy, white earthenware delicately ornamented with floral decoration in
a warm blue. Venturing to lift the cover of one, I found it to be filled
with little rolls of brightly-tinted clay that looked like coloured
crayons.

"You are mighty fastidious about your apparatus," I remarked, picking up
the dainty little pot and wiping some smears of clay from its surface.

"And why not?" demanded Peggy. "Why shouldn't one have pretty things to
work with? The old craftsmen did. I've seen some old planes and
chisel-handles beautifully carved, and I am sure they did better work for
having beautiful tools to work with. I would have pretty tools myself if
I could make them."

"You shall, Peggy," said I. "You shall show me what you want and I will
make them for you."

As I was speaking I absently turned the little pot upside down and
glanced at the bottom. And then I really did get a shock. There was only
a single spot of ornament on the base, but that spot was a revelation:
for it was a little blue bird.

I smothered the exclamation that rose to my lips and put the pot down on
the bench. What could be the meaning of this? Had Peggy, like Mr.
Hawkesley, been attracted by Mr. Goldstein's wares? Or was it possible--"Won't
you show me what you were doing, Peggy?" I asked.

She turned scarlet at the question, and looked so distressed that I felt
it a cruelty to press her. But cruel or not, I meant to get to the bottom
of the mystery.

"I'd rather not, Sibyl, if you don't mind," she said, shyly.

"But why? What an extraordinary little person you are."

"Well," she said, doggedly, "if you must know, I am not allowed to show
my work to anyone."

"Not allowed by whom?"

"By the dealer who takes all my work. For some reason, best known to
himself, he makes a secret of it; won't allow anyone to know who makes
it."

"But apart from the dealer, Peggy, you wouldn't mind my seeing your work?

"Of course I shouldn't. I should like you to see it. But a promise is a
promise, you know."

"Of course," I agreed; and then I stepped quickly up to the bench and
very carefully picking up the damp cloth, lifted it clear of the object
which it covered; which turned out to be a jar standing on a small
turn-table. Peggy sprang forward with a gasp of consternation; but she
was too late. The deed was done; moreover, the murder was out; for in the
moment when my first glance fell on the jar, Mr. Hawkesley's "mystery
ware" had ceased to be a mystery so far as I was concerned.

The appearance of the jar was rather curious, but perfectly unmistakable.
The clay, in its "green" state--unbaked and still somewhat plastic--was
of a cool, grey colour, and the surface of the squat, octagonal body and
the short neck and rim was covered with rich and intricate floral
ornament, very minute, sharp and delicate. In the completed part this
ornament was of dull blue and finished flush with the surface; in the
unfinished part it was simply indented and had the appearance of what
bookbinders call "blind tooling," but was somewhat deeper.

From the work, my eyes turned with a sort of respectful wonder to the
creator, who stood by my side with an air partly embarrassed, partly
defiant. To me there was some thing very impressive in the thought that
this unassuming, little lady was actually a master craftsman (I am
compelled to use the masculine form, there being no feminine equivalent);
the creator of masterpieces which would live in the great collections of
the future for the admiration of generations yet unborn. And in the first
shock of surprised admiration and pride in my friend's achievement I had
nearly blurted out all that I knew. But reflection suggested a better
plan.

"My dear Peggy!" I exclaimed. "I never dreamed that you did work of this
quality."

"There's nothing very wonderful about it," she replied, regarding the jar
with a kind of affectionate disparagement. "It is only a poor imitation
of the beautiful Oiron ware. That pottery has always interested me;
partly because it is so lovely, and partly because, according to
tradition, it was made by a woman--Helene de Hangest-Gerilis. But my
work isn't a patch of hers, and it isn't even as good as I could do."

"How is that?"

"Well, you see, it ought to have more modelled ornament than I put on. It
ought to be more important. Her pieces were most elaborately modelled--many
of them had figures in the full round. But I can't afford to carry
my work as far as that. It would take too long. Besides, I have to work
to order, to some extent, and my orders are to keep to moderately, simple
pieces."

"Your orders! From the dealer, I suppose? Tell me about him, Peggy, and
how it is that you are such a slave."

"I'm not a slave," she retorted doggedly. "But I have a contract with a
dealer. He takes the whole of my work, and he makes it a condition that I
shan't sell anything to any one else or let anybody know what kind of
work I do. I oughtn't to have let you in, but I know that I can trust you
not to breathe a word to anyone of what you have seen here."

Mr. Hawkesley was right, then; and I recalled with sympathetic
vindictiveness his desire to wring the dealer's neck.

"Concerning this contract, Peggy," said I. "You say the dealer has the
right to the whole of your work. Did he pay you anything for this
privilege?"

"Yes. He paid five pounds when the agreement was signed; but he deducted
it from the payment for the first lot of pieces."

"Then it was only payment on account, not payment for the exclusive right
to all your work. And with regard to the prices, how are they fixed?

"Oh, the dealer fixes the prices, of course. He knows more about it than
I do."

"Evidently. But what sort of prices does he fix?"

"Oh, ordinary prices, I suppose. He will probably give me fifteen
shillings for this jar."

"And how long will it take you to make it?"

"Let me see," she said, reflectively. "There is the throwing and turning;
that doesn't take very long. Then this one had to be shaped after it was
turned. Then there comes the decorating; of course that is what takes the
time. Including the cover, I should say there is nearly a week's work in
that jar. And then it has to be fired and glazed; but the firing and
glazing are done in batches."

"And all this for fifteen shillings a week!" I exclaimed.

"Say a pound," said she. "That is about what I earn. It isn't much, is
it? But I have a little money of my own, though I spent most of it on
fitting up the workshop."

"And what period does this precious contract cover? When does it expire?

"Expire?" she repeated, a little sheepishly. "I don't know that it
expires at all. No period is mentioned in it."

"Peggy," I said, solemnly; "you should alter your potter's mark. Take out
the little, blue finch and put in a little, green goose. But, seriously,
we must see into this. I am a lawyer's daughter--not that I profess to
have inherited a knowledge of law. But I am certain that this agreement
is not binding. Will you let me show it to a friend of mine who is a
lawyer? In strict confidence, of course."

"Yes, if you like, Sibyl. But I don't see that it matters. I like doing
the work and I do make a living by it. What more would you have?"

"I thought you said you would like to do something more ambitious--the
very best work of which you are capable. Wouldn't you?"

She was silent for a while, and a far-away, wistful look stole into her
face. Suddenly she said: "Sibyl, I'm going to show you something; but you
mustn't tell anyone." She led me to a large cupboard, the door of which
she unlocked and threw open. On the single shelf was a model in red wax
of a tall candlestick or lamp-holder of the most elaborate design, the
shaft and capital-like socket enriched--though sparingly--with fine
relief decoration, and the base occupied by a spirited and graceful group
of figures, beautifully modelled and full of life and expression.

"That," she said, "is to be my chef d'art--though it doesn't look much
in the wax. You must think of it in ivory-white, with a rich coloured
inlay and perhaps some under-glaze painting. It has taken me months,
doing a bit whenever I have had time, or when I couldn't resist the
temptation to go on with it. Now it is finished, as far as the modelling
goes, and the next thing will be to mould it. But I shan't actually make
the piece at present, because I don't mean him to have it--the dealer,
you know. If I finished it now, it would be his, of course."

"Yes, by the contract it would. And it mustn't. This piece ought to give
you a position in the front rank of artist potters. But I mustn't waste
any more of your time. You will let me have that agreement, won't you?"

She promised that I should have it at lunch-time, and with this I went
back to my workshop to consider a plan that had come into my mind for her
enlightenment and emancipation. But it turned out that there was no need
for scheming on my part, for chance or Providence offered me the
opportunity ready-made. That very evening I received a short note from
Mr. Davenant informing me that Miss Tallboy-Smith had acquired a
collection of English and French soft porcelain, and that she proposed to
exhibit the whole of her new acquisition for a week at the club.

"She rather wants," he said, "to make the opening day something of a
function, and has asked Hawkesley and me to be there to lunch. Can you
come, too? It would please her if you could--and you know how delighted
Hawkesley and I would be. Besides, I think it will really be a very
interesting show."

Here was the very chance that I wanted. Forthwith, I swooped down on the
unsuspecting Titmouse and secured her agreement to bear me company to a
"pottery show," without giving too many particulars. Then I wrote to Mr.
Davenant telling him that I was bringing a guest who was deeply
interested in pottery and porcelain, and suggesting that we might form a
party of four at a small table.

By the same post I sent off Peggy's agreement to Dr. Thorndyke, with the
request that he would tell me whether it was or was not legally binding.
And, having thus laid the train, as I hoped, for the discomfiture of Mr.
Goldstein, I felt at liberty to return to my own affairs.

Chapter XVII--The Apotheosis of the Titmouse

THE respective merits of hard and soft porcelain have been, from time to
time, warmly debated by collectors and experts, but never, perhaps, have
they been more earnestly discussed than on the occasion of the opening of
Miss Tallboy-Smith's exhibition. During the half-hour which preceded
lunch, the central glass case and the additional show-cases which had
been set up for the occasion were surrounded by groups of eager
connoisseurs, and the contrasting virtues of the pate tendre and the more
durable, if less beautiful, true porcelain were once more considered and
expounded.

The attendance of the members and their friends must have been highly
gratifying to Miss Tallboy-Smith, though it was no greater than was
warranted by the importance of the exhibition; for the collection
included representative pieces, not only of Chelsea, Bow, Nantgarw,
Pinxton, and other English ware; but also of the old, French soft paste
porcelain, including several early examples of Sevres. The preliminary
glance at the collection had furnished material for conversation, as I
could see by observing the occupants of the long central table, at the
head of which sat the beaming hostess, supported by Major Dewham-Brown
(who talked little, but consumed his food with intense concentration of
purpose); and even our own small table, tucked away inconspicuously in a
corner, was not immune from the influence of soft porcelain, for Mr.
Hawkesley and my guest discussed the topic with a wealth of knowledge
that reduced Mr. Davenant and me to respectful and attentive silence.

Our two friends were evidently very pleased with one another; and not
without reason. For Mr. Hawkesley was much more than a mere collector; he
was an enthusiastic and learned student of all kinds of ceramic work;
while, as to my friend Peggy, her conversation revealed a familiarity
with all kinds of materials and processes that made me feel quite shy as
I thought of the artless handbook with which I had presented her.

But, indeed, Miss Peggy was quite transfigured. She had met with a
kindred spirit. And under the influence of contagious enthusiasm, the
usually silent and secretive Titmouse blossomed out in a manner that
surprised me. As I listened to the animated duet of her chirping treble
with Mr. Hawkesley's robust baritone, I found it difficult to identify
her with the quiet little potter who was wont to work behind locked doors
in the old shipsmith's shop at Wellclose Square.

After lunch the siege of the showcases began again on a more portentous
scale. Glass cases were opened for more complete inspection of their
contents, and pieces were even handed out to be handled, stroked and
smelled at by the more infatuated devotees. As neither Mr. Davenant nor I
could be included among the latter, we were satisfied by a comparatively
brief inspection of the treasures, after which we retired to a sheltered
seat to look on and talk.

"Just look at those two china-maniacs!" exclaimed Mr. Davenant. "They are
as thick as thieves already. And what is Miss Finch going to do with that
bleu de roi vase? Is she going to kiss it? No; she has given it back to
the Tallboy-Smith. Well, well; enthusiasm is a fine thing. By the way,
she is a nice little lady, this friend of yours; pretty and picturesque,
too, and uncommonly well turned out. I'm beginning to have a new respect
for Wellclose Square."

I looked at the Titmouse with a sort of motherly pride (though she was
about my own age). The word picturesque described her admirably with her
warm colour, her graceful hair, and the trim, petite figure that was so
well set off by the simple, artistic dress--in which I seemed to trace
the hand of Lilith. She was my importation to the Magpies, and I felt
that she was doing me credit.

"I have often wondered," Mr. Davenant said, after a reflective pause,
"what made you choose such an unlikely locality as Wellclose Square for a
residence, and, indeed, how you came to know of its existence. Very few
middle-class people do. I hope Miss Vardon will not consider me unduly
inquisitive."

"Mrs. Otway will not," said I.

"Mrs. Otway is a myth--a legal fiction. I refuse to recognise her
existence. She is a mere creature of documents, of church registers. The
real person is Miss Helen Vardon."

"That sounds rather like nonsense," said I, "but, of course, it can't be,
because the speaker is Mr. Davenant. Perhaps there is some hidden meaning
in these cryptic observations."

"There isn't," he rejoined; "or, at any rate, it shan't remain hidden. I
mean that I refuse to recognise your connection with this man, Otway, or
to associate you with his beastly name."

"But it is my beastly name, too, according to law and custom."

"I don't care for law and custom," said he. "The name Otway is abhorrent
to me, and it doesn't properly belong to you. I shall call you Miss
Vardon, unless you let me call you Helen; and I don't see why you
shouldn't, considering that we are old and intimate friends."

"It would undoubtedly have the support of a well-established precedent.
There was a certain bishop who was called Peter because that was his
name. That precedent would apply to Helen, but it certainly would not to
Miss Vardon."

"Then," he rejoined, "let us follow this excellent precedent. Let it be
Helen. Is that agreed?

"I don't seem to have much choice; for if 'Mrs. Otway' is a legal
fiction, 'Miss Vardon' is an illegal one."

"Well, don't let us have any fictions at all. Let us adhere to the actual
baptismal facts."

"Very well, Mr. Davenant."

"But why 'Mr. Davenant'? My baptismal designation is Jasper.'

"And a very pretty name, too," said I. "But the precedent does not apply
in your case. You have not married Mr. Otway."

"No, thank Heaven! If I had, there would be a case of petty treason. But
neither have you, for that matter. You have only gone through a
ridiculous ceremony which means nothing and signed a document which sets
forth what is not true."

"It seems to me," I said, "that we are not adhering to our agreement to
avoid fictions. My marriage, unfortunately, is perfectly real and valid
in the eyes of the law."

"The law!" he exclaimed, contemptuously. "Who cares for the law? Have we
not the pronouncement of that illustrious legal luminary, Bumble C.J.,
that the law is a ass and a idiot? And, mark you, he was specially
referring to matrimonial law. Now, who would base his actions and beliefs
on the opinions of an ass and a idiot?

"And to think," said I, "that you have abandoned the law for mere
architecture! With your gift for casuistry, you ought to have been a
Chancery lawyer or else a Jesuit. But here is Miss Tallboy-Smith. She
thinks we are neglecting her treasures."

But our hostess had not come to utter reproaches. On the contrary, she
was brimming over with pleasure and gratitude.

"My dear Mrs. Otway," she exclaimed, beaming on me and grasping my hands
affectionately, "I can't thank you enough for bringing that dear young
lady, Miss Finch, to see my porcelain. She is a sweet girl, and she
simply knows everything about china. It is perfectly wonderful. She might
be a potter herself. And her love of the beautiful things and her
enjoyment in looking at them has given me, I can't tell you how much,
pleasure. You must really bring her to see my whole collection. Will you?
I shall love showing it to her."

I agreed joyfully, for this would mean another nail in the coffin of Mr.
Goldstein; and as Peggy and Mr. Hawkesley joined us at this moment, I was
able to complete the arrangement and fix a date.

As Miss Tallboy-Smith bustled away, Mr. Hawkesley put in his claim.

"I don't see," said he, "why I should be left out in the cold. I've got a
collection, too; and I think it would really interest Miss Finch, for she
tells me she has seen very little modern pottery. Won't you bring her to
see it, Mrs. Otway?"

Again I accepted gladly, with Peggy's consent. My scheme was working
rapidly towards a successful conclusion, and I felt that I could push it
forward energetically; for that very morning I had received a letter from
Dr. Thorndyke returning the agreement and denouncing it as legally
worthless and utterly opposed to public policy.

"As to fixing a date," said Mr. Hawkesley, "I suggest that we all adjourn
to my rooms now. Come and have a cup of tea with me and then we can look
over the crockery. How will that do?"

It suited Peggy and me quite well, and we said so.

"And you, Davenant?" asked Mr. Hawkesley.

"Well, I had one or two cathedrals to finish," was the reply; "but they
must wait. Art is long--deuced long, in my case. Yes, let us adjourn and
combine crockery and tea--which, as Pepys reminds us is a 'China drink,'
and therefore appropriate to the occasion."

On this, we sallied forth and made our way to the Strand, where we
chartered a couple of hansoms to convey us to Dover Street, Piccadilly,
where Mr. Hawkesley had his abode in one of those fine, spacious,
dignified houses that one finds in the hinterland of the West End of
London. His rooms were on the first floor, and when we arrived there by
way of a staircase which would have allowed us to walk up four abreast,
we were received by a sedate and impassive gentleman, whose appearance
and manner suggested a Foreign Office official of superior rank.

"Would you let us have some tea, please, Taplow?" said Mr. Hawkesley,
addressing the official deferentially. Mr. Taplow opened a door for us,
and having signified a disposition to accede to the request, departed
stealthily.

As we entered the large, lofty room, well lighted by its range of tall
windows, I looked about me curiously, for I was instantly struck by the
absence of pottery among its ornaments. The available wall-spaces were
occupied by important pictures--all modern; the mantelpiece and other
suitable surfaces supported statuettes of marble or bronze--again all
modern. But of ceramic ware there was not a trace, with the single
exception of a small framed cameo relief. Rather did the apartment
suggest the abode of a furniture collector, for one side of the room,
opposite the windows, was occupied by a range of armoires, or standing
cupboards, mostly old French or Flemish.

"You don't favour the glass case, I notice, Hawkesley," said Mr.
Davenant.

"No," was the reply. "They are well enough for public museums, but they
are unlovely things. And one doesn't want to look at one's whole
collection at once. I like to take the pieces out singly and enjoy them
one at a time. You see, each piece is an individual work. It was the
product of a separate creative effort, and ought to be enjoyed by a
separate act of appreciation."

"You seem, Mr. Hawkesley," said I, "to have a preference for modern work.
Do you think it is as good as the old?"

"I think," he replied, "that the best modern work is as good as any that
was ever done. Of course, I am not speaking of commercial stuff. That is
negligible in an artistic sense. I mean individual work, done under the
same conditions and by the same class of men as the old craft work. That
is quite good. The pity is that there is so little of it. But I am afraid
the supply is equal to the demand."

"Don't you think," said Mr. Davenant, "that that is partly the fault of
the modern craftsman? Of his tendency to confine himself to fine and
elaborate, and therefore costly, productions? Of course, the old work was
not cheap in the modern factory sense of cheapness. The pottery and china
that was made at the Etruria works or those of Bow or Chelsea was by no
means given away. But the prices were practicable for every day purposes,
whereas modern studio pottery is impossible for domestic use. And the
same is true of other craftwork, such as book-binding, fine printing,
textiles, metal work, and so on. If the modern craftsman caters only for
the collector and ignores the utilitarian consumer, he can't complain at
being ousted by commercial production."

Here the arrival of Mr. Taplow with the tea arrested what threatened to
prove a too-interesting discussion. I should have liked to continue it--on
another occasion; at present, my desire was rather to "cut the cackle
and get to the hosses." Accordingly, while the tea was being consumed, I
rather studiously obstructed any revival of the debate by keeping up a
conversation of a general and somewhat discursive character; and as soon
as we appeared to have finished I introduced the subject of Ceramics.

"Is that plaque on the wall a Wedgwood cameo?" I asked.

"Oh, no," Mr. Hawkesley replied. "That is an example of Solon's wonderful
pate-sur-pate work. It is done with white porcelain slip on a dark,
coloured ground. Come and look at it."

We all rose and gathered round the plaque while Mr. Hawkesley descanted
on its beauties; which were, indeed, evident enough.

"It is lovely work," said he; "so free and spontaneous. The Wedgwood
reliefs look quite stiff and hard compared with these of Solon's. I have
some of his vases with the same kind of decoration, and we may as well
look at those first."

He wheeled a travelling turn-table towards a fine Flemish armoire of
carved oak, and opening the latter, displayed a range of pieces of this
beautiful work, at the sight of which Peggy's eyes glistened. One after
another they were carefully placed on the turn-table, viewed from all
points, admired, discussed and replaced. The other contents of the
armoire were less important works--mostly French--but all received
respectful attention. The next receptacle, a French armoire of carved
walnut, was devoted to modern stone-ware by the Martin Brothers, Wells
and other individual workers, concerning which our host was specially
enthusiastic.

"There," said he, placing on the turn-table a wonderful Toby jug of brown
Martin ware, "Show me any old salt-glaze ware that is equal to that! Look
at the modelling! Look at the beautiful surface and the quality of the
actual potting! And then go and look at the stuff in the shop windows.
Just good enough for the slavey to smash."

"Well," Mr. Davenant remarked, "you can't say that she doesn't appreciate
its qualities and do justice to them. If former generations had been as
energetic smashers as the present, collectors of old stuff would have had
to seek their treasures in ancient rubbish-heaps."

"Yes, that is a fact," agreed Mr. Hawkesley, as we moved on to the next
cupboard. "When domestic pottery was more valuable it got more respectful
treatment. Now this cupboard is only partly filled. I keep it for the
work of one artist whose name I don't know. I've shown you some of the
ware, Mrs. Otway, but it may be new to Miss Finch."

As he unlocked the door my heart began to thump, and I cast an anxious
eye on Peggy. For I knew what was coming, but I didn't know how she would
take it. At the moment she was looking at the closed door with pleased
expectancy. Then the door swung open, and in a moment she turned pale as
death. For one instant I thought she was going to faint, and so,
apparently, did Mr. Davenant, for he made a quick movement towards her.
But the deadly pallor passed, and was succeeded as rapidly by a crimson
flush; but her quick breathing and the trembling of her hand showed how
great the shock had been.

Meanwhile, Mr. Hawkesley, all unconscious, was glancing over the row of
vases, jars and bowls, and expatiating on the peculiar beauties of the
"mystery ware." The pieces were separated into two groups; the works in
pure inlay and those combining the inlay with slip decoration and
embossed ornament; and one of the latter he presently lifted from its
shelf and placed on the turn-table.

"Now, isn't that a lovely jar, Miss Finch?" said he. "And doesn't it
remind you of the beautiful St. Porchaire, or Oiron ware?"

Peggy gazed at the jar with an inscrutable expression as she slowly
rotated the turn-table. "It is somewhat like," she agreed; "at least, the
method of work is similar."

"Oh, don't give my favourites the cold shoulder, Miss Finch," said Mr.
Hawkesley. "I think I prize my pieces of this ware more than anything
that I have. It is so very charming and so interesting. For, you see, it
is real pottery; I mean that, beautiful and precious as it is, it is
quite serviceable for domestic purposes, whereas much of the studio
pottery is made for the gallery or the cabinet."

"You haven't discovered yet where it is made, I suppose?" I asked.

"No," he replied. "Its origin is still a mystery and something of a
romance--which may be one reason why I am so devoted to it. I often
speculate about the potter, and invent all sorts of queer theories about
him."

"As for instance?"

"Well, sometimes I fancy that he may be in debt to this dealer--that he
may have had advances or loans and be unable to pay them off and get
free. It is quite possible, you know. Then, sometimes I have thought that
he may be one of those poor creatures who drink or take drugs, and that
the dealer may keep him slaving in some cellar for his bare maintenance
and his miserable luxuries. But I've given that idea up. This work is too
sane and reasonable and painstaking for a drunkard or drug-taker. But,
who ever and whatever he is, I wish I could find him out, and thank him
for all the pleasure that he has given me, and help him to get a proper
reward for his labour, which I am sure he does not."

"I don't know why you are so sure," said Mr. Davenant. "This ware is
pretty expensive, isn't it?"

"Not if you consider that each piece is an individual work on which a
great deal of time and labour has been expended. The price that I paid
Goldstein for this particular piece was seven guineas, which wouldn't
represent very high remuneration if the artist had the whole of it."

"Seven guineas, Mr. Hawkesley!" exclaimed Peggy, incredulously.

"Yes, Miss Finch; and I should say very cheap at the price."

I glanced at Peggy with malicious satisfaction, for her cheeks were
aflame with anger and the light of battle was in her eyes.

"What a shame!" she protested. "How perfectly scandalous! The grasping,
avaricious wretch! To charge seven guineas for a piece that he bought for
fifteen shillings!"

For a few seconds there was an awesome silence. Peggy's exclamation had
fallen like a thunderbolt, and the two men gazed at her in speechless
astonishment; while she, poor Titmouse, stood, covered with blushes and
confusion, looking as if she had been convicted of pocketing the spoons.

"You actually know," Mr. Hawkesley said, at length, "that Goldstein gave
only fifteen shillings for that jar?"

"Yes," she stammered faintly, "I--I happen to have--to be aware--that
--that was the amount paid--"

She broke off with an appealing glance at me, and I proceeded to "put in
my oar."

"It's no use, Peggy. The cat is out of the bag--at least her head is,
and we may as well let out the rest of her. The fact is, Mr. Hawkesley,
that this ware is Miss Finch's own work."

I now thought that Mr. Hawkesley was going to faint. Never have I seen a
man look so astonished. He was thunderstruck.

"Do you mean, Mrs. Otway," he exclaimed, "that Miss Finch actually makes
this ware herself?"

"I do. It is her work from beginning to end. She does the potting, the
decorating, the firing and the glazing. And she does it without any
assistance whatever."

Mr. Hawkesley gazed at Peggy with such undissembled admiration and
reverence that I was disposed to smile--though I liked him for his
generous enthusiasm--and the unfortunate Titmouse was reduced to an
agony of shyness.

"This is a red letter day for me, Miss Finch," said he. "It has been my
dearest wish to meet the creator of that pottery that I admire so
intensely; and now that wish is gratified, it is an extra pleasure to
find the artist so much beyond--"

He paused to avoid the inevitable compliment, and Mr. Davenant held up a
warning finger.

"Now, Hawkesley," said he; "be careful."

"I know," said Mr. Hawkesley. "It is difficult to steer clear of banal
compliments and yet to say what one would like to say; but really the
personality of the mysterious artist has furnished a very pleasant
surprise."

"I can believe that," said Mr. Davenant. "I can imagine, for instance,
that you find Miss Finch a very agreeable substitute for the intoxicated
gentleman in the cellar."

At this we all laughed, which cleared the air and put us at our ease.

"But," said Mr. Davenant, "proud as we are to have made the acquaintance
of a distinguished potter, we are haunted by the spectre of that fifteen
shillings. We get the impression that Miss Finch's business arrangements
want looking into."

"Yes," agreed Mr. Hawkesley, "they do indeed. Why do you let this fellow
have your work, at such ridiculous prices, too?"

"It isn't so ridiculous as it looks," replied Peggy. "When I began, I
couldn't sell any of my work at all. It was frightfully discouraging. No
one would have any thing to do with it. My first work was simple
earthenware, and even the cheap china shops wouldn't have it. Then I
chanced upon Mr. Goldstein, and he bought one or two simple, red
earthenware jars and bowls for a few pence each. It didn't pay me, but
still it was a start. Then I experimented on this pipe-clay body with
slip decoration and coloured inlay and showed the pieces to Mr.
Goldstein; and he advised me to go on and offered to take the whole of my
work, if I signed an agreement. So I signed the agreement, and he has had
all my work ever since."

"At his own prices?"

"Yes. I didn't know what the things were worth."

"Well," said Mr. Davenant, "my law is a trifle rusty, but I should say
that that agreement would not hold water."

"It won't," said I. "We have just had counsel's opinion on it, and our
adviser assures us that it is worthless, and that we can disregard it."

"Then," said Mr. Davenant, "you had better formally denounce it at once."

"Why trouble to denounce it?" demanded Mr. Hawkesley. "Much better let me
call on Goldstein and make him tear up the duplicate. He has got a fine,
handy warming-pan hanging up in his shop. I saw it only this morning."

"The connection is not very clear to me," said I.

"It would be clear enough to him," was the grim reply.

Mr. Davenant chuckled. "Your methods, Hawkesley, appeal to me strongly, I
must admit; but they are not politic. Legal process is better than a
warming-pan, even if it were filled with hot coals. Let us hand the
agreement to a reputable solicitor, and let him write to Goldstein
stating the position. Miss Finch won't hear any more of her benefactor
after that."

After some discussion, in which I supported Mr. Hawkesley's proposal, the
less picturesque method of procedure was adopted, and Mr. Davenant was
commissioned to carry it out.

"And we will have a one woman show of Blue Bird Ware at the club," said
Mr. Hawkesley. "I will take my whole collection there and exhibit it with
a big label giving the artist's name in block capitals. The pottery
collectors will just tumble over one another to get specimens of the work
when the artist is known."

The rest of Mr. Hawkesley's collection received but a perfunctory
consideration. Even the gorgeous De Morgan earthenware, glowing with the
hues of the rainbow, came as something of an anti-climax; and we closed
the last of the cabinets with almost an air of relief.

"And now," said Mr. Hawkesley, as he pocketed his keys, "I suggest that
we mark this joyful occasion by a modest festival--say, a homely little
dinner at the club and an evening at the play. Who seconds my proposal?"

"We shall have to go as we are then," said I, "as we can't change."

"I think we can enjoy ourselves in morning dress," he rejoined; "and as
we shall all be in the same shocking condition, we can keep one another
in countenance."

The proposal was accordingly adopted with acclamation and carried into
effect with triumphant success, and some slight disturbance of the
orderly routine of the establishment in Wellclose Square; for it was on
the stroke of midnight when Miss Polton, blinking owlishly, opened the
green door to admit the two roisterers who had just emerged from a
hansom-cab.

"It has been a jolly day!" Peggy exclaimed fervently as we said
'good-night' on our landing. "And it will be a jolly to-morrow, too."

"Yes; you will be able to get on with your masterpiece now; and when it
is finished we can show it at the club and you will be able to sell it
for a small fortune."

"I shan't want to sell it," she said. "If it is good enough, and if it
wouldn't seem too forward or improper, I should like to give it to Mr.
Hawkesley--as a sort of thank-offering, you know."

"Thank-offering for what?"

"For his appreciation of my work. I really feel very grateful to him, as
well as to you, Sibyl, dear. You see, he not only liked the things, but
he thought of the worker who made them. All the time that I was working
alone, with the door locked, from morning to night to fill that
cormorant's pockets, Mr. Hawkesley was thinking of me, the unknown
worker, looking for me and wanting to help me. I don't forget that it is
you who have got me out of Mr. Goldstein's clutches. But I do feel very,
very grateful to Mr. Hawkesley. Don't you think it is quite natural that
I should, Sibyl?"

"I think you are a little, green goose," said I, and kissed her; and so
ended the day that saw the end of her servitude and the dawn of
prosperity and success.

Chapter XVIII--Among the Breakers

My preoccupation with Peggy Finch's affairs had to some extent submerged
my own, but now that my little friend had triumphantly emerged from the
house of Bondage, I returned to my labours with a new zest. In spite of
the various interruptions, the Zodiac spoons had made steady progress,
and it was but a few days after our momentous visit to Mr. Hawkesley's
rooms that, almost regretfully, I put the finishing touches to the Fishes
spoon--the last of the set.

It had been a pleasant labour, and as I laid out the completed set, I was
not dissatisfied. True, there had been difficulties; but difficulties are
the salt of craftsmanship. Some of the signs, such as Aries, Taurus, Leo,
Virgo and Capricornus, had been quite simple, the head of the Ram, the
Bull, or other symbolic creature furnishing an obvious and appropriate
knop for the spoon. But others, such as Gemini, Pisces, and especially
Libra, had been less easy to manage. Indeed, the last had involved a
slight evasion; for, since it seemed quite impossible to work a pair of
scales into a presentable knop, I had relegated them to the shoulder of
the bowl and formed the knop of a more or less appropriate head of
Justice blindfolded. So all the difficulties had been met by a pleasant
and interesting exercise of thought and ingenuity, and the work--my
magnum opus, for the present--was finished. And it was rounded off by a
very agreeable little addition; for Phyllis Barton, who had seen and
greatly admired the set, had made a delightful little case to contain it
--just a pair of walnut slabs hinged together, the lower slab having
twelve shaped recesses to hold the spoons and the lid ornamented with
shallow carvings of a winged hour-glass and the phases of the moon.

I made up the spoons into a parcel and the case into another, so that
they should not be treated together in a single transaction; and having
advised Mr. Campbell by a letter on the previous day, set forth one
morning for Wardour Street. The silent willing which should have preceded
my entry to the shop was inadvertently omitted, for as I crossed the
street I observed Mr. Campbell exchanging blandishments with a large
Persian cat of the "smoky" persuasion, and, as he saw me at the same
moment, I had no choice but to enter straightway.

He received me with the most encouraging affability--indeed, he even
condescended to shake hands--and was evidently pleased to see me. And
his reception of my work was still more encouraging. There was none of
the buyer's proverbial disparagement. He was frankly enthusiastic. He
held up each spoon separately at arm's length, wagging his head from side
to side; he inspected it through a watchmaker's lens; he stroked it with
a peculiarly flexible thumb, and finally laid it down with a grunt of
satisfaction.

Then came the question of terms; and when he offered twenty-four guineas
for the set, I was quite glad that the silent willing had been omitted.
For I should probably have willed eighteen.

Having settled the price of my own work, I produced the wooden case.
Phyllis had priced it at half a guinea, which was ridiculous. I boldly
demanded a guinea for it.

"That's a long price," said Mr. Campbell, pulling a face; of
proportionate length. But I watched his thumb travel ling over the
clean-cut carving, I saw him delicately fitting the spoons, one by one,
into their little niches, and I knew that that guinea was as good as in
Phillibar's pocket.

"It is a long price, Mrs. Otway," he repeated, cocking his head on one
side at the case. "But it's a pretty bit of work; and it's the right
thing--that's what I like about it. So suitable; it would be a sin to
put those spoons into a velvet-lined case, as if they were common,
stamped, trade-goods. Very well, Mrs. Otway, I'll spring a guinea for the
case; and I should like to see some more work from the same hand."

This was highly satisfactory (though it was not without a pang of
bereavement that I saw the little case closed and hidden from my sight
for ever in a locked drawer); and when I had received the two cheques--I
asked for a separate one for Phyllis--I tripped away down Wardour Street
as buoyantly as if I had not a care in the world.

The association of ideas is a phenomenon that has received a good deal of
attention. It was brought to my notice on this occasion when I found
myself opposite St Anne's Church; for no sooner had my eye lighted on its
quaint warty spire than my thoughts turned to Mr Davenant--or rather, I
should say, to Jasper. Perhaps he was in my mind already; possibly in the
subconscious, as Lilith would have said, and the church spire may have
acted as an autoscope--it would not have had to be an exceptionally
powerful one. At any rate, my thoughts turned to him and to the Magpies
Club, and it was not unnatural that my steps should take a similar
direction.

As I followed the well-remembered route, I reflected on the changes that
a few short months had brought. In that brief space a new life had
opened. The solitary, friendless orphan who had sought sanctuary in Miss
Polton's house, how changed was her condition! Happy in her work, in her
home, in her friends; for had she not her Lilith, her Phyllis, her Peggy
--and Jasper? And here a still, small voice asked softly but insistently
a question that had of late intruded itself from time to time. Whither
was I drifting? My friendship with Jasper was ripening apace. But
ripening to what? There could be but one answer; and that answer only
raised a further question. In normal circumstances the love of a man and
a woman finds a permanent satisfaction in marriage. But where marriage is
impossible love is a mere disaster; a voyage with nothing but rocks and
breakers at the end.

So whispered the still, small voice into ears but half attentive; and as
I neared the bottom of Essex Street it became inaudible, for approaching
the club-house from the opposite direction was Jasper himself.

"Well!" he exclaimed, "this is a piece of luck! And yet I had hoped that
you might be coming into town to-day. Is it business or pleasure?"

"It has been business, and now I hope it is going to be pleasure. I am
taking the rest of the day off."

"Now, what a very singular coincidence! I am actually taking the rest of
the day off myself."

"Your coincidences," I remarked, "somehow remind me of the misadventures
of the bread-and-butter fly; they always happen."

"Quite so," he agreed. "But then, you see, if they didn't happen they
wouldn't be coincidences. Do we begin by fortifying ourselves with
nourishment?

"I don't know what you mean by 'begin,' but I came here to get some
lunch."

"So did I--another coincidence, by the way. Shall we take our usual
little table in the corner?"

We seated ourselves at the table, and as we waited for our lunch to be
brought, I ventured on a few inquiries into Jasper's professional
affairs.

"You seem to take a good many days off," I remarked.

"I do. There is, so to speak, a distinctly marked 'off side' to my
practice."

"And when you are away, what happens? Do you keep a clerk?"

Jasper grinned. "You over-estimate the magnitude of my practice. No; I
have a simpler and more economical arrangement. I let my little front
office to a law writer, at a peppercorn rent, subject to the condition
that he shall interview my clients in my absence, furnish evasive answers
to their questions, and supply ambiguous and confusing information."

"But don't the clients get rather dissatisfied?"

Again Jasper smiled. "That question," said he, "involves an important
philosophic principle. A famous philosopher has proved his own existence
by the formula 'cogito, ergo sum'--I think, therefore I am--implying
that if he didn't exist he couldn't think. Now, that principle applies to
my clients. Before they can be dissatisfied, they must exist. But they
don't exist. Therefore they are not dissatisfied. Q.E.D."

"I don't believe you care whether they exist or not--but that is the
worst of having an independent income."

"It is a misfortune, isn't it? But I bear up under it surprisingly. Will
you have some of this stuff? It is called a pelion. I heard the waitress
describing it as a pea-lion, apparently misled by the analogy of the
pea-cock and the pea-hen. Evidently she is no zoologist."

At this moment Miss Tallboy-Smith entered the room and halted at our
table to exchange greetings and remind me of my engagement.

"Tell Miss Finch not to forget," said she. "It's next Wednesday. I shall
have my things back from here by then, and I understand that Mr.
Hawkesley has secured the cases for a special exhibition of studio
pottery. You must bring Miss Finch to that, too."

Like Jasper's proxy, I gave an evasive answer to this, for I knew that
wild horses would not drag Peggy to an exhibition of her own work. But
evidently Mr. Hawkesley had made no confidences so far.

"Have you ever seen the Diploma Gallery at the R.A.?" Jasper asked when
Miss Tallboy-Smith had flitted away. "If you haven't, we might look in
there for an hour this afternoon."

As I had never seen the diploma works, I fell in readily with the
suggestion, and accordingly, when we had finished lunch, we strolled
thither and spent a very pleasant hour examining and comparing the works
of the different academicians, old and new. From Burlington House we
drifted into the Green Park, and presently took possession of a couple of
isolated and lonely-looking chairs. For some time we gossiped about the
pictures at which we had been looking in the gallery; then our talk
turned on to the affairs of my friend Peggy.

"Hawkesley seems to have appointed himself Miss Finch's advertising
agent," Jasper remarked. "And he'll do the job well. He is an energetic
man, and he knows all the pottery connoisseurs. I met him yesterday, and
had to listen to Blue Bird ware by the yard."

"I like him for his enthusiasm," said I.

"So do I," agreed Jasper. "And it is quite a little romance. His
admiration of the pottery is perfectly genuine, as we know; but there is
something in what he calls 'the personality of the artist.' I think he is
distinctly 'taken' with your pretty little friend. How does she like
him?"

"I think she is decidedly prepossessed. At any rate, she is profoundly
grateful to him for discovering her work, and especially for the interest
that he took in the unknown worker."

"There you are, then," said Jasper. "There are the ingredients of a
life-size romance. Fervid admiration on the one side, gratitude on the
other, and good looks and good nature on both. We shall see what we shall
see, Helen; and I, for one, shall look on with the green eyes of envy."

"Why will you? Do you want Peggy Finch for yourself?"

"I want Hawkesley's good fortune. If he loves this little maid and thinks
she cares for him, he can ask her to marry him. That is what makes me
envious."

I made no reply; indeed, there was nothing to say; and already the sound
of the breakers was in my ears.

"I suppose, Helen," he said, after a long pause, "you realize that I love
you very dearly?"

"I know that we are the best of friends, and very deeply attached to one
another."

"We are much more than friends, Helen," said he; "at least, there is much
more than friendship on my side. You are my all--all that matters to me
in the world. You live in my thoughts every moment of my life. When we
are apart I yearn for the sight of you--I reckon the hours that must
pass before I shall see you again, and when we are together the happy
minutes slip away like grains of golden sand. But I need not tell you
this. You must have seen that I love you."

"I have feared it, Jasper--and that I might presently lose the dearest
friend that I have in the world."

"That you will never do, Helen, dearest, if I have the happiness to be
that friend. Why should you?"

"It seems that it has to be. Our friendship has been a sweet friendship
to me--too sweet to last, as I feared; and if some might cavil at it, it
was innocent and wronged no one. But if it has grown into--into what I
had feared it might, then it has become impossible. More than friends we
can never be, and yet we cannot remain friends."

We were both silent for more than a minute, and both were very grave.
Then Jasper asked, with a trace of hesitation: "Helen, if we were as
those other two are--if you were free--would you be willing to marry
me?"

It was a difficult question to answer, in the circumstances and yet I
felt it would be an unpardonable meanness to dissemble.

"Yes," I answered; "of course I should."

"Then," said he, "I don't see why we can never be more than friends."

"But, Jasper, how can we? I am a married woman."

"I don't admit that," said he. "Your marriage is a fiction. You are
really a spinster with a technical impediment to the conventional form of
marriage. Your so-called husband is a stranger to whom you have no ties.
You don't like, or even respect him; and certainly you have no
obligations of duty to him, seeing that he induced you by a mere
fraudulent pretence to go through this form of marriage with him."

"I am not thinking of Mr. Otway," said I. "He is nothing to me. I owe him
no duty or consideration, and I would not sacrifice a single hair of my
head for him. But the fact remains that I am, legally, his wife; and
while he lives I can contract no other marriage."

"But is that quite true, Helen?" he objected.

"Certainly it is; unless you consider a bigamous marriage as an
exception, which it is not."

"Of course I do not. Bigamy is a futile and fraudulent attempt to secure
the appearance of a legal sanction. No one but a fool entertains bigamy."

"Then I don't see the meaning of your objection."

"What I mean," said he, "is that a fictitious marriage does not exclude
the possibility of a real marriage."

"Still I do not quite follow you. What do you mean by a real marriage?"

"A real marriage is a permanent, life-long partnership between a man and
a woman. Ordinarily, such a partnership receives the formal endorsement
of the State for certain reasons of public policy. But it is the
partnership which is the marriage. The legal endorsement is an extrinsic
and inessential addition. Now, in your case the State has accepted and
endorsed a marriage which does not exist--which is a pure fiction. The
result is that if you contract a real marriage, the State will withhold
its endorsement. That is all. It cannot hinder the marriage."

"This is all very ingenious, Jasper," said I, "and it does credit to your
legal training. But it is mere sophistry. The position, as it would
appear to a plain person of ordinary common sense, is that a woman who is
legally married to one man and is living as the wife of another, is a
married woman who is living with a man who is not her husband."

"That is the conventional view, I admit," said he. "But it is a mistaken
view. It confuses the legal sanction--which is not essential--with the
covenant of life-long union, which is the essence of marriage--which, in
fact, is the marriage."

"But what is the bearing of this, Jasper?" I asked. "We seem to be
discussing a rather abstract question of public morals. Has it any
application to our own affairs?

"Yes, it has. At least, I think so, though I feel a little nervous about
saying just what I mean."

"I don't think you need be. At any rate, there had better be a clear
understanding between us. Tell me exactly what you do mean."

He considered awhile, apparently somewhat at a loss how to begin. At
length, with evident embarrassment, he put his proposal before me.

"The position, Helen, is this: You and I have become deeply attached to
one another; I may say--since you admit that you would be willing to
marry me--that we love one another. It is no passing fancy, based on
mere superficial attractions. We are both persons of character, and our
love is founded on deep-seated sympathy. We have been friends for some
years. We liked one another from the first, and as time has gone on we
have liked one another better. Our friendship has grown. It has become
more and more precious to both of us, and at last it has grow into love--on
my side, into intense and passionate love.

"We are not likely to change. People of our type are not given to change.
We love one another and we shall go on loving one another until the end.

"If our circumstances were normal, we should marry in the normal manner.
That is to say, we should enter into contract publicly with certain
formalities which would confer a definite legal status and render our
contract enforceable in a court of law. But our circumstances are not
normal. We are willing to comply with the formalities but we are not
allowed to. We are not in the position of persons who, for their own
purposes, lightly disregard the immemorial usages of society--who
dispense with the formalities because they would avoid the
responsibilities of formal marriage. We wish to enter into a lifelong
partnership; we desire to undertake all responsibilities; we would
welcome the formalities and the secure status. But the law refuses. There
is a technical disability.

"We have, therefore, two alternatives. We may give up the marriage which
we both desire, or we may marry and dispense with the formalities and the
legal status. Supposing we give up the marriage. Just consider, Helen
what it is that we give up. It is the happiness of a whole life-time. The
abiding joy of the sweetest, the most sympathetic, companionship that is
possible to a man and a woman. For though we are lovers, we are still
friends, and friends we shall remain until death parts us. Our tastes,
our interests, our sympathies make us prefer one another as companions to
all other human beings. Of how many married couples can this be said? To
us has been given that perfect comradeship that makes married life an
enduring delight, a state of happiness without a cloud or a blemish. And
this is what we give up if we let this disability, this technical
impediment, hinder us from marrying.

"On the other hand, supposing we marry and dispense with the formalities,
what do we give up? Virtually nothing. The legal security is of no value
to us, for each of us is secure in the constancy of the other. If we
enter into a covenant, we shall abide by it, not by compulsion, but
because we shall never wish to break it. As to the legal status and the
social recognition, is it conceivable that two sane persons should give
up a life's happiness for such trumpery? Surely it is not. No, Helen, let
us boldly take our destiny into our own hands. Let us publicly denounce
this sham marriage and cancel it for ever. I ask you, dearest, to give me
the woman of my heart for my mate, my friend, my wife, for ever; to take
me, unworthy as I am, for your husband, who will try, as long as he draws
the breath of life, to make up to you by love and worship for what you
have sacrificed to make him happy."

As I listened to Jasper's appeal--delivered with quiet but impressive
earnest--I think I was half disposed to yield. It was not only that I
admired the skill with which he put his case and the virile, masterful
way in which he trampled down the obstructing conventions; but deep down
in my heart I felt that he was right--that his separation of the things
that really mattered from those that were trivial and inessential was
true and just. But there was this vital difference between us; that he
was a man and I was a woman. Our estimates of the value of the
conventions were not the same. Without the legal sanction I might be his
wife in all that was real; but the world would call me his mistress.

"Jasper, dear," I said, "it is impossible. I admit the truth of all that
you have said, and I wish--Oh! Jasper, how I wish, that I could accept
the happiness that you offer me! You need not tell me that our
companionship would be a delight for ever. I know it. But it cannot be.
Even if I could accept it for myself, I could not accept it for you; I
could not bear to think that, through me, you had been put outside the
pale of decent society. For that is what it would mean. You--a gentleman
of honour and reputation--would become a social outcast, a man who was
living with another man's wife; who, if he were admitted at all to the
society of his own class, would have to be introduced with explanations
and excuses."

"I think you exaggerate the social consequences, Helen," said he. "I
propose that we should write to Otway and formally repudiate the
marriage. Then, if we were boldly, and openly to state our position and
the exceptional circumstances that had driven us to it, I believe that we
should receive sympathy rather than condemnation. I don't believe we
should lose a friend; certainly not one whose loss would afflict us. And
Otway could take his remedy, if he cared to."

"You mean he could divorce me," I said, with something like a shudder.

"Yes. But I am afraid he wouldn't."

"I don't think he would. But if he did, it would be an undefended suit,
and the stigma of the Divorce Court would be on us for ever."

"It would be unpleasant, I admit," he replied. "But think of the
compensations. Think of the joy of being, together always, of having our
own home, of going abroad and seeing the world together."

"Don't, Jasper!" I entreated. "It is too tantalizing. And even all this
would not compensate me for the knowledge that I had dragged you from
your honourable estate to a condition of social infamy."

"You need not consider me," he rejoined. "I have thought the matter out
and am satisfied that I should gain infinitely more than I should lose;
for I should have you, who are much more to me than all the rest of the
world."

"You haven't thought of everything, Jasper," said I. "You know of the
folly I committed at the time of my father's death--in withholding facts
at the inquest, I mean--and you have excused it and treated it lightly.
But others would view it differently. And now there is this blackmailer
of whom I have told you. At any moment, a serious scandal may arise; and
in that scandal you would be implicated."

"It wouldn't matter to me," said he. "Nothing would matter to me if only
I had you."

"So you think now. But, Jasper, think of the years to come. Think how it
might be in those years when the social ostracism, the loss of position
and reputation, had grown more and more irksome, if we should regret what
we had done, if we should blame ourselves--even, perhaps, secretly blame
one another--"

"We should never do that, Helen. We should always be loyal. And there
wouldn't be any social ostracism. At any rate, I am quite clear as to my
own position. I want you for my wife. To get you I would make any
sacrifices and count them as nothing. But that is only my position. It
isn't necessarily yours--or rather, I should say your sacrifices would
be greater than mine. A woman's point of view is different from a man's."

"It is, Jasper. I realise fully how essentially reasonable your proposal
is, and I am proud of, and grateful for, the love that has impelled you
to make it. But to me the thing is impossible. That is the only answer I
can give. What it costs me to give that answer--to refuse the happiness
that you offer me, and that I crave for--I cannot tell you. But even if
it breaks my heart to say 'no,' still, that must be my answer."

For a long time neither of us spoke. As I glanced furtively at Jasper,
the dejection, the profound sadness that was written on his face wrung my
heart and filled me with self-accusation. Why had I not foreseen this?
Why had I, who had nothing to give in return, allowed his friendship to
grow up into love under my eyes? Had I not acted towards this my dearest
friend with the basest selfishness?

Presently he turned to me, and, speaking in quiet, even tones, said:

"It would not be fair for me to make an appeal on my own behalf. I may
not urge you to accept a relation which your feeling and judgment reject.
But one thing I will ask. I have told you what I want; and you are to
remember that I shall always want you. I will ask you to reflect upon
what we have said to-day, and if perchance you should come to think
differently, remember that I am still wanting you, that I am still asking
you, and tell me if you can give me a different answer. Will you promise
me this, Helen?"

"Yes," I replied, "I promise you, Jasper."

"Thank you, Helen. And meanwhile we remain friends as we have been?"

"We can never be again as we have been," said I. "Friendship may turn to
love, but love does not go back to friendship. That is as impossible as
for the fruit to change back into blossom. No, dearest Jasper; this is
the end of our friendship. When we part to-day it must be farewell."

"Must it be, Helen? Must we part for ever? Could we not go back to the
old ways and try to forget to-day?

"I shall never forget to-day, nor will you. For our own peace of mind we
must remain apart and try to avoid meeting one another. It is the only
way, Jasper, hard as it will be."

I think he agreed with me, for he made no further protest. "If you say it
must be, Helen, then I suppose it must," he said, dejectedly. "But it is
a hard saying. I don't dare to think of what life will be without you."

"Nor I, Jasper. I know that when I say 'good-bye' to: you, the sun will
go out of my life and that I can look for no other dawn."

Again we fell silent for a while; and again I reproached myself for
having let it come to this.

"Don't you think, Helen," he said at length, "that we might meet
sometimes, say at fixed intervals--even long, intervals, if it must be
so--just that we might feel that we had not really lost one another
completely?"

"But that is what I should wish to avoid. For we have lost one another.
As to me, it has no significance. I have nothing to give and nothing to
lose. I am shackled for life to Mr. Otway. But you have your life before
you, and it would only be fair that I should leave you free."

"Free!" he exclaimed. "I am not free and never shall be. Nor do I wish to
be free. I am yours now and for ever. And so I would wish it to be. We
may not be married in any outward form, but we are married in the most
real sense. Our hearts are married. We belong to one another for ever
while we live, and neither of us will ever wish to change. You know it is
so, dearest, don't you?"

What could I say? He had spoken my own thoughts, had expressed the wish
that I had not dared to acknowledge. Weak and unjust it may have been,
but the thought that in the dark days of our coming separation we should
still be linked, if only by an invisible thread, came as something like a
reprieve. It left just a faint spark of light to relieve the gloom of the
all too sombre future. In the end we agreed to a monthly letter and a
meeting once a year. And so, having fixed the terms of our sentence, we
tried to put our troubles away and make the best of the few hours that
remained before the dreaded farewell.

But despite our efforts to get back to our wonted cheerful companionship,
the swiftly-passing hours were filled with sadness and heart-ache.
Instinctively we went and looked at things and places that recalled the
pleasant jaunts that were to be no more; but ever Black Care rode behind.
It was like the journey of two lovers in a tumbril that rolled its
relentless way towards the guillotine; for at the end of the day was the
parting that would leave us desolate.

And at last the parting was upon us. At the corner of Cable Street we
halted and faced one another. For a few moments we stood in the gathering
gloom, hand clasped in hand. I dared not speak, for my heart was
bursting. Hardly did I dare to look at the man whom I loved so
passionately. And Jasper could but press my hand and murmur huskily a few
broken words of love. And so we parted. With a last pressure of the hand
I turned away and hurried along Cable Street. I did not dare to look
back, though I knew that he was gazing after me; for the street swam
before my eyes and I could barely hold back my sobs.

I did not go straight home. The tumult of emotion sent me hurrying
forward--whither I have no recollection save that somewhere in Shadwell
a pair of friendly policemen turned me back with the remark that it "was
no place for the likes of me." At length, when the first storm of grief
had passed, and I felt myself under control, I made my way to Wellclose
Square, and pleading the conventional headache, retired at once to my
room.

And there, in quiet and seclusion, with tears that no longer need be
restrained, with solemn rites of grief, I buried my newborn happiness--the
happiness that had died almost in the moment of its birth.

Chapter XIX--Illusions and Disillusion

IT is a generally accepted belief that of all the remedies for an aching
heart, the most effective is distraction of the mind from the subject of
its affliction. And probably the belief is well founded. But it usually
happens that the sufferer is the last to recognize the virtues of the
remedy, preferring to nurse in solitude a secret grief and to savour
again and yet again the bitterness of the Dead Sea fruit of sorrow.

So it was with me in these unhappy days. The seclusion of the workshop
gave me the opportunity for long hours of meditation, in which I would
trace and retrace the growth of my love for Jasper, would think with
passionate regret of what might have been, and speculate vaguely upon the
future. So far from seeking distraction in these first days of my
trouble, I kept aloof from my comrades, so far as I could; shut myself in
the workshop, or in my room, or wandered abroad alone, following the
great eastern thoroughfares where I was secure from the chance of meeting
a friend.

But the distractions which I would have avoided came unsought. First,
there was the visit with Peggy to Miss Tallboy. It was due but a day or
two after my parting with Jasper, and I loathed the thought of it; but it
had to be; for who could say how much it might mean to Peggy? And as it
turned out, I should never have forgiven myself if I had failed her. I
had looked for a rather dull, social call flavoured with porcelain. But
it was quite otherwise. Miss Tallboy-Smith had at length heard of Peggy's
genius and had invited a few specially choice connoisseurs to meet her,
including Mr. Hawkesley--unless he had invited himself. At any rate,
there he was, reverential and admiring, but yet with a certain air of
proprietorship which I noted with interest and not without approval. It
was quite a triumph for Peggy, and she took it very modestly, though with
very natural satisfaction. To me, however, there was a fly in the
ointment, though quite a small one; for Mr. Hawkesley proposed an
exploration of the Wallace Collection, which Peggy had never seen, and
which I felt bound, for her sake, to agree to. But I looked forward with
prospective relief to the time--not far distant, I suspected--when
these two pottery enthusiasts would be intimate enough to dispense with a
chaperon.

Then there came a distraction of another kind. One evening after tea,
Lilith took me apart, and looking at me with some concern, said: "Our
Sibyl has not been herself of late. I hope she is not being worried about
anything."

"We all have our little troubles, Lilith," I replied, "and sometimes we
don't take them so resignedly as we should."

"No," she rejoined. "Resignation is easier when the troubles are someone
else's. But we are very concerned to see you looking so sad--not only
Margaret and I, but all of us. We are all very fond of you, Sibyl, dear,
and any of us would think it a privilege to be of help to you in any way.
You know that, don't you?"'

"I have good reason to. No woman could have found kinder or more helpful
friends than I have in this house."

"Well," she said, "friends are for use as well as for companionship.
Don't forget that, if there is any little service that any of us can
render you."

I thanked her very warmly, and she then opened a fresh topic.

"Some time ago, Sibyl, we were speaking of psychical experiments, and I
suggested that you might like to see some carried out by my friend, Mr.
Quecks, who is an authority on these subjects. Mr. Quecks was away from
home at the time, on a lecturing tour in Kent; but he is home again now.
I wrote to him about you and have had one or two talks with him, and he
has asked me to invite you to a little demonstration that he is giving to
some friends next Friday evening. Would you care to come with me?"

I would much rather not have gone, but I knew that a refusal would
disappoint Lilith, who had set her heart on converting me. Accordingly, I
accepted the invitation, and we were arranging details of the expedition
when Peggy joined us. As soon as she heard what was afoot she was all
agog.

"Oh, what fun!" she exclaimed. "You'll let me come, too, won't you,
Lilith? I did so enjoy it last time."

Lilith, however, was by no means eager for her company, for the Titmouse
was a rank unbeliever, and made no secret of it.

"What is the use of your coming, Peggy?" said she. "You don't believe in
the super-normal. You would only come to scoff."

"Perhaps I should remain to pray," rejoined Peggy. "It is no use
preaching to people who are already convinced. And I should just love it.
That Quecks man is so frightfully amusing. He is the funniest little
guffin you ever saw, Sibyl. Won't you let me come, Lilith?"

"Of course you can come if you really want to," Lilith replied with
evident reluctance. "But you shouldn't speak of Mr. Quecks as if he were
a mountebank or a buffoon. He may not be handsome, but he is a very
learned man and very sincere."

"I beg your pardon, Lilith," said Peggy. "I won't call him a guffin any
more. And thank you ever so much for letting me come."

The arrangements being thus settled, it is only fair to Peggy to say that
she endeavoured, as far as possible, to treat the demonstration quite
seriously. Even in our private conversations she made no further
disparaging references to Mr. Quecks, though I did gather that her
anxiety to be present at the s\E9ance was not unconnected with a desire to
keep an eye on him to see that he did not impose on me.

Mr. Quecks' house was situated in a quiet street off Cromwell Road,
Kensington, and the "demonstration" took place in a large room
intermediate in character between a library and a drawing-room, lighted
by three electric bulbs, all of which were encased in silk bags, so that
the illumination was of a twilight dimness. The visitors were about a
dozen in all, and while we were waiting for the late arrivals Mr. Quecks
made a few observations on super normal phenomena in general.

To me he required no disparagement from Peggy or anyone else, his own
appearance doing all that was necessary in that respect. The first glance
at him impressed me disagreeably; but then he was a manifestly uncomely
man, with a large, bald face and long, greasy black hair, which was
brushed straight back and accumulated in an untidy bush at the nape of
his neck. He spoke unctuously, and his manner was confident, persuasive,
didactic and authoritative, and he gave me the impression of a man who
was accustomed to dealing chiefly with women--his present audience was
composed of them exclusively.

"In interpreting the results of the experiments which we are about to
perform," he observed, "we have to bear in mind that psychical and
super-normal phenomena, inasmuch as they are not concerned with material
things, are not directly appreciable by the senses. We cannot see or
touch the subliminal self, either our own or that of others. But neither
can we see the electric current or the Hertzian waves. We know of their
existence and properties indirectly, through their effects. Electricity
can be transformed into heat, light or sound, and these can be perceived
by means of the radiator, the electric lamp or the telephone, which act
directly on our senses. So it is with the hidden subconscious self.
Invisible itself, it can be made to produce effects which are perceptible
to the conscious mind through the senses, and through those effects its
own existence is revealed."

This sounds reasonable enough; but the experiments themselves were rather
disappointing on the whole. Perhaps I expected too much; or perhaps the
preoccupied state of my mind did not allow me to bring to them sufficient
interest or attention. Moreover, Mr. Quecks had an assistant (I had
almost said "confederate") whose appearance pleased me no more than his
own; a wall-eyed, taciturn woman of about thirty-five, of the name of
Morgan, who acted as the "percipient"--the word "medium," I noticed, was
not used--and helped to prejudice me against the experiments.

We began with a demonstration of thought-transference, which I found
dull, tiresome and unconvincing. Probably I was unreasonable; but the
apparent triviality of the proceedings, which resembled a solemn and
unspeakably dull drawing-room game, influenced my judgment. The
percipient, Miss Morgan, being seated, blindfolded, in the middle of the
room, a pack of playing cards and another pack of cards, each of which
bore a single capital letter, were produced. A card was drawn out at
random and held up behind the percipient and in view of everyone else,
including Mr. Quecks, who held the percipient's hand. Miss Morgan then
guessed the card or the letter. Sometimes she guessed correctly,
sometimes nearly correctly, some times quite incorrectly. The proportion
of correct guesses, Mr. Quecks informed us, was vastly greater than could
be accounted for on the law of probabilities. And I dare say it was. But
the exhibition left me cold, as did those of table-tilting and planchette
writing which followed. Even the "pendule explorateur," which had so
impressed me on a previous occasion, fell flat on this. For, since that
rather startling experience, I had given some thought to the magic
pendulum, and believed that I had found at least a partial explanation of
its powers. Accordingly, when my turn came to try the "autoscope," I took
the string in my fingers and shut my eyes; and when Mr. Quecks objected
to this, I gazed fixedly at the opposite wall, seeing neither the
pendulum nor the clockwise alphabet. Under these conditions the pendulum
was a complete failure; it would spell nothing. But when I looked
steadily at the pendulum and the letters, the swinging ball spelled out
clearly the word that I chose--Lilith.

I was thus in a decidedly sceptical frame of mind when the next set of
experiments began; and even these produced, at first, no effect on me
other than a slight tendency to yawn. Their object was to demonstrate the
existence of a "psychometric" power or faculty; that is to say, a power
to detect in certain material objects a permanent impression left by
contact with some particular person. Such a faculty, Mr. Quecks explained
to us, was possessed by certain exceptionally sensitive persons. He had
it to some extent himself, but in Miss Morgan it was developed in a
really remarkable degree, as the experiments which were to follow would
convince us.

Hereupon Miss Morgan was once more blindfolded, all the lights but one
were switched off, so that the room was almost in darkness, and the
demonstration began. One of the visitors, at Mr. Quecks' whispered
request, slipped a ring from her finger and passed it to him. By him it
was handed to Miss Morgan, who solemnly applied it to her forehead. Then
followed an interval of expectant silence, in which I thought I heard a
faint giggle from Peggy Finch, who sat in the row in front of me.

At length Miss Morgan opened her mouth and spake. It seemed that she was
seeing visions, and these she described in detail. Naturally I was unable
to check them, nor could I judge whether they had any relation to the
ring. The owner of that article stated, at the close of the experiment,
that the visions, as described, corresponded closely to certain places
and events which were known to her and to no one else. Which seemed
conclusive enough; but yet it left me only with a feeling that the whole
proceeding was ridiculous and trivial.

The next experiment was performed with a glove from the hand of another
visitor, and when this was concluded, Mr. Quecks whispered to a lady in
the front row, who whispered to Peggy, who turned to me.

"He wants your handkerchief, Sibyl," she said in a low whisper.

I took my handkerchief from my pocket and gave it to Peggy, who squeezed
it up into a ball and passed it to the lady in front, who passed it to
Mr. Quecks, who handed it to Miss Morgan; who, in her turn, applied it to
her forehead as if it had been an ice-bag, and assumed an attitude of
intense mental concentration. And again the sound of a suppressed giggle
came from the neighbourhood of the Titmouse.

Then Miss Morgan began to speak.

"I seem to be passing through the country--swiftly--very swiftly; past
great, wide fields and woods. They are strange-looking woods. The trees
are all in lines--in straight lines...But wait! Are they trees? No,
they can't be; they are too small. No--they are plants growing up poles
--they must be vines. It is a vineyard--and yet they don't look quite
like vines. No, no! Of course, I see now; they are hops. It is a
hop-garden. And now I am passing another. Now I have come out on to a
road on the top of a hill. There are hills all round, and in the hollow
there seems to be a town...and I seem to see water in the town...yes,
it is water. It is a river...But I don't see any ships...only
some red things...Oh, yes! I see; the red things are sails--red
sails. I thought sails were always white."

She paused; and in the intense silence I leaned forward, listening
eagerly. All my indifference and boredom had vanished. This was quite a
different affair from the card-guessing and planchette-reading. She had
described Maidstone vividly, accurately--or at least so it seemed to me;
Maidstone as it would appear to one approaching the bridge from the west.
Of course it might be mere guessing; but--

"I seem," Miss Morgan resumed, "to be descending a hill by a broad
street...What is that in front of me? Is it--yes I see it is a bridge. Yes
I see it plainly now. I am coming towards it. But what on earth is this
thing on my left hand? It seems to be a mass of gold and yet...and
yet it looks like an elephant. That's ridiculous, of course. It can't
be...But it certainly looks like gold...and yet it...it really
does look like an elephant! Well, I can make nothing of it. And now it is
gone and I am on the bridge." Again she paused, and I sat gazing at her
in blank astonishment. There could now be no question as to the reality
of the visions, unless the whole exhibition was a fraud. The idea of
skilful guessing could not be entertained for a moment. The description
did not merely fit Maidstone; the detail of the golden elephant on the
brewery by the bridge fixed the identity of the place I beyond the
possibility of doubt. It was either a genuine--and most
amazing--psychical phenomenon or an outrageous imposture.
But an imposture, to which Lilith must have been a party, was more
incredible than the super-normal itself.

As these thoughts passed swiftly through my mind, Miss Morgan resumed her
description.

"I am standing on the bridge, but it is beginning to grow indistinct. By
the riverside I can just see a great house, an old, old house, which
seems to stand by the water's edge, and beyond it trees and a church
tower. Now it is gone and I can see nothing. Is this all?...No; I
see, very, very faintly, a small crowd of people. They seem to be in a
field. And I make out a number of white objects in the field. They look
rather like sheep, but they are very still. Oh! they are not sheep at
all; they are tombstones. And I see now that the people are all in black
and that they are standing round an open grave. It must be a
funeral...Yes; there is the clergyman in his surplice...But it is beginning
to fade.

"Now I can only just see the dark shapes of the people and now they are
gone too. This must be all, I think." She paused for a few moments and
then exclaimed:

"No it isn't! Something else is coming. It is very dim, but it looks like
a man sitting at a table. Yes! But I can't see what he is doing. He is
not writing. He has something in his right hand, and keeps moving it up
and down. Oh, I see now: it is a hammer. He seems to be hammering some
bright object--a piece of metal, I think...Yes, it is quite clear
now. But it isn't a man at all; it is a woman. I saw her distinctly for a
moment, but she has grown dim again...Now she has gone and I can see
nothing...I think that is all...Yes, that is all. Nothing else
seems to come."

She removed the handkerchief from her forehead and held it out towards
Mr. Quecks, who took it from her and tiptoed round to where I was
sitting.

"Thank you, Mrs. Otway," he whispered. "It seemed a very successful
experiment; but you can judge better than I can."

"It was, indeed, most successful," I replied, as he gave me back my
handkerchief. "I am positively amazed at the detailed accuracy of the
description."

"You think the correspondence is closer than could be accounted for by
coincidence or chance guessing?" he asked.

"There can be no question of chance," I replied. "The descriptions were
much too detailed and circumstantial."

"That is most interesting," said he. "For there can be no other
explanation but that of genuine psychometric faculty. Miss Morgan is a
stranger to you, and, moreover, she did not know whose handkerchief it
was. The remarkable success of this experiment seems to support Miss
Blake's estimate of your unusual psychic gifts. You evidently have the
power of imprinting your personality on inanimate objects in an
exceptional degree. I should almost think it likely that you would be a
successful scryer. Have you made any experiments with the crystal?"

"Yes. But they are all complete failures. I could see nothing."

"That is not unusual in early experiments," said he. "There is a
difficulty in concentrating. I wonder if you would care to make a trial
now under my guidance. I think I could help you to visualize some simple
scene. Will you try?"

The astonishing success of Miss Morgan's experiment had revived all my
former curiosity, and I assented readily, much to Mr. Quecks'
satisfaction. The nature of the new experiment was explained to the
company, and the necessary preparations made. An easy chair was placed
for me in the middle of the room, and the chairs for the others arranged
behind it, so that I should not have my attention distracted by seeing
them. As I passed Lilith on my way to the chair, I greeted her with a
smile, and was a little surprised at the lack of response on her part. I
thought she would be gratified to see me taking so active a part in the
proceedings; but apparently she was not; indeed, I had never seen her
look so ungenial.

When I had taken my seat, Mr. Quecks directed me to lean back and adopt a
position of complete physical rest. A black, velvet cushion was then
placed in my lap and on the cushion was laid the crystal globe, itself
almost black in the dim twilight save for a single spark where it
reflected the light of the one electric lamp.

"You will look fixedly at the bright spot of light," said Mr. Quecks, who
had seated himself beside me; "concentrate your attention on it and think
of nothing else. Don't let your mind wander, and don't move your eyes.
Think of the bright spot and look at it. Soon a mist will come before
your eyes; then you will feel a sort of drowsiness. You will grow more
and more drowsy, but your eyes will keep open and you will still see the
mist. You are seeing it now--" (this was quite correct); "it grows
denser; now you are beginning to feel drowsy--just a little drowsy--but
your eyes are wide open; still you are getting drowsy--rather more
drowsy--"

He seemed to repeat these words over and over and over again like a sort
of chant; and his voice, which had been at first soft and confidential,
took on a peculiar sing-song quality, and at the same time began to grow
more and more distant until it came to me thin and small like the voices
that are borne from far-away ships on a calm day across the water of a
quiet anchorage. And, meanwhile, a strange somnolence fell upon me. I
felt as if I were in a dream. Yet my eyes were wide open, and before them
floated the mist, out of which shone the single spark of light. And the
little, thin voice went on chanting far away, but I could no longer make
out what it said. Nor was I attending to it. I was gazing into the mist
at the tiny spark--gazing fixedly, unwinkingly, without effort.

Presently the mist seemed to clear a little, and the spot of light began
to grow larger. Now it looked like a hole in the shutter of a dark room;
and now it was as though I were looking through an opera glass or a
telescope; but I could make out nothing save a confused blur of light, in
the middle of which was a vague, dark shape. But still the area of light
grew larger, and now I could see that there were other shapes, all dim,
vague and shadowy. Then in an instant it cleared up, as a magic-lantern
picture sharpens when the lens is focussed. The dark shape was Mr. Otway.
He stood, stooping forward, gazing at something on the floor--something
that lay by the fireplace, motionless, with upturned waxen face. It was
horribly distinct. I could see my father's face settling into the
rigidity of death; I could see the crimson streak on his temple; I could
even see the sparkle of the silver knob on the stick that Mr. Otway
grasped.

The vision lasted, as it seemed, but for a few seconds. Then it grew dim
and confused and quickly faded away into blank darkness; and I found
myself sitting up in the chair, wide awake, but bewildered and a little
frightened. The lights were full on, and the visitors were all gathered
around my chair gazing at me with a very odd intentness.

"Did you see anything in the crystal?" Mr. Quecks asked, suavely.

"Yes," I answered, not quite so suavely. "How long have I been asleep?"

Mr. Quecks looked at his watch. "Just five and twenty minutes," he
replied.

I got up from the chair, and, addressing Peggy, who was looking at me a
little anxiously, asked: "What has been happening, Peggy? Have I been
talking nonsense?"

"No," she answered. "You've been asleep, and you've been guessing cards
and doing most extraordinary sums--multiplying and dividing fractions
and all sorts of things. That's all. But," she added in a lower tone,
"he'd no business to hypnotize you without your permission. You didn't
give him permission, did you?"

"No, I didn't," I replied.

At this moment Lilith came up to us and put the same question.

"No," I answered. "I didn't understand that I was to be hypnotised."

"I thought not," said she in a tone of evident vexation. "It doesn't
happen to matter as things have turned out, but it was quite improper. I
shall speak to Mr. Quecks about it when you are gone."

"Aren't you coming with us, then?" asked Peggy.

"No," replied Lilith. "I have some matters to talk over with him, so I
must stay a little while; but I shall follow you in about half an hour."

Shortly after this the meeting broke up, and Peggy and I took our
departure. As we sat in the train, I tried to extract from my companion
some details of what had happened, but I found her curiously unwilling to
pursue the topic. I gathered, however, that, as soon as the hypnotic
trance was completely established, Mr. Quecks suggested to me that I
should have a distinct vision of some scene that I had witnessed "in the
old town that Miss Morgan had seen and shortly before the funeral that
she had described." Then, after an interval, he had put a number of
problems in multiplication and division of large numbers and fractions,
which I had solved with extraordinary ease and rapidity. As to the nature
of my vision, Peggy displayed no interest, but turned the conversation on
to subjects quite unconnected with Mr. Quecks or psychical science.

When we arrived home she followed me to my room and suggested that we
should wait there for Lilith, which was what I had intended to do. And
here again she showed a marked tendency to avoid the subject of Mr.
Quecks and his experiments. But, as she sat in my chair gossiping, I
caught her eye, from time to time, travelling almost furtively towards
the clock on the mantelpiece, and I wondered if she was feeling anxious
about Lilith, who had to make her way alone through the rather unsavoury
neighbourhood of Ratcliff. Whatever she was feeling, however, she kept up
a flow of conversation--which was, itself, a rather unusual phenomenon--and
presently grew quite confidential about herself--which was more
unusual still. It was clear that her friendship with Mr. Hawkesley was
now quite firmly established, and they evidently saw a good deal of one
another--but this I knew already. And it was clear that their sympathy
in tastes was running parallel to a very strong liking of a more personal
kind.

After a pause in this confidential gossip, Peggy suddenly looked down a
little shyly, and, turning very pink, asked hesitatingly:

"Sibyl, dear, you haven't quarrelled with Mr. Davenant, have you?"

"Quarrelled, Peggy!" I exclaimed; "of course I haven't. Have we ever
struck you as quarrelsome people?"

"No, indeed," she replied. "But you don't seem to have seen much of one
another lately."

"No; I haven't seen Mr. Davenant for quite a long time," I said.

She was silent for a while, and I noticed that her cheeks were growing
more and more pink.

"What is my little chameleon turning that colour for?" I asked.

She looked up at me with a shy smile. "Sibyl," she said, "don't think me
inquisitive or impertinent. I am your friend, you know, and we are fond
of one another, aren't we?"

"We are the very best of friends, Peggy, dear, so you needn't mind asking
me anything that you want to know."

"Well, then, Sibyl; why don't you and Mr. Davenant marry? Anyone can see
how fond he is of you, and I'm sure you care for him an awful lot, don't
you, now?"

"My Titmouse is becoming an expert authority on these matters," said I,
thereby converting poor Peggy to the semblance of a corn-poppy.

"Perhaps I am," she admitted, defiantly. "But why don't you marry him,
Sibyl?"

"My dear Peggy," said I, "there is a very substantial reason. Its name is
Mr. Otway."

"Sibyl!" gasped Peggy. "I thought you were a widow!"

I shook my head. "No, Peggy. I am a widow in effect, but a married woman
by law. I have a husband who is no husband; whom I married in error, whom
I have never lived with and could never think of living with, but whom I
can never get rid of. That is the position."

She flung her arms around my neck, and laid her cheek to mine.

"My poor, dear Sibyl," she exclaimed. "How dreadful for you! I am so
frightfully sorry, dear. And is there no end to this?"

"There is death," said I. "That is all. And that is why I am not seeing
much of Mr. Davenant nowadays."

"It is an awful thing, Sibyl," said she. "You and Mr. Davenant could make
one another so perfectly happy.' And I don't see why you shouldn't, for
that matter."

"Why, how could we, Peggy?"

Again she blushed scarlet, and with a defiant glance at me, replied:

"I wouldn't have my whole life wrecked. I should just go off with him,
husband or no husband."

"You dreadful little reprobate. And what do you suppose the world would
say about you?"

"It could say what it liked so long as I'd got the man I wanted. But it
wouldn't really say anything. No one with any sense would think a penny
the worse of me. Nor would they of you. Everyone would say that you had
done the right thing, seeing that you had no choice. You couldn't be
expected to be bound for life to a dummy husband."

At this moment I rose from my chair, and going over to the
dressing-table, lit a candle. Then I put my hand in my pocket and drew
out an unaddressed envelope and a piece of pencil. With the latter I
wrote on the envelope my signature and the words "ten minutes to eleven."
The whole proceeding seemed quite automatic. I did not know why I was
doing it. I had not known that either the envelope or the pencil was in
my pocket, for I had not put them there. But I carried out the train of
action almost unconsciously and quite without surprise.

When I had written on the envelope, I opened it and drew out a piece of
paper. On the paper was some writing in an unfamiliar hand. I held the
paper near the candle and read as follows:

"At ten minutes to eleven you will light a candle, take this envelope and
a pencil from your pocket; you will write on the envelope your signature
and the time. Then you will open the envelope and read this message."

I stood for some seconds gazing at the paper in utter amazement. Then I
looked round quickly at the clock. It was ten minutes to eleven. From the
clock my glance turned to Peggy, who was sitting watching me with a very
uncomfortable expression.

"Do you know anything about this, Peggy?" I asked.

"Yes," she replied. "That Quecks man told you to do it. He wrote the
message and put the envelope and pencil in your pocket when you were in a
deep sleep. He spoke the message into your ear, and, after about a
minute, told you to wake up, and you woke up immediately. It was like his
impudence to perform his beastly experiments without getting your
permission first."

"It was. But the thing is rather uncanny. I don't like it at all."

"There's nothing in it," said Peggy, though she, too, was evidently not
pleasantly impressed. "It's what they call post-hypnotic suggestion. It
isn't in any way super-natural. The doctors know all about it."

"Still," said I, "it is a very strange affair. There is something
extremely eerie in finding oneself turned into an unthinking automaton
worked by somebody else's will. And some of the other experiments were
rather startling: Miss Morgan's visions for instance."

"Mightn't they have been just clever guesses?"

"No, Peggy. That is quite impossible. Her descriptions applied to my case
in detail and were correct every time. You heard her describe the view
from Maidstone Bridge?"

"Yes. And I recognised it from that water-colour over your mantelpiece."

"Well, don't you think it very wonderful and incomprehensible?"

"No, I don't," said Peggy. "How do you suppose she did it?

"I can only imagine that some influence that I don't understand passed to
her from my handkerchief."

"Then you imagine wrong," said the Titmouse. "Your handkerchief was in my
pocket all the time. It was my handkerchief that she was smelling at. And
her descriptions didn't fit me the least little bit. I don't hammer my
pottery, you know."

"But I don't understand. You passed her my handkerchief, didn't you?"

"No; I passed her mine. You see, I'd seen this handkerchief trick before
and I had mine ready, rolled up into a ball in my hand. So it was quite
easy to make the exchange. But we may as well change back now."

She took a handkerchief from her pocket and handed it to me; and when I
had identified it as my own, I produced hers and restored it to her.

"You are a wicked little baggage, Peggy," said I, "though I must admit
that the ruse was quite a fair one. But still, I don't quite see how it
was done? It was evidently an imposture. But how was it worked? How did
she get the information?"

"Why, she got it from Mr. Quecks, and he got it from Lilith."

"You surely don't suggest that Lilith was a party to this fraud?"

"Of course I don't," she replied, indignantly. "Lilith is a lady to the
tips of her fingers. That's just where it is. She would never suspect.
But we know that she wrote to Quecks about you, and she has talked to him
about you, and no doubt he has pumped out all that she knows about you.
Then you will remember that he has just come back from a tour in Kent--he
is almost certain to have been to Maidstone--and there are such
things as picture postcards. There is no mystery as to how it was done;
but I do wonder that he was such a fool as to do it before Lilith. I
suspect she stayed behind to tell him what she thought of him."

As we were speaking, Lilith came up the stairs, and I ran out to
intercept her and bring her in.

"You needn't have waited up for me," said she, "though I am glad you
have, for I want to apologise for Mr. Quecks' very improper behaviour."

"Don't think any more about it, Lilith," said I. "It didn't do any harm,
and it has enabled Peggy and me to have a little private s\E9ance to
ourselves."

"Did the post-hypnotic experiment work correctly?"

"Perfectly--and most uncannily."

"Then," said Lilith, "you have gained by that amount of experience. As to
the rest of Mr. Quecks' experiments--well, Sibyl, I am afraid we must
consider them on the plane of public entertainment rather than on that of
genuine research. But it is getting late. We had better go to bed now and
talk things over to-morrow."

This advice was forthwith acted on, as to its first half; and if I owed
Mr. Quecks a grudge for trying to impose on me, I should have been
grateful to him for giving me something to think about other than my own
griefs and entanglements.

Chapter XX--Cloud and Sunshine

REVIEWING on the morrow my experiences at Mr. Quecks' house, I was
conscious of a rather definite change of outlook. Those experiences had
made a very deep impression. The vision that I had seen was something
outside ordinary, normal experience, and it still haunted me. And then,
even more uncanny, there was that strange automatic action which I had
carried out with such perfect unconsciousness and yet so exactly and
punctually. It was all very well for Peggy to put it aside with the easy
explanation that it was merely post-hypnotic suggestion, and that the
doctors knew all about it. That explanation explained nothing. The fact
remained that I had suddenly become aware that things which I had been
accustomed to dismiss as delusions--as the mere superstitions of
credulous people--were actual realities. And this discovery created for
me a new standard of possibility and truth. Even Miss Morgan's visions,
though I knew them to be a rank imposture, had left an impression that
was not to be completely effaced. The shock of amazement that they had
produced at the time left a vague after-effect, due, no doubt, to the
more real and equally mysterious experiences.

Concerning these latter I was somewhat puzzled. It was not quite clear to
me how I had come to be hypnotized at all, and I took an early
opportunity of questioning Lilith on the subject.

"There is no mystery about that," she replied. "The orthodox method of
producing the hypnotic trance is to cause the 'subject' to gaze steadily
at some bright object--a metal button, a crystal, or even a small piece
of white paper. He is told to gaze fixedly at this object, to concentrate
his attention on it, and to think of nothing else. The purpose of this is
to get rid, as far as possible, of the conscious self and to allow the
subconscious self to act without disturbance. When this state of mental
abstraction has been established, the 'subject' is ready to receive
suggestions. If the operator suggests to him that he is drowsy, he
becomes somnolent; and at the same time he becomes much more susceptible
to suggestion. Now, if the operator suggests to him that he feels certain
sensations, he feels those sensations. If it is suggested that he
performs certain actions, he performs them. This is what happened to you.
Mr. Quecks induced you to gaze steadily at the crystal, and when you were
in the proper state of mental abstraction, he suggested the hypnotic
trance. Then he suggested that you would see a vision of some scene that
you had looked on shortly before the funeral, and I understand that you
did see such a vision."

"Yes, I did; and most astonishingly vivid it was. But, Lilith, when I lit
that candle in my room I was not in the hypnotic trance."

"No; that was a post-hypnotic phenomenon, and really a most interesting
one. To understand it you must think of the two personalities, the
conscious self and the subconscious, or subliminal self. Now the
suggestions are made to the subconscious self, while the conscious is
dormant or in abeyance. But when the conscious self returns or awakens,
the subconscious mind continues to work, although unperceived by the
conscious mind. If the suggestion refers, as in your case, to some action
to be performed at an appointed time, the subconscious keeps account of
the passing time and at the appointed moment sets the machinery in
motion. The action itself is perceived by the conscious mind, but the
train of subconscious thought has been unperceived, though it has really
been quite continuous. It is very curious, though not particularly
mysterious."

"And it is only in the hypnotic trance that these suggestions take
effect?"

"That," replied Lilith, "is not quite clear. It seems that in ordinary
sleep suggestions of the kind may sometimes take effect. And for the same
reason. In sleep, the conscious self is in abeyance--is out of action;
but the subconscious is active, as we see in the case of dreams and still
more strikingly in the case of somnambulism. But the postponed effects of
suggestions made during normal sleep need more investigation. I believe
that sleep produced by drugs is much more like the hypnotic trance than
natural sleep."

"Well," I said, "it is all rather weird and uncanny," and so the subject
dropped. But, as I have said, the influence of these strange experiences
remained. My former scepticism of the occult and mystical gave place to a
state of mind in which I was prepared to admit the possibility of things
that I had once regarded as wildly incredible.

Nevertheless, I was but faintly interested in the wonders of psychical
research. Indeed, I was not much interested in anything connected with my
daily life. I had endeavoured to revive my enthusiasm for my work by
setting myself an ambitious task--a silver candlestick of a
semi-ecclesiastical design, worked in repouss\E9 with enrichments in
enamel. But all the pleasure in the work was gone. The various processes
--skilfully enough executed, as I noticed with tepid satisfaction--which
should have been a joy, were but the routine of industry; and through
them all the never-ending heartache, the sense of loss, of bereavement,
the feeling that the light had gone out of my life for ever. The passing
time seemed to bring no mitigation. Rather did it seem to me that every
day I missed my dear companion more.

Perhaps if my loss had been more final--if, for instance, Jasper had
been taken from me by Death--I might have striven more determinedly to
shape my life anew. But there was a certain inconclusiveness in our
separation. Not that I ever, for a moment, considered the possibility of
re-opening the question. But still I think there lurked in my mind the
feeling that the door was not finally closed. Jasper's words, "Remember
that I am still wanting you, that I am still asking you," would come to
me unbidden, again and yet again, reminding me that the way was still
open, that I could end the separation if and when I chose. And then
Peggy's outspoken declaration was not without its effect. For the
Titmouse was a very paragon of modesty and maidenly propriety; and when I
recalled her robust contempt of conventional points of view I could not
help asking myself sometimes if I had not been too prudish.

All of which was very disturbing. It left me with my resolution
unchanged, and yet without that sense of finality that would have set me
reconstructing my scheme of life.

So the weeks dragged by till the time for the first monthly letter drew
nigh; and the passionate yearning with which I looked forward to it told
me that that letter was a mistake. It ought never to have been. The
chapter should have been ended and the volume shut irrevocably.

As the time for the letter approached, my unrest took me abroad more than
usual, and one day, forsaking the sordid east, I took the train to South
Kensington and made my way to the Museum, though with no special object
in my mind. I had ascended the steps to the main entrance, and was
approaching the doorway, when I came face to face with Miss
Tallboy-Smith, who was just emerging. At the sight of me she halted with
a dramatic gesture of astonishment.

"Well!" she exclaimed, "so you are really alive! I thought I was never
going to see you again. Where have you been? It's ages--centuries--since
I have seen you. And dear Miss Finch, too; whatever has become of
her? Were you going into the Museum? I have just been wallowing in the
Salting Collection. Delightful, isn't it? The very kernel of the Museum.
Don't you think so?

"I don't think I have ever seen the Salting Collection," said I.

"Never seen the Salting Collection!" she gasped. "My dear Mrs. Otway! How
dreadful! And you a connoisseur, too. Why, it's a Paradise; the
collectors' Heaven. Do you believe that people come back after death and
frequent their old haunts? I hope it's true. If it is, I shall come to
the Salting Collection. I shall divide my ghosthood between that and the
Wallace. It will really be very jolly. Unlimited leisure, with all
eternity at one's disposal. And no stuffy restrictions; no closing hours
or students' days. So convenient, too! You just pass in through the
closed door or the wall and float up the stairs. Why, you could even get
inside the glass cases! I'm afraid you'll think me an awful old heathen;
but I'm not really. And how are you? And how is Miss Finch? And why
haven't you been to the club for such an age. And isn't it dreadful about
poor Mr. Davenant?"

My heart seemed to stand still, and I think I must have turned pale, for
Miss Tallboy-Smith said hastily: "I'm afraid I have startled you, Mrs.
Otway; but surely--surely--do you mean to tell me that you haven't even
heard about it?"

"I have heard nothing," I said, faintly. "Is he--tell me what has
happened."

"I haven't had very full particulars," said she, "but it seems that a
cart--or was it a wagon? No, I think it was a cart--and yet I'm not
quite sure that it wasn't--but there! I'm not very dear as to the
difference between a cart and a wagon. What is the difference?

"It doesn't matter," I said impatiently. "Tell me what happened."

"No," she agreed, "I suppose it doesn't matter. Well, it seems that this
wagon--but I think it was really a cart--yes, I'm sure it was--at
least, I think so--but at any rate it appears that the wagon had run
away--that is, of course, it was the horse that had run away, but as he
was tied to the cart, it comes to the same thing. And he got on to the
pavement--it was in the Strand, somewhere near that shop where they sell
those absurd--now what do they call those things? I am getting so silly
about names, and it's quite a common name, too--"

"Never mind what they are called," I entreated. "Do tell me what happened
to Mr. Davenant."

"Well, what happened was this. When the wagon got on the pavement all the
people scattered to get out of the way--all except a messenger boy, and
he fell down right in front of the cart. Then Mr. Davenant ran out and
tried to drag the boy dear of the wagon; and, in fact, he did drag him
out of the way, but he wasn't quick enough to save himself, for the horse
swerved and knocked him down violently on to some stone steps. He fell
with his side on the stone steps, and I understand that his ribs were
simply smashed to matchwood."

"And where is he now? Is he in a hospital?

"He was. They took him to Charing Cross Hospital, but he wouldn't stay
there. He insisted on going home directly they put on the splints or
whatever the things were. And, will you believe me, Mrs. Otway, when I
tell you that he has been living alone in those wretched chambers ever
since! He wouldn't even have a nurse. Isn't that just like a man?"

"But who looks after him?

"Nobody. Of course there is the charwoman, or laundress as they call them
--though why they should be called laundresses I can't imagine. They look
more like dustwomen--and the man from the office downstairs looks in
sometimes. It's a perfectly scandalous state of affairs. I wish, Mrs.
Otway, you would go and see him and make him have a nurse."

"I will certainly go and see him," said I. "I will go now," and I held
out my hand to bring the interview to an end.

"How sweet of you, dear Mrs. Otway!" she explained, keeping a firm hold
of my hand, which I endeavoured unobtrusively to withdraw. "I felt sure
you would go to the rescue. And you will insist on his having a nurse,
won't you? He will listen to you, but you will have to be firm. Promise
me you will, now."

"I will see that he is properly looked after," I replied.

"Yes, but he must have a nurse, you know--a properly trained and
certificated nurse. You can get excellent nurses at that place--now,
what is its name? Cavendish--Cavendish something. I am getting so silly
about names. Let me see, I did have a card in my purse; perhaps it is
there still--" Here she released my hand to open her wrist-bag, and I
took the opportunity to retreat down the steps.

"Don't trouble, please," I urged. "I shall manage quite well.
Good-bye!" and with this I hurried away, somewhat unceremoniously, across
the wide road, and, as soon as I had turned the corner, broke into a run.
A couple of minutes later I arrived at the station, breathless, just in
time to see a Circle train move out. I could have wept with vexation. It
was but a few minutes before the next one would be due, but those minutes
dragged like hours. With swift strides I paced up and down the platform
in an agony of impatience, turning over and over again Miss Tallboy
Smith's confused account of the accident and trying to construct by its
aid some intelligible picture of Jasper's condition.

Even when I was in the train its progress seemed intolerably slow and the
succession of stations interminable. It was an agony to sit still and
passively await the leisurely arrival at my destination, and an
unspeakable relief when, at last, I reached the Temple Station, to spring
from the train, dash up the stairs and hurry along the embankment. My
progress on foot might be slower, but I had the physical sensation of
speed.

At the top of Middle Temple Lane I emerged into Fleet Street, and,
crossing the road, entered Clifford's Inn Passage. I had never been there
before, and, though I knew the number of Jasper's house, I thought it
best to enquire as to its whereabouts. As I passed through the archway I
saw a somewhat clerical-looking man standing at the door of the porter's
lodge, and from him learned that No. 54 was in the inner court on the
east side of the garden; with which direction I hurried on again. Clearly
there came back to me the impressions that seemed so dim at the time: a
sense of quiet and repose, of aloofness from the bustle of the city, an
old-world, dignified shabbiness that was yet homely and pleasant withal.
I crossed a little court, passed through a second archway, and came out
into a second, larger court, where the gay foliage of plane trees found a
foil in the dingy, red brick of the venerable houses. A glance showed me
the narrow alley by the garden, and a dozen paces along its
roughly-flagged pavement brought me to the entry of No. 54, on the side
of which was painted "Mr. J. Davenant, Architect," and below, in smaller
lettering, "Jonathan Weeble, Law Writer."

I stepped into the entry, and tapping on a door which, by its painted
description, appeared to appertain to Mr. Weeble's premises, was bidden
to "come in." Accordingly, I entered and was confronted by a somewhat
unkempt, young man who was apparently engaged in engrossing a large
document which was secured to a sort of evergrown lectern by means of a
band of tape.

"I have called," I said, "to enquire about Mr. Davenant. Is he in a very
serious condition?"

"He wasn't when I saw him about an hour ago," was the reply.

"Do you think he would be well enough to see me?" The young man, whom I
assumed to be Mr. Weeble, inspected me critically, and then replied:

"I should say most emphatically that he would. But we needn't leave it at
that. I can soon find out. Won't you sit down?"

He rose briskly and hurried out of the office, and it was only when I
heard him ascending the uncovered stairs, two or three at a time, that I
remembered that I had given no name.

Mr. Weeble's confident manner had lifted a load of anxiety from my mind,
but my agitation was little abated. My fears were relieved, indeed, for
evidently Jasper's condition was not such as to occasion alarm; but, as
my anxiety subsided, other emotions made themselves felt. I was actually
going to see him. Within a couple of minutes we should be together. The
intolerable separation would be at an end. And the ecstasy of this
thought--the almost painful joy of anticipation--brought home to me the
intensity of my yearning to look on him again.

The sound of Mr. Weeble's footsteps descending the stairs set my heart
throbbing, and as he bustled into the office I stood up, trembling with
excitement.

"It's all right," said he. "Mr. Davenant will see you, if you'll go up.
First floor, right hand side of the landing. I've left the door open, and
you'll see his name above it."

I did not go up the stairs at Mr. Weeble's pace, but I went as rapidly as
the trembling of my knees would let me. On the first floor I saw a
forbidding, iron-bound door standing ajar, and above it the well-beloved
name, painted in white letters. I drew back the heavy door, disclosing a
lighter one, also ajar, which I pushed open as I closed the massive "oak"
after me. For a moment I stood on the threshold looking into the quaint,
old-world room, with its panelled walls and the soft green light from the
plane trees shimmering through the windows. He was reclining by the fire
on a low, wooden settle, and held a book in his hand; and even in that
instantaneous glance I could see how changed he was--how pale and thin
and weary-looking. But as I stepped out from the shadow, the worn face
lighted up; the book fell to the floor, and he flung his arms out towards
me.

"Helen!"

"Jasper!"

In a moment I was on my knees by his side. His arms were around me and my
cheek lay against his. And so for a while we rested with never a word
spoken and no sound in the room but the ticking of the clock and the soft
rustle of a swaying branch on the window panes. And so I could have
rested for ever; for at last my heart was at peace.

"Jasper, dear," I said, at length, "how is it with you? Are you badly
hurt?"

"Not a bit," he replied. "It is just a matter of a cracked rib and a few
bruises; and I've nearly recovered from those."

"But why did you never send me a word? That wasn't friendly of you,
Jasper."

"How could I, dearest?" he protested. "A bargain is a bargain. The month
wasn't up."

"Jasper!" I exclaimed; "how could you be so silly? Of course you ought to
have sent me a message, and I would have come to you instantly."

"I am sure you would, Helen," said he, "which was an additional reason
for my keeping to our covenant. It would have seemed a shabby thing to
do; for, badly as I wanted you, I was never really in any danger. By the
way, how did you hear of my little mishap?"

I told him of my meeting with Miss Tallboy-Smith, and he chuckled softly.
"She was an old goose to frighten you with those lurid stories, but I'm
very grateful to her, all the same. I have wanted you, Helen."

He drew me closer to him and stroked my hair fondly; and again we were
silent for a while. The clock ticked on impassively, the plane tree
rustled gently on the window, and I was filled with a quiet, restful
happiness that I was unwilling to interrupt even by speaking.

Presently Jasper bent down to my ear and whispered:

"Helen, darling, you haven't anything to tell me, have you?"

I knew what he meant, of course; and the strange thing is that, though
the question came unexpectedly, and though I had not consciously given
the subject a moment's, thought, I found my mind completely and finally
made up.

"Yes," I replied, "I have. Jasper, dear, I am your own. I can't live
without you. The world must say what it will. I can do without the world,
but I can't exist without you."

He drew me yet closer to him and kissed me reverently. "Dear heart," he
said softly, "sweet wife, I would try to thank you if words could tell
you what your precious gift means to me. But life is before us, and mine
shall be one long thanksgiving. You have given me my heart's desire; if
love and worship and faithful service can in any degree repay you, they
shall be yours as long as our lives endure."

Thus in a few moments were the long weeks of misery and despair blotted
out. We were reinstated, and, indeed, much more than reinstated; we were
admitted and accepted lovers. And, just as my mind had, so to speak, made
itself up without conscious thought on my part, so now that I had entered
into this new covenant it seemed quite inevitable and satisfying. Its
nonconformity with social conventions left me completely undisturbed.

Presently Jasper made me draw up a low, rush-bottomed chair that I might
sit comfortably by his side while we talked. But, in fact, we talked
little; for there is a sort of telepathy born of perfect sympathy that
makes speech superfluous. We were both very happy and very deeply moved;
and it seemed more companionable to sit, hand clasped in hand, and let
our thoughts run on undisturbed by speech, knowing that the thoughts of
each were but a reflection of the other's.

Anon came Mr. Weeble, stamping slowly up the stairs like an infirm
coal-porter and making such a prolonged to-do about inserting the
latch-key into the outer door that we both laughed. A very discreet man
was Mr. Weeble.

"I've just come to see if I can do anything," said he, when Jasper had
introduced me. "I generally make his tea and straighten out his bandages.
Shall I make the tea now or are you taking charge, Mrs. Otway?"

"I will make the tea," said I, "but while you are tidying up the bandages
I will run out and get some fresh cakes."

"Yes," said Mr. Weeble, "that would be a good idea. Our stock is rather
low and a trifle old and fruity. And talking of cakes, that reminds me
that an old rooster called a day or two ago and left one. I put it in a
spare deed-box and forgot all about it. I'll go and fetch it up."

"A rooster, you say, Weeble," said Jasper. "May we assume that you are
speaking figuratively?"

"Yes," replied Mr. Weeble. "Elderly party with an automatic smile and the
rummiest name I ever heard. Now what was her name? Something
double-barrelled--Bigboy-Jones, was it?"

"Tallboy-Smith, I expect," said Jasper.

"That was it. I sent her a letter of thanks the same day in your
handwriting and signed it with your name. Are you starting now, Mrs.
Otway? You'll find a very good cake-shop in Fetter Lane near the top on
the left-hand side."

I took a brief bag of Jasper's and his latchkey and sallied forth into
Fetter Lane by the postern gate; and as I walked up the quaint, old
street I found myself looking into the homely shops and inspecting the
ancient timber houses with a queer sort of proprietary air, as if I
belonged to the neighbourhood. I found the cake-shop---it was really an
old-fashioned baker's shop, such as one might find in a country town--and
as I made a selection of the wares, based on experience of Jasper's
tastes, I found myself almost unconsciously considering the merits of the
establishment as a source of supply for a family of two. If the change in
my mental state was sudden, it was certainly complete; as I sauntered
back down Fetter Lane with my bag of provisions, care-free and filled
with a delightful sense of emancipation, loitering to look into shop
windows or to peer up strange courts and alleys that I might not return
prematurely; I could not but contrast my condition with that in which I
had set forth in the morning, hopeless, heart-weary, despondent. When I
arrived at Jasper's chambers, Mr. Weeble had already gone; but he had
filled the kettle and set it to boil on the gas-stove in the kitchen,
where I found it murmuring placidly and breathing out little clouds of
steam. The kitchen was a delightful absurdity. About the magnitude of a
good-sized china cupboard, it suggested, with its range of shelves and
little chemical sink, a doctor's dispensary or a chemist's laboratory.
Yet it was very orderly and quite convenient, and it had the advantage
that, while I was engaged in the preparations for the meal, my heart
singing in unison with the kettle's song, I could look out of a tiny
window on the moss-grown garden, or through the open door see Jasper
watching me with a smile of ecstasy, and receive his instructions as to
where the various articles were to be found. It was all very pleasant and
intimate, and every little, homely detail helped to bring home to me the
reality of my happiness.

During the very leisurely tea we gradually approached the subject of our
future arrangements, which had evidently been very carefully thought out
by Jasper.

"I'm not quite such a graven image as I look," said he. "I don't believe
it's necessary for me to keep so immovable. But that is the doctor's
business. I just do as I'm told. However, my bandages are coming off in a
few days, and I understand that I shall be practically well in a
fortnight. Until I am well, we had better let things remain as they are;
and I think it would be better for you not to come and see me again in
the interval."

"Do you mean that I am to leave you, a helpless invalid all alone and no
one to look after you?"

"Yes," he replied. "Of course, I shall want you dreadfully, but as to my
being alone and helpless, that is merely a sentimental view of the case.
You can see for yourself that I am quite comfortable and well cared-for--Weeble
never forgets me for an instant. And I think it most necessary
that, until we are definitely married, we should have the most scrupulous
regard for the conventions. We can't get the sanction either of the Law
or the Church to our marriage; therefore, it is the more necessary for us
to treat it ourselves with the utmost respect and seriousness. We are not
going to enter into a casual and irresponsible relationship. We are going
to contract a marriage; and I propose that we do so publicly and with
proper formalities suited to the dignity and importance of the
transaction."

"But," I asked, "what formalities are possible?

"My proposal," he replied, "is this: we shall appoint a day and a time to
meet here, and have two witnesses in attendance. Weeble could be one and
the Inn porter, Mr. Duskin, the other. In the presence of those witnesses
we shall formally agree to take one another as husband and wife. Each of
us shall make a written declaration to the same effect, reciting the
circumstances which render the unusual procedure necessary, and, in your
case, denouncing and repudiating your marriage with Otway. These
declarations we shall respectively read to the witnesses--who will also
read them--and we shall each sign our declaration in the presence of the
witnesses. I am not quite clear whether it would be legal for them to
counter-sign as witnesses. If not, we shall add a note stating that the
signatures were made in their presence. Then we shall exchange
declarations and we shall notify Mr. Otway and whosoever else may be
concerned, or whom we wish to inform, of what has taken place. Does that
meet with your approval, Helen?"

"Entirely," I replied, "excepting the sentence of banishment. Don't you
think I might just look in on you now and again to see if you want
anything?"

"It is only a fortnight, dearest," said he, "and we can write as often as
we please. Until we are married we can't be too careful to avoid
provoking criticism."

I made no further objections, for I felt that he was right; and,
moreover, I could not but perceive that this rather excessive primness,
like the formalities which he had proposed, was simply an unconscious
expression of chivalrous respect, a protest in advance against any
unfavourable criticisms of me. And in accordance with what I felt he
would consider prudent, I took leave of him comparatively early, so as to
avoid a second meeting with Mr. Weeble, who, I learned, came in every
night between eight and nine to help him to get to bed.

"I shall write to you every day," I said, as I drew on my gloves, "and
you must promise that, if there is anything that I can do for you, you
will let me know and never mind about Mrs. Grundy. Is that agreed?"

He gave the required promise, and when I had handed him back his
latch-key, I stooped and kissed him; and as I looked back at him before
closing the iron-bound door, I could not but contrast this parting with
the miserable farewell of less than a month ago.

Chapter XXI--A Dreadful inheritance

IT has always been, and still is, somewhat of a puzzle to me to account
for the sudden and complete change in my point of view in regard to my
union with Jasper. Lilith would doubtless have explained it as a case of
subconscious reflection, and probably she would have been right. My
impression is that Peggy's matter-of-fact attitude toward marriage
unsanctioned by law had a more profound effect, than I was aware of; that
her words--which I had certainly recalled from time to time--had
remained in my mind subconsciously exercising a continuous influence. Or
it may be that I had found a life of separation impossible, and had
realised it consciously only when I found myself once more in Jasper's
presence.

But, however it may have happened, the fact remains that I accepted the
new order without a qualm. The conditions that I had scouted as
unthinkable now seemed entirely reasonable and acceptable. The only
twinge of misgiving that I ever had, was produced by the draft of the
declaration that Jasper sent for my approval and criticism. For that
well-meant document, with its half-defiant, half-protesting phrases, did
certainly bring home to me with uncomfortable vividness the fact that
this marriage was not like any other marriage, and that I was not as
other married women were. But I sent it back approved and tried to forget
it, and quietly went on with my preparations for the new life.

Outwardly, however, I made no change in my habits, and even tried to
suppress the gaiety and buoyancy of spirit that I felt, lest the sudden
change from my recent depressed condition should attract notice. I still
lived my life apart, only too happy in my solitude, and spent most of my
time in the workshop conning over Jasper's letters, or meditating on the
happy days that were drawing so near. For a time the candlestick was
sadly neglected, until I had the sudden inspiration of finishing it as a
wedding-gift to Jasper. And then all the joy of work revived and
blossomed into unsuspected skill. Tracer and punch seemed to travel along
their appointed paths unguided; the spindle-shanked chasing hammer became
a familiar demon and appeared to develop a volition of its own, and the
little enamel furnace roared with glee.

So the days sped by, each bringing me nearer to the golden gate of my
enchanted garden, and each so filled with quiet happiness that I could
not wish it shorter. About the end of the first week came a letter from
Jasper saying that the bandages had been discarded, and that he had taken
a walk and had appeared quite well and strong. A day or two later, came
another fixing the date and time of our meeting. It was to be on the
following Thursday--only five days ahead--at six o'clock in the
evening. The formalities were to be carried out immediately on my
arrival; we should then dine quietly at the club, spend the evening at a
concert or the theatre, and take the boat train either to Flushing or
Calais, which ever I preferred.

The arrival of this letter, though I had been daily expecting it, came as
quite a shock, and turned my tranquil happiness into feverish excitement
which I had some difficulty in concealing. The fixing of an actual date
and the selection of a definite region in which to spend the honeymoon (I
chose the north of France) gave a reality to this Great Adventure and
brought it out of the undefined future into the present. For now I had to
carry out the final preparations. Lightly as I might travel, I must take
some luggage, and this would entail a conveyance; and this in its turn
involved something in the nature of a public departure, so that, if I had
desired to disappear secretly--which I did not--the thing would have
been impossible. Yet I was, naturally, loath to say much about my
immediate intentions, preparing to make my explanations by letter after
the event; and this the prevailing good manners of the little community
made quite easy. I notified Miss Polton and my more intimate friends
that I was going away on a visit of uncertain duration, and, whatever
curiosity they may have felt, no further particulars were asked for as
I went about my immediate preparations--the packing of those few things
that I must needs take away with me--unnoticed, or at least uncommented
on, and then began unobtrusively to arrange the rest of my possessions
for the final removal.

On Wednesday--the day before that of my departure--a letter arrived
from Mr. Otway. It reached me just after lunch, and I glanced at it
before rising from the table. The subject was the same as that of
previous ones, but it was evident that something in the nature of a
crisis was approaching. The extreme agitation of the writer was shown not
only in the matter and the impassioned, rather incoherent manner, but
even in the handwriting; which was ill-formed and slovenly, in great
contrast to Mr. Otway's usual business-like neatness.

"My dear Helen," it began "I have not troubled you for quite a long time
with my miserable affairs--which are, to some extent your affairs too.
But they are going from bad to worse, and now I feel that I am coming to
the limits of endurance. I cannot bear this much longer. My health is
shattered, my peace of mind is wrecked, and my brain threatens to give
way. Death would be a boon, a relief, and I feel that it is not far off.
I cannot go on like this. Those wretches leave me no peace. Hardly a week
passes but I get some new menace; and now--but I can't tell you in a
letter. It is too horrible. Come to me, Helen, for the love of God! I am
in torment. Have pity on me, even though you have never forgiven me. I
cannot come to you, for I am now unable to leave my bed. I am a wreck, a
ruin. Come to me just this once, and if you cannot help me, at least give
me the comfort of your sympathy. You will not be troubled by me much
longer.

"Your distracted husband,

"LEWIS OTWAY."

The emotions that this letter aroused were mixed and rather conflicting.
Never had I felt a deeper loathing of Mr. Otway than now that I was being
forced to accept what I knew in my heart to be but a counterfeit of
marriage. I had been robbed of my birthright, and he had robbed me. Never
was I less in a mood to offer him sympathy in the troubles that he had
created for himself and me by his callous selfishness. And yet I decided
to go to him. Whether the decision was due to some sort of compunction
for the blow that I was going to strike on the morrow; or whether to
curiosity, or to a desire to verify his foreboding of approaching death,
I cannot say. Certainly the last consideration entered into the mixture
of motives, and probably was the determining factor. At any rate, I
decided to go. Dimly, I perceived that I ought to have consulted Jasper,
though I was unaware of the possible legal significance that my visit
might acquire. I formed my decision at once, and early in the afternoon
set forth westward with the letter in my pocket.

I did not go direct to Mr. Otway's chambers. Promptly as I had made up my
mind, I felt the necessity of thinking over the circumstances and
forecasting the possibilities. On my way westward I made a halt at a
tea-shop, and while I awaited the leisurely service I drew out the letter
and read it through again. Clearly the blackmailers were becoming more
urgent and possibly more definite. It seemed as though they had adopted
some new tactics. But it was not the blackmailers who interested me. I
found my eye travelling again and again to those two sentences that
hinted at the possibility of Mr. Otway's death.

"I feel that it is not far off." And again, "You will not be troubled by
me much longer." Had he any solid grounds for these forebodings? Or were
they merely the offspring of abiding terror, or perchance simply
rhetorical flourishes designed to arouse my sympathy? These were
questions of no small moment to me, for Mr. Otway's death would set me
free and in an instant unravel the tangled skein of my relations with
Jasper.

As I drank my tea with reflective deliberation I turned these questions
over in my mind, not disguising from myself the cool, impassive, egoism
of my attitude. My feeling in respect of Mr. Otway was devoid of any
trace of sentimentalism. I viewed him as the insurance director views the
generalised "proposer,"--but inversely; for I was interested in his
decease, not in his survival. I loathed him, but I did not hate him. I
did not wish him ill. If I could have saved him from suffering I would
have done so, even at the cost of some considerable effort. But if he had
stood in the face of instant death, and I could have averted that peril
by moving a finger, I would not have moved a finger.

That was my position. As I rose from the table and returned the letter to
my pocket, what was in my mind was that Mr. Otway seemed to think that he
was going to die, and I hoped that he was right.

When I reached Lyon's Inn Chambers the sun was already low and the gloom
of the evening was beginning to settle on the closed-in block of
buildings. I ascended the ill-lit stone stairs to the second floor, where
the light on the landing was so dim that I had difficulty in deciphering
Mr. Otway's name above the door of his "set" and as I did so I noted
with surprise that the inscription was faded and obscure, and had the
appearance of having been in existence for many years, whereas Mr. Otway
had, as I believed, but recently entered on his tenancy.

The door was opened by Mrs. Gregg, who stood in the gloom of the entry
confronting me without a word.

"Good evening, Mrs. Gregg," I said. "Mr. Otway has asked me to call on
him--"

"Ye need make no excuses," she interrupted, "for coming to see your
lawful husband."

"Thank you, Mrs. Gregg," I replied. "Is Mr. Otway disengaged?"

"No," she answered; "he is expecting a visitor."

"How very unfortunate," said I. "He wanted particularly to see me, I
know."

"Perhaps you could look in some time to-morrow?" she suggested.

"No, I am afraid I can't. If Mr. Otway is unable to see me this evening I
must write to him. I shall not have another opportunity to call for some
considerable time."

She reflected for a few moments, and I gathered that she was unwilling to
take the responsibility of cancelling the interview.

"Could you call again a little later?" she asked, at length. "He will
have finished with his visitor by about half-past seven, or say a quarter
to eight. Could you look in again at eight?"

I had not wanted to be out as late as this would make me, but if I was to
see Mr. Otway at all, it would have to be to-night. Eventually I accepted
the arrangement, some what, I think, to Mrs. Gregg's relief.

As I descended the stairs I heard the footsteps of two persons--apparently
a man and a woman--ascending. On the first-floor landing I
met the man, who turned out to be the lamplighter. Just as I had passed
him he lit the landing lamp, and its light, which came from behind me,
fell full on the woman who was coming up. It was only a momentary glimpse
that I caught as she passed me on the stairs, but I recognised her
instantly. She was Mrs. Campbell, the wife of the Ward Street dealer.

It was an odd meeting, and it gave me the material for a good deal of
thought and speculation. Mr. Otway's chambers were the only ones on the
second floor; from which it seemed probable that Mrs. Campbell was the
visitor whom he was expecting. This was a rather queer coincidence; but
it was not the only one. That sudden recognition of the face, thrown into
strong relief against the dark background by the bright lamplight, had
set my memory working. I remembered how, when I had seen Mrs. Campbell in
the shop and had heard her speak, her face had seemed to suggest
something familiar, and her accent and the intonation of her voice had
called up some accent and tone that I had heard before. It had been but a
vague impression at the time; but now, in the new setting and aided by
association, the impression became quite definite. The face that hers had
suggested was Mr. Otway's face; but the really odd thing was that her
voice and accent suggested not Mr. Otway's but Mrs. Gregg's. And this
very queer resemblance was made yet more queer by a singular discrepancy.
Mrs. Gregg spoke with a distinct Scottish accent. It was a peculiar one,
different from that of any other Scots person whom I had ever heard
speak; but it was quite pronounced. Mrs. Campbell, on the other hand, had
no trace whatever of a Scottish accent; of that I was quite sure. But I
was equally sure of the resemblance between the two, subtle and elusive
as it was.

Here, then, was a problem the consideration of which gave me quite a
considerable amount of occupation, and, helped me to while away the hour
and a half that I had to wait. The almost fantastic oddity of the
coincidence might have made me reject my impressions as mere delusions;
but, on the one hand, there was Mrs. Campbell evidently making for Mr.
Otway's chambers, and, on the other, was the fact that it was Mr. Otway
who had introduced me to the shop in Wardour Street. However, I could get
no farther than speculation; and, as speculation tends rapidly to exhaust
its limited material, I presently dismissed the problem and returned to
the consideration of Mr. Otway's health and its bearing on my own future.

The hour and a half I spent in a leisurely survey of Lincoln's Inn and
the Temple. My perambulations with Jasper had brought home to me that
London is an entertainment in itself; that no observant person need be
dull who has access to its historic streets and picturesque backwaters.
And now it was very pleasant to revisit the scenes of former rambles--to
be repeated often in the future--and meanwhile to reflect on the
happenings of the present and let my thoughts stray to the new life that
was about to open; and the time slipped away so agreeably that when the
three-quarter chime was struck in a polite undertone by the genteel clock
in the Inner Temple, it came to me as quite a surprise.

On the stroke of eight I rang the bell of Mr. Otway's chambers, and was
forthwith admitted by the taciturn Mrs. Gregg. In silence she conducted
me along a narrow corridor that led from the entrance lobby, across a
largish room furnished partly as a library, partly as a dining-room and
by a communicating door into the bedroom, when--still without uttering a
word departed, shutting the door after her.

Mr. Otway half rose in bed as I entered, and made a vague gesture of
welcome, finally extending his hand, which I shook formally.

"This is really good of you, Helen," said he, "to come and see me, and to
come so promptly. I am sorry Mrs. Gregg sent you away. There was no need.
My other visitor could have been put off."

"It is of no consequence," said I. "My time was my own to-night. What is
the new trouble--for I infer from your letter that there is some new
development. Is there any definite threat?"

Again he half rose in bed, and looking at me with anxious intensity said,
in a low, suppressed tone "Helen, just see that the door is properly
shut."

I did so, and he then begged me to draw the chair, which had been placed
for me, closer to him. This I also did, and, having seated myself, looked
at him expectantly.

Still half raised in bed, he bent his head as near to me as he could, and
in a whisper said, "Helen, I want to ask you a question. What became of
your father's stick?"

The question, whispered with such strange secrecy, and accompanied by a
singular look compounded of eagerness, fear and suspicion, somewhat
startled me; for I remembered, even as he spoke, that the same question
had been asked by Dr Thorndyke.

"I haven't the least idea," I replied. "Haven't you got it?

"No. I never had it. I have never seen it since the--ah--the occasion
when--ah--you remember--"

"Of course I remember. I have good reason to."

"Ah--no doubt. Yes. But are you quite sure--I thought you might have
taken it away with you."

"But, Mr. Otway, you let me out of the house yourself. You saw me go, and
you must have seen that I was not taking it. And you know that I never
came to the house again."

He sank back on his pillow with a gesture of despair.

"Yes," he murmured, "that seems to be so. It must be so, I suppose."

"It is so," I said. There is no question about it. When I went away that
morning the stick was in your house. But why are you asking me about it?
Is it of any importance?

He turned towards a table that stood by the opposite side of the bed, and
taking up a bunch of keys, unlocked a deed-box that was on the table, and
took from it a sheet of paper.

"Read that," said he, handing me the paper.

The document was a type-written letter of a similar character to the
previous ones, and of about the same length. It ran thus:

"Mr. Lewis Otway,

"Some funny questions are being asked. What about Mr. Vardon's stick--the
loaded stick with the silver, knob to hide the lead loading? Where is
it? Somebody says they know where it is and who's got it. And they say
there is a bruise on the silver top, and they say something about a smear
of blood and a grey hair sticking to it. Do you know anything about it?
If you don't, you'd better find out. Because I think you'll hear from
that somebody before you are many weeks older or else from the police.

"A WELL-WISHER."

As I came to the end of this document I raised my eyes and met Mr.
Otway's fixed on me with a very singular expression. But he quickly
averted his gaze, possibly embarrassed by the steady intensity of my own.
For this letter, together with Mr. Otway's agitated questionings, had
revived the old doubts in my mind. Could there be any truth in this
veiled accusation? Was it possible that I had really made a hideous
mistake in shielding this man? As these doubts flashed through my mind,
some reflection of them may have appeared in my expression as I steadily,
looked Mr. Otway in the face. At any rate, he looked away as I have said;
and when I handed him back the letter, he took it in a hand that shook
like a dipsomaniac's, and replaced it in the deed-box without a word.

For a space we were both silent, and I sat looking at him and his
surroundings with profound distaste. The close, stuffy air of the room
aroused a faint disgust; the objects on the bedside table--the cigarette
box--the large spirit decanter and siphon and a bottle of veronal
tablets--conveyed a disagreeable impression of drinking and drug-taking.
And the man himself, with his pasty face, his baggy eyelids, creased with
multitudinous wrinkles, his drooping, tremulous underlip, was distinctly
repellent. The whole atmosphere of the place and its occupant was
unwholesome, sordid and abnormal.

Yet, unwholesome and unhealthy as he looked, there was no striking change
in Mr. Otway's appearance; nothing new to justify, so far as I could
judge, his alarming account of himself. His aspect supported the
suggestions of the spirit-bottle, the cigarettes and the veronal; he
looked distracted, terrified, nerve-shaken; but he did not, to my eye,
look like a dying man. I inspected him critically during that interval of
silence, and arrived, almost regretfully, I fear, at the conclusion that
his forebodings were merely the result of a chronic state of fear--if
they were real and not deliberately assumed to excite my sympathy.

I think he must have had a feeling that I was regarding him with
disfavour, for presently he turned towards me with a deprecating air and
sighed wearily.

"I am afraid, Helen," said he, "that you are very tired of me and my
troubles. But you must try to be patient. It may not be for long."

"Why do you say that?" I asked. "Is your health really bad, apart from
the worry of these letters?"

"My health gets worse from week to week," he replied. "Not that I am
suffering from any definite disease. But the constant alarm and anxiety,
the shocks which keep coming one on top of another, are breaking me up. I
get no interval of peace in which to recover. I am in a constant state of
worry and depression by day, which leads to that," and he pointed to the
spirit-decanter, "and it is even worse at night unless I secure a little
rest by those things," pointing to the veronal bottle; "and cigarettes,
whisky and veronal don't make for a long life or robust health."

"Still," I said, "you mustn't exaggerate or alarm yourself unnecessarily.
You are not in very good condition, I can see; but there is no reason to
suppose that you are in a dangerous state. Couldn't you cut off these
drugs and the whisky and go away for a change?"

He shook his head.

"I couldn't go away," he said. "They would find me out and follow
me. And as to cutting off the stimulants and the sedatives, that
is impossible. Bad as they are, they are the last bulwark against
something worse."

"What do you mean?" I asked.

He did not answer immediately, but seemed to be considering my question
and debating whether he should make any further confidences. At length he
turned to me somewhat abruptly with an expression which I had never seen
on his face before: a wild expression strangely unlike his usual, heavy
stolidity, suggesting excitement and terror, with yet a curious dash of
exultation.

"Helen," he said with a singular intensity of voice and manner, "there
are men who are born into this world under sentence of death. The black
cap hangs over their cradles. Throughout their lives they have
continually to watch--to evade the execution of the sentence if they
can. But the time comes when they can escape no longer. They are tired of
evasion, of the struggle to escape; and then they give themselves up; and
that is the end.

"I am one of those men, Helen. My mother put an end to her own life. My
only brother put an end to his life. My mother's father made away with
himself. It is in the blood. My mother was found hanging from a tree in
an orchard. My brother disappeared and was found a month later hanging
from a peg in a disused wardrobe. My grandfather hanged himself from a
beam in the loft. Perhaps there were others. At any rate, there it is.
The fathers have eaten sour grapes and the children's teeth are set on
edge."

He paused, and I sat looking with uneasy surprise at the unwonted
animation in his face: the faint flush, the awakening light in his eyes,
the suppressed eagerness of his manner. There was something weirdly
unpleasant about this new phase.

"You mustn't allow these fancies to disturb you," I said feebly.

"They are not fancies," he retorted. "They are weighty realities. I
thought for a long time that the inheritance had passed me by. But when
the first of those letters came, I knew that the legacy had fallen in.
And every new menace sets the impulse working. Whenever one of those
letters comes I feel it; I find myself thinking of my mother and my
brother, and wondering if they felt the same. Then I take a stiff whisky,
and the feeling goes off. But I don't care, nowadays, to go to bed until
I have taken a dose of veronal."

"Why not?" I asked.

He drew himself to the edge of the bed, and, thrusting his head out,
peered into a shadowy corner of the room with a sort of half-terrified,
half-exultant leer that seemed to stir the very marrow of my bones.

"What is it, Mr. Otway?" I asked, staring into the corner but seeing
nothing.

"Do you see it, Helen?" he said, rolling his eyes at me and then looking
back into the corner, which was in a line with the bed-head; "that great
hook, or bent peg. I can't imagine what it was put there for; but there
it is, like a great metal finger, beckoning, beckoning."

I looked at the object that he indicated--a massive curved peg or hook
fixed to the wall about seven feet from the floor--and shivered
slightly. Its appearance was horribly suggestive.

"When I used to lie awake," Mr. Otway continued, still gazing into the
corner, "after the first letters came, I could lie on my left side,
because then it was behind me and I seemed to feel it drawing me. I had
to turn so that I could see it; and whenever I looked at it, it seemed to
beckon. And so it does now."

"I should have it unscrewed and taken away," said I.

"Yes," he replied, reflectively, "perhaps it might be--and yet I don't
know. Perhaps I might be more restless if it were not there. It is; in a
way, a satisfaction to know that--ah--that I hold a trump card that I
can play if--ah--if all the other cards are against me."

As he spoke, he looked at me with that same curious half-frightened,
half-exultant expression that made me wonder whether perhaps his
inheritance included a dash of insanity. Then he rolled back to the
middle of the bed and lay staring at the ceiling; and by degrees the
excitement faded out of his face and he recovered his usual stolid
gravity of expression.

Presently he glanced at the little carriage clock that stood on the
table, and, turning to me, said: "I usually take my veronal about this
time. Would you mind giving me a glass of water and the tablets?"

I rose from my chair, and as I did so my little wrist-bag, which had been
reposing, forgotten, on my lap, slipped to the floor. I picked it up and
hung it on the knob of the chair-back, and then fetched the water-bottle
and tumbler from the wash-stand. Having filled the tumbler and handed it
to Mr. Otway, I picked up the veronal bottle, and seeing that it was a
new one, broke the seal, withdrew the cork and pulled out the cotton-wool
packing.

"Three tablets, please," said Mr. Otway.

I handed him the bottle, and as he took it and shook out the three
tablets he smiled grimly.

"You are the most cautious woman I have ever met," he remarked. "But you
are quite right to make me responsible for my own poison."

He took the tablets one at a time, crunching each between his teeth very
thoroughly before washing it down, with water. Then he mixed what looked
to me a very stiff allowance of whisky, with a very little soda water,
and swallowed it at a draught.

"I find that the stimulant makes the veronal act more rapidly," he
explained. "I shall be asleep in about half-an-hour. Do you mind staying
with me until I drop off?"

I agreed to this, although it was getting late; but, conscious that it
was probably the last service I should ever render him, I did not feel
that I could refuse. So I sat down again in the chair and watched him,
noting that already--probably as a result of the stimulant--he was
quieter in manner and more peaceful in appearance. Even when he reverted
to the subject that had occasioned my visit, his manner was quite calm.

"There is something very mysterious about that stick," he remarked.
"Recalling the circumstances, I remember putting it down in the corner by
the writing-table. I never saw it again, and never gave its whereabouts a
thought. I assumed that you had taken it, but I now realise that I was
mistaken. Apparently it has got into undesirable hands and we haven't
heard the last of it, I fear."

"You had better not think any more about it, Mr. Otway," I said. "There
is nothing to be done, and the less you worry the less harm these people
will be able to do you."

"Yes," he agreed; "that is good advice, and I can follow it now. But if I
should wake up in the small hours of the morning it will be very
different. That is the worst time, Helen. Then this persecution seems
beyond bearing. The horror of it makes me sweat with fear. I seem to hear
the police on the stairs. I find myself listening for the sound of the
bell. It is horrible--horrible! And then I think of that wardrobe,
unnoticed all those weeks, and the figure inside in the dark. And then--"

He made a motion of his eyes towards the shadowy corner and involuntarily
I glanced at the great peg high up on the wall.

He did not speak again for some time, and I sat silently watching him and
thinking--thinking of his dreadful heritage and all that it might mean.
Was it a reality, this legacy of death that he saw coming to him? Was it
true that even now the black cap hung over his bed? Supposing it were?
Supposing that this very night, in the chilly middle watch, he should
wake with all his terrors clutching at his heart! Should creep out of his
bed and--Here my glance stole into the shadowy corner, and, as I looked,
my mind seemed to picture a dim shape filling the wall space below the
big, massive peg. There were no details and hardly any form; it was just
a shape, vague and rather horrible. I shivered slightly, but I did not
try to blot out the mental picture. It was a gruesome thing, that dim,
elongated shape, but it did not disturb me much; for it set going other
associated trains of thought. There was the ceremony to-morrow evening,
the witnesses with their doubtful rights of attestation, protesting that
all was in order--and protesting in vain. There were two Ishmaelites
going forth hand-in-hand into the wilderness, ready to meet scorn with
defiance--but still Ishmaelites. And at the thought, the shape upon the
wall space below the peg seemed to grow less dim, to loom out more
distinctly. That shape was Mr. Otway--dead. The late Mr. Otway. No
longer a legal impediment, but just a fiction that had ceased to exist.

From the dark corner I turned my eyes on to the living man as he lay
motionless, breathing softly with an occasional faint snore, and now and
again puffing out his cheeks. He was not asleep, for I could see his eyes
open and close at intervals; but he was evidently growing somnolent. I
watched him with deep interest, almost with fascination, as one might
look on a condemned man making his last journey in the hangman's cart.
This was a condemned man, too: a potential suicide. At any moment he
might set forth on his last journey; and his arrival at his destination
would set the Ishmaelites free. He was ready to go; but he awaited the
determining influence that would start him on his journey. What form
would that final cause take? Would it be some sudden shock of alarm? Or
the cumulative effect of prolonged, abiding fear?

I leaned forward and spoke softly to him.

"Do you know, Mr. Otway, what caused your brother--"

He opened his eyes and looked at me, dully. "What did you say, Helen?" he
asked.

"I was wondering if you knew--if there was anything in particular that
caused your brother to take his life."

He cogitated sleepily for a while before replying. At length he answered,
in a drowsy voice: "I am not very clear about it. He had had a good deal
of worry of one kind and another, financial and domestic. I don't know
that anything unusual had occurred; but he had been in a nervous,
depressed state for some time."

Having made this reply, Mr. Otway closed his eyes and took a deep breath;
and I reflected on the significance of his answer. There had apparently
been no specific cause of his brother's suicide, but just the
accumulating effects of nervousness and depression, which exploded when
they reached a certain degree of intensity. His condition, in fact,
seemed to have been almost identical with Mr. Otway's present condition.

Once more my eyes wandered away to the shadowy corner; and again the wall
space below the great hook-like peg became occupied by that elongated
shape. Now I seemed to visualise it more completely. It was no longer a
mere shape. It had parts--recognisable members. There were the
limp-dangling arms, the downward-pointing toes, the shadowy head lolling
sideways. It was very horrible, yet I found myself viewing it without
horror, but rather with a certain detached interest. I was getting used
to it, and was disposed to consider it in terms of its significance.

It was not a person. It was a thing which had replaced a person who had
ceased to exist. That person had had a wife. But the wife had ceased to
exist, too. In her place was a widow--a free, unattached woman in whom
were vested all the rights and liberties of spinsterhood, including the
power to contract a valid and regular marriage. The shape was an ugly and
forbidding thing; but it held precious and desirable gifts.

From the shape projected by my own imagination my eyes turned to the
actual man--the man who was convertible into such a shape. He was fast
asleep now; lying on his back, breathing a little stertorously and
blowing out his cheeks at each breath. He was an unpleasant spectacle,
and the sound of his breathing was disagreeable. He ought not to be lying
on his back; for sleepers who lie on their backs are apt to dream, and
dreams are not good for men with a tendency to suicide. And sleepers who
breathe stertorously are apt to dream ugly dreams.

This consideration set my thoughts working afresh. Supposing this man
should have a dream presenting his waking terrors with all the added
intensity and vividness of a nightmare; the heavy footfalls of the police
upon the stairs, the hands groping in the darkness of the landing for the
bell-pull! Or if his dream should show him that wardrobe with its
dreadful occupant! What would happen? And even as I put the question to
myself my imagination supplied with startling vividness the answering
picture. I saw the affrighted sleeper suddenly awaken in uncontrollable
panic, scramble from his bed and shuffle hurriedly towards the corner
under the peg.

The mental construction of the scene was singularly complete and orderly.
I even found myself filling in the details of the means. There, indeed,
was the peg. But a man cannot hang himself without some means of
suspension. And these must be immediately available or the impulse might
die away before they were found. I glanced around the room to see what
means were to hand; and at once my eye lighted on an old-fashioned
bell-rope that hung beside the head of the bed. Its perfect suitability
was evident at a glance--provided that it could be detached without
ringing the bell. But the necessity for cutting it rather than pulling it
down would be obvious, even to a suicide.

The means, then, were all ready to hand. And there was the man, charged
with this self-destructive tendency, sleeping in the very posture
calculated to start it into action.

I sat still, watching him with absorbing interest, and as these thoughts
shaped themselves with more and more distinctness, an impulse of which I
was barely conscious formed itself and steadily grew in intensity. At
length I leaned forward and spoke in a low voice.

"Mr. Otway, you should not lie in that position."

There was no answer, and he made no sign. The heavy breathing went on
with uninterrupted regularity, the eyes remained closed. Again I spoke,
this time more loudly, clearly and distinctly.

"Mr. Otway, can you hear me? If you lie as you are lying, you will
probably dream. You may have bad, dangerous dreams. You may dream of your
mother and your brother. You may dream that the peg on the wall is
beckoning to you. And then you may wake in a panic and think that the peg
is still beckoning. And then--"

I stopped suddenly. What was this that I was doing? Was it a warning to
avert disaster? So the words were framed. But I knew it was nothing of
the kind. It was suggestion, pure and almost undisguised. The dreadful
truth struck me like a blow and seemed to turn me into stone. I sat rigid
as a statue, still leaning forward with my lips parted as if to complete
that awful sentence, every moment more appalled by this frightful thing
that I had done. There came to me in a flash a vision of my own
automatism after the s\E9ance; I heard Lilith telling me how the sleep of
the drugged resembles the hypnotic trance; and again it came to me how I
had been sitting looking at that terrible peg on the wall and--without
conscious intention--creating by my will the awful shape beneath it.

How long I should have sat, bent forward as if frozen into rigid
immobility by the horror of this hideous thing, it is impossible to say.
The realization of what I had done, that had fallen on me like a
thunderbolt, had petrified me in a posture of arrested action. It seemed
to have deprived me of the power of movement.

The place was intensely silent. The monotonous breathing of the sleeping
man--the snoring intake alternating with the soft, blowing expiration--made
no impression on the profound quiet, and the rapid ticking of the
little carriage clock on the table seemed only to make it more intense.

Suddenly something stirred in the outer room. I sprang to my feet with a
gasp that had almost been a shriek. Probably it was only Mrs. Gregg, but
in my overwrought state the sound was vaguely alarming. I stood for a few
moments, my heart thumping and my breath coming short and fast; then I
stole on tip-toe across the room and softly opening the door, peered into
the outer room. It was in darkness except that a bright beam of moonlight
poured in at the window; but this gave enough light to show that there
was nobody in the room.

Still fearful of I knew not what, I stepped softly through the doorway
and looked about me suspiciously. The moonlight struck on a large
cupboard or wardrobe, which instantly suggested the lurking-place of some
eavesdropper and at the same time aroused horrible associations connected
with Mr. Otway's brother; so that, in spite of my alarm, I was impelled
to pluck at the handle to satisfy myself that no figure was hidden
within. But the cupboard was locked, or, at any rate, would not open.

Then I looked under the table and peered into the darker corners of the
room, growing--naturally--more and more nervous every moment, and
pausing from time to time to listen, or to look back through the doorway
into the bedroom, where I could see Mr. Otway lying motionless like a
sepulchral effigy.

Suddenly something stirred softly quite near to me--the sound seemed to
come from the cupboard. I could have screamed with terror. The last
vestige of my self-possession was gone, and in sheer panic I fled across
the room and down the corridor to the entrance lobby. This place was in
utter darkness, and as I frantically groped for the latch, I felt my skin
creep and break out into a chilly sweat. At last I found the latch,
dragged the door open and darted out; and as the clang of the closing
door filled the building with hollow echoes, I ran swiftly down the
stairs.

Once out in the inhabited streets, my alarm subsided somewhat; but still
the image of that motionless figure in the bedroom, the sinister-looking
peg on the wall and the recollection of those dreadful words that I had
spoken into the sleeper's ears pursued me with an abiding horror. I
walked quickly out into the Strand, and I was in the act of hailing a cab
when I remembered that I had left my wrist-bag hanging on the chair-back
by Mr. Otway's bedside. My purse was in that bag. But if it had contained
my entire worldly possessions I could not have summoned up courage enough
to go back for it.

The cab drew up by the kerb. I hesitated a moment, but reflecting that it
was yet hardly ten o'clock, and that someone would be waiting up from
whom I could borrow the fare, I gave the cabman the address, with the
necessary explanations, entered the cab and shut the door. But as the
crazy vehicle--it was an ancient four-wheeler--rattled over the uneven
roadways of the side streets, the scene in that warm and stuffy bedroom
was re-enacted again and again. And yet again I looked on that ill omened
cupboard in the ghostly moonlight; speculated on the mysterious sounds in
the living-room; wondered uncomfortably if there had been a watcher or a
listener, and if so, whether that eavesdropper knew the meaning of silent
willing and suggestion.

Chapter XXII--The Catastrophe

VIEWED by the cheerful light of the morning sun as it streamed in through
my bedroom window, the phantoms of the previous night dwindled to mere
scarecrows. On the panic-stricken state in which I had fled from Mr.
Otway's chambers I was now disposed to look back with faint amusement.
Even the words which I had spoken into Mr. Otway's ears as he slept had
no longer any terrifying significance, though I had to admit that they
were not susceptible of any satisfactory interpretation. They had been
spoken under the influence of an impulse which I could not account for,
and did not care to examine too closely, but which I vaguely connected
with my excursions into psychical research--a subject which I decided to
avoid as far as possible in the future.

As to Mr. Otway, if his account of his family was correct, it seemed
quite probable that, sooner or later, he would make away with himself,
though, seeing that he was now well past middle life, the propensity
could hardly be as strong as he had represented it. On the other hand, he
was now being subjected to a very excessive nervous strain, and was
undoubtedly letting his mind run on the subject of suicide. If the
blackmailers continued to keep up an increasing pressure, as they seemed
inclined to do, the breaking-point might be reached quite soon. And I
could not disguise from myself that the catastrophe, if and when it
occurred, would not present itself to me as a personal misfortune.

With this I dismissed Mr. Otway and his affairs, and let my thoughts roam
into more attractive regions. For this was the day of days. In a matter
of a few hours my separation from Jasper would be at an end. We should be
united, never again to part.

As I rose and dressed, this was the burden of my thoughts. The weeks of
separation and loneliness were gone, and the hours that lay between the
present and that final meeting were running out apace like the grains of
sand in an hour glass that is nearly spent. I hurried over breakfast that
I might the sooner escape to be alone with my happiness; and most of the
morning I spent in the workshop, arranging my apparatus so that it might
easily be packed, in case I should not come back to superintend the
removal myself. The candlestick, which was finished and successful beyond
my expectations, I took upstairs to place in my trunk that I might give
it to Jasper this very day. And then I paid a visit to my friend Peggy,
whom I found in her workshop chirruping gaily and very busy making a
complicated set of plaster moulds from the dissected wax model of her
masterpiece. But I did not stay long with her, for the making of
piece-moulds is an engrossing occupation and one better followed in
solitude.

As I entered the house from the garden I encountered our little housemaid
with a telegram in her hand.

"This has just come for you, ma'am," said she, holding it out towards me.
"The boy is waiting to see if there is any answer."

I suppose that to most persons unaccustomed to receiving telegrams, the
appearance of the peremptory, orange-tinted envelope is a little
portentous. Especially so was it to me at that moment, with the crisis of
my life so near at hand; and my heart beat tumultuously as I tore open
the envelope and unfolded the flimsy paper. It bore but a brief message;
but when I had read that message, the joy of life, the half-timorous
happiness that had come to me with the morning sunlight, went out in a
moment, like a wind-blown taper, and left me desolate.

"Cancel appointment for to-day and do not come to the club. Letter
follows. JASPER."

That was all. There was really nothing very alarming in it. But to me it
came as a dreadful anti-climax, strung up, as I was, to the highest pitch
of nervous tension. With a trembling hand I refolded the paper, and,
having told the maid that there was no answer, ran up to my room and
bolted myself in.

It was a terrible blow. Only now, by the bitterness of the
disappointment, did I realise the heart-hunger that I had endured, the
intense yearning for the moment in which my beloved companion would be
restored to me. And then, beyond this sudden collapse of my happiness,
almost in the moment of its realisation, was the mystery, the suspense,
the uncertainty. What could it be that had happened? Had Jasper's
condition suddenly grown worse? That could hardly be, for he was
practically well--at least, he had so regarded himself--and moreover
there was that cryptic reference to the club. Why must I not go to the
club?

There was something very mysterious in that prohibition! The more I
reflected on the matter the more puzzling did it appear. On the other
hand, the very mystery in which the affair was shrouded was itself a
relief. For, of course, I never for one moment had the faintest doubt of
Jasper's loyalty, nor could I entertain the possibility of his having
changed his views on the subject of our marriage. Some thing had occurred
to hinder it; but Jasper was my own and I was his, and that being so, the
hindrance, whatever it might be, could be but temporary.

So I comforted myself and made believe that all was well, though when by
chance my eye lighted on the trunk, packed and even provided with a blank
label, I could hardly keep back the tears. At lunch I let Miss Polton
know that my visit was postponed, and immediately after the meal I
prepared to go out and seek relief in a long, sharp walk. By the time I
returned, the letter from Jasper would probably have arrived and I should
know how matters stood.

I had put on my outdoor clothes and was just about to start, when,
opening the drawer in which I kept my wrist-bag, I suddenly remembered my
loss of the night before. The bag contained, not only my purse, but my
card-case and one or two other things I could not conveniently do
without. The prohibition to go to the club could hardly, I reflected,
extend to Lyon's Inn Chambers, though they were in the same
neighbourhood. At any rate, I wanted the bag, and in my restless state a
journey with a defined purpose offered more relief than an aimless walk
through the streets.

During the short journey from Mark Lane to the Temple I turned over and
over again the words of the telegram without obtaining any glimmer of
enlightenment. If I had been less sure of Jasper, I should have been
intensely wretched; but now, as the shock subsided, my optimism revived
and I found myself looking forward to Jasper's letter with a confident
expectation of reassuring news.

Emerging from the Temple Station, I walked up Arundel Street, and,
crossing the Strand, presently passed through Half-Moon Alley and cast a
glance of friendly recognition at the old gilded sign, so pleasantly
associated with the scarlet parasol that hung outside the
umbrella-maker's shop in Bookseller's Row. The two signs recalled the old
delightful explorations with Jasper, and put me in quite a cheerful frame
of mind, which lasted until I found myself once more ascending the bare
and rather sordid stone stairs of Lyon's Inn Chambers. Then there came a
marked change. As I walked up the cold, gloomy staircase a feeling of
depression settled on me. I passed the grimy lantern that had looked on
my head-long, terror-stricken flight, and some of the forgotten qualms
came back. I breathed again the close air of that unpleasant bedroom; I
saw again the unwieldy figure in the bed, with its pasty face and puffy
eyelids; and even the sinister-looking peg on the wall came forth with
uncomfortable vividness from the recesses of memory. By the time I
reached the landing, my distaste for the place had grown so strong that I
was half inclined to turn back and complete the transaction by means of a
letter.

This weakness, however, I overcame by an effort of will and resolutely
rang the bell. There was a short interval and then the door opened,
revealing the figure of Mrs. Gregg, who, according to her custom, stood
and stared stonily at me without uttering a word.

"Good afternoon, Mrs. Gregg," said I. "When I went away last night I left
my wrist-bag behind."

"Ye did," she answered; "and ye left the bedroom door open and the gas
full on. I found it so this morning."

"I am very sorry," I said.

"'Tis no matter," she rejoined, impassively, and continued to stare at me
in a most singular and embarrassing fashion.

"Could I have my bag, please, Mrs. Gregg?" I asked.

"Ye could," she replied; but still she made no move nor any suggestion
that I should enter; and still continued to look at me with the
strangest, most enigmatic expression.

"I hope," said I, by way of relieving the extraordinarily uncomfortable
situation, "that Mr. Otway is better today."

"Do ye?" said she; and then, after a pause, "Maybe ye'd wish to see him?"

"I don't think I will disturb him, thank you," I replied.

"Ye need have no fear," said she. "Ye'll no wake him."

"Well, I don't think I have time to see him to-day. I just called to get
my bag."

"And is that all ye've come for?" she demanded, glowering at me in the
most astonishing manner.

"What else should I have come for?" I asked.

She thrust her head forward and replied in a mysterious tone: "I thought
maybe ye'd come to ask where your husband is."

"I don't understand you, Mrs. Gregg. Is Mr. Otway not at home?"

"He is not," she replied; and as I made no answer she asked: "Shall I
tell you where he is?"

"It really isn't any business of mine, Mrs. Gregg," said I.

"Is it not?" she demanded. "Will it no interest ye if I tell ye that your
husband is in St. Clement's Mortuary?"

"In the mortuary!" I gasped.

"Aye, in the mortuary." She glared at me in silence for a few moments,
and then, suddenly grasping my arm, exclaimed: "Woman! do ye ken yon peg
on the bedroom wall? Aye, ye may well turn pale. Ye'd ha' turned paler if
ye'd seen what I saw by the gaslight this morn hangin' from yon peg."

I gazed at her for a few moments in speechless horror, until she seemed
to sway and shimmer before my eyes. Then, for the first and only time in
my life, I must have fainted, for I remember no more until I found myself
lying on the floor of the lobby, with Mrs. Gregg kneeling beside me
slapping my face with a wet towel.

I rose with difficulty, feeling very weak and shaken. Mrs. Gregg silently
handed me my bag and preceded me towards I he door, where, with her hand
on the latch, she turned and faced me.

"Weel, mistress," said she, "'tis a fit ending, seeing how it began.
Ye've been a poor wife, but ye'll make a bonny widow, though I doubt it
will stay long at that."

To this insolent and brutal speech I made no reply. I was completely
broken, physically and mentally. I tottered out on to the landing and
slowly descended the stairs, holding on to the iron hand-rail, my horror
of the place urging me to hasten away, my trembling limbs and lingering
faintness bidding me go warily. As I walked unsteadily up Holywell
Street, a newspaper boy, running down the narrow thoroughfare, halted and
held out a paper.

"Here y'are, Miss, sooicide in Lyon's Inn. The housekeeper's story."

I hurried past him with averted face, but out in the Strand there were
others, shouting aloud the dreadful tidings or displaying posters on
which the hideous fact was set forth in enormous type. And it seemed as
if each and all of them were specially addressing themselves to me. I
returned down Arundel Street, instinctively making for the station, but
as I approached it a fresh group of newsboys made me swerve to the left
and pursue my way along the Embankment on foot.

As I walked on, and the air and exercise helped me to recover physically
from the shock, I began to collect my faculties. At first I had been
utterly bewildered and overborne by a sense of horror and guilt. I had
sent this wretched man to his death. I had ordained the means, the manner
and the time of his death, and it had duly befallen according to my
directions. Morally--and perhaps even legally--it amounted to murder. I
had willed, I had suggested; and that which I had willed and suggested
had come to pass. That was what had flashed into my mind in the very
moment in which Mrs. Gregg had made her dreadful communication.

But now, as I walked on, I began to argue the case in my own favour. In
the first place, I told myself, it was not certain that the act of the
dead man had any connection with the willing or the suggestion. It might
have been a mere coincidence. I tried to dwell on this view; but it would
not do. The coincidence was too complete to be explained away by any such
casuistry. I could not in this way escape the responsibility for Mr.
Otway's death.

Then I considered the question of intention. I told myself--truthfully
enough--that I had not consciously willed that Mr. Otway should kill
himself. I had not even been conscious of any intention to suggest to him
that he should kill himself. But though I did make some sort of point in
my own defence, it was extremely unconvincing I had allowed my mind to
dwell with hardly-disguised satisfaction on the possibility of his
suicide (in a particular manner at a particular time), and between that
and actual willing the distinction was not very obvious. And then there
were those words, spoken to him in his sleep. It was not conscious,
deliberate suggestion; but what was it? The impulse to speak those words
was apparently evolved from the subconscious. But does no moral
responsibility attach to subconscious intentions?

So I argued, back and forth, round and about; but always came back to the
same conclusion. Mr. Otway was dead; and it was my act that sent him to
his death. Locked up in my own breast this dreadful secret might remain;
but it was my companion for life. There was no escape from it.

But would it remain locked up in my own breast? That was another question
that began to loom up with a very real menace. How much did Mrs. Gregg
know? She might easily have overheard our conversation and even those
final, fatal words. And if she had, would she understand their
significance? Now that I came to consider the circumstances, there was
something rather alarming in the manner of this inscrutable woman;
something threatening and accusatory which I had vaguely felt at the
time. And as I reflected on this and the possibilities that it suggested,
a fear of something more substantial than my own accusing conscience
began to creep around my heart.

When I arrived home, Jasper's letter was awaiting me. But it contained
nothing new. He had seen the posters, had bought an early paper and had
immediately sent off the telegram. His tone was that of matter-of-fact
satisfaction. The legal impediment to our marriage had now been removed.
No declarations were necessary now. We could marry like other people. We
were free.

That was the burden of the letter. All our troubles were at an end. Until
everything was settled, we had better avoid meeting. But when the chapter
was closed with all due formalities we could sing "Nunc dimittis," and
thenceforth live only for one another.

I laid the letter down. All that it said was true. The picture that my
imagination had drawn under the guidance of desire as I had sat looking
into the shadowy corner of the bedroom in Lyon's Inn had become a
reality. The fetters that I had forged and put on that fatal morning in
the little church at Maidstone, had fallen off and given me back my
freedom.

And even as I told myself this, some voice from within seemed to whisper
a caveat, and my heart was sensible of a chill of fear.

BOOK III--CRIME

Chapter XXIII--The Dead Hand

THE entry of Mr. Otway into my life inaugurated a long succession of
disasters. The very first words that I heard him speak shattered the
peace of a lifetime. Thence-forward, like the Ancient Mariner, I was
haunted by a malign influence which seemed to exhale continuously from
his ill-omened personality. And even now that he was dead that malignant
spirit was not at rest. His very corpse, lying in the mortuary, was a
centre whence radiated sinister influences that crept into my secret soul
and enveloped me from without. During his life Mr. Otway had been my evil
genius; and death had but transformed him into a malicious poltergeist.

His first, tentative appearance in this character was made on the very
evening of my second visit to Lyon's Inn Chambers, when the coroner's
officer called at Wellclose Square to serve the subpoena for the inquest.
The announcement of his arrival caused me some qualms of vague alarm,
which I knew in my heart to be nothing but the stirring of my own
conscience. For the purpose of this inquest was to find an answer to the
question, "How did Lewis Otway come by his death?" And that question I
could have answered in four words--Silent Willing and Suggestion. But I
had no intention of answering that question; and hence, as I entered the
room into which the officer had been shown, I was consciously on the
defensive.

I had, however, no occasion to be. The officer was a civil, fatherly man
in a constable's uniform, sympathetic, deferential and not at all
inquisitive.

"I have called, ma'am," he began, "on a very sad errand. I don't know
whether you have heard the dreadful news--"

"Of Mr. Otway's death?" said I.

"Ah! then you have heard. That is a relief. Well, I have called to let
you know that the inquest is arranged for the day after to-morrow, at 3
p.m. in the room adjoining the mortuary." He gave me a few explicit
directions as to how to find the latter and then added: "If there is any
information that you could give us that would guide us in starting the
inquiry, we should be glad. Or the names of any witnesses that we ought
to subpoena."

I reflected. The threatening letters must necessarily be referred to at
the inquest. I should have to mention them myself, even if Mrs. Gregg
knew nothing of them.

"I happen to know," I replied, "that Mr. Otway had received a number of
anonymous letters and that he was greatly worried about them."

"Blackmailing letters?" he asked.

"I don't think any demands for money were made," I replied.

"Do you know what was their nature? Were they threatening letters?"

"Yes, indirectly. The two or three that I saw had reference to the death
of my father, who died very suddenly and who was alone with Mr. Otway at
the time. They suggested a suspicion that Mr. Otway was responsible for
my father's death."

The officer looked at me quickly and then became deeply reflective.

"Will it be possible to produce those letters at the inquest?" he asked,
after a cogitative pause.

"They are not in my possession," I answered; "but if the coroner will
make an order for their production I will endeavour to have it carried
out."

"Thank you, ma'am," said he; and then, as an after-thought, added: "If
you could make it convenient to call at the coroner's office to-morrow,
say at about two o'clock, I could give you the order and perhaps help you
to carry it out."

The latter suggestion appealed to me strongly and I fell in with it at
once. Thereupon the officer picked up his helmet with an air of
satisfaction, and, having handed me the subpoena, moved towards the door.
I accompanied him along the hall and let him out; and as I wished him
good evening and launched him down the steps, another figure emerged from
the darkness and passed him on the way up.

"Does Mrs. Otway live here?" the newcomer enquired. I glanced at him with
faint suspicion, for the exact incidence in time of his arrival with the
officer's departure suggested a connection between the two events.

"I am Mrs. Otway," said I.

"Oh, indeed! Could I have a few words with you on a matter of some
importance? I will not detain you more than a few minutes."

I hesitated, eyeing my new visitor dubiously. But there were no
reasonable grounds for a refusal; and I eventually ushered him into the
little parlour that the officer had just left, and indicated the vacant
chair.

"The matter concerning which I have taken the liberty of calling on you,
Mrs. Otway," said he, "is connected with--er--with the painful
occurrence--er--at Lyon's Inn Chambers. A most deplorable affair. Most
distressing for you--most distressing! Pray accept my sincere sympathy."

"Thank you, Mr.--"

"Hyams is my name--you may have heard your late husband speak of me. We
have been acquainted a good many years."

"He has never spoken of you to me, Mr. Hyams. But what can I do for you?

"Well, I can put my business in a nut-shell. Your husband, at the time of
his death, had certain valuable property of mine in his possession. I
should like to get that property back without delay."

He had certainly wasted no time. Unsentimental as was my own attitude I
felt this haste to be almost indecent.

"I should think you will have no difficulty," said I, "if you apply in
the proper quarter."

"That is what I am doing," he retorted. "You are is widow. His property
is in your hands."

"Not at all," I replied. "Pending probate of the will, the property is
vested in his executors."

He looked at me in not unnatural astonishment. I suppose the phraseology
that I had acquired from my father was unusual for a woman.

"Who are the executors?" he asked.

"I don't know," I replied.

"But," said he, "I suppose you have seen the will."

"No, I don't know that there is a will. I am only assuming the existence
of one from my knowledge of Mr. Otway's business-like habits."

"But this is very unsatisfactory," said Mr. Hyams. "There is portable
property of mine worth several thousand pounds lying in his chambers for
anyone to pick up, and those chambers in charge of a woman who probably
has access to his keys. It really isn't business, you know."

"What is the nature of the property?" I asked.

"It is a collection of very valuable stones, the who lot contained in a
little box that anyone could carry away in his pocket."

"Then," said I, "the probability is that he has deposited the box with
his bankers."

"Who are his bankers?" he asked.

"I really don't know."

"You don't know!" he exclaimed. "But you must have seen his cheques. I
presume he made you an allowance?"

"I accepted no allowance from him and I have never seen one of his
cheques."

Mr. Hyams looked at me with undisguised incredulity, "A most
extraordinary state of affairs," he commented. "Can you give me the
address of his lawyers?"

"I am sorry, Mr. Hyams, that I cannot. I don't even know if he has a
lawyer. I know nothing whatever about Mr. Otway's affairs."

Mr. Hyams' countenance took on an expression that was very much the reverse
of pleasant. "I suppose, Mrs Otway," said he, "you realise that you are
talking to a man of business and that you are telling a rather unlikely
story.

"I realise it very clearly, Mr. Hyams," I replied, "and I realise also
the difficulty of your position. What I recommend you to do is to go to
Lyon's Inn and see the housekeeper, Mrs. Gregg. She has been with Mr.
Otway many years and can probably tell you all that you want to know."

Mr. Hyams shut his mouth tightly, rose deliberately and picked up his
hat.

"Then," said he, "the position, as I understand it, is this: You don't know
whether there is or is not a will; you don't know the name of your
husband's bankers; you don't know who his lawyer is; you don't know
anything about his affairs; and you disclaim any responsibility in regard
to property that was in his custody when he died."

"Yes," I agreed, "that is the position; a very unsatisfactory one for
you, I must admit. Perhaps I may be able to help you later, when I know
more about Mr. Otway's affairs. Will you leave me your address?"

He was on the point of refusing, but prudence triumphed over anger and he
laid on the table a card on which I read the name, "David Hyams, Dealer
in precious stones," and the address, "501, Hatton Garden."

"If I learn anything fresh I will write to you," I said; whereupon he
thanked me curtly and gruffly and walked towards the door with pursed-up
lips and a lowering, truculent expression and took his departure without
another word.

When he was gone I reflected at some length on the significance of his
visit. The interview had brought home to me very vividly my anomalous
position. Mr. Otway had been a total stranger to me. Of his past, of his
recent habits and mode of life, his friends, his occupation--if he had
any--his family and social status, I knew nothing. My father had
referred to him as a retired solicitor and as a collector of, or dealer
in, precious stones. Vaguely, I had conceived him as a man of some means
--perhaps a rich man. But I knew nothing of him and had given him and his
affairs barely a thought. He was a stranger who had come into my life for
but a moment, and had straightway gone out again, leaving a trail of
desolation to show where he had been.

That was the real position. But to strangers to the world at large, it
would seem incredible. I was Mr. Otway's widow. I had been his wife in law
if not in fact. And the world would hold me to the legal relationship.
The dead man, lying in the mortuary, seemed about to make good the claims
that the living man had been forced to abandon. My status as a wife had
been a mere fiction: my status as a widow was an undeniable reality.

The clear perception of the extent to which I was involved in the dead
man's affairs gave my visit to the coroner's office a new importance. For
now, while seeking information for official use at the inquest, I must
gather what knowledge I could for my own guidance under cover of the
coroner's order. The address of the office--in Blackmoor Street, Drury
Lane--was printed on the subpoena, and there, after a few enquiries, I
made my appearance punctually on the following day.

My friend of the previous evening--whose name I discovered to be
Smallwood--was in the office, looking over some documents with the aid
of a pair of spectacles, which gave him a curiously unconstabulary
aspect. He rose when I entered, and, opening a drawer, took out a sheet
of paper.

"This is what you asked for, Mrs. Otway," said he (upon which a young man
at a desk looked up quickly), "the coroner's request for the production
of the letters that you told me about. Can I give you any other
assistance?"

"If you could accompany me to the chambers and be present during the
search for the letters, I should be glad," I replied. "You see," I added,
seeing that he looked somewhat surprised, "I am almost a stranger to the
housekeeper, I know nothing about the household or Mr. Otway's
arrangements, and I shall be accountable to the executors if there are
any, for any interference with the papers or their removal. I should very
much prefer to have a reliable witness."

He saw the position at once, and, greatly to my relief, agreed to come
with me, or rather to follow me in a few minutes. Thereupon I left the
office and walking at a leisurely pace into Drury Lane presently made my
way into the Strand by way of May-pole Alley and turned eastward towards
Lyon's Inn Chambers.

At the entrance I waited for a minute or two and then slowly ascended the
stairs to Mr. Otway's landing, growing more and more uncomfortable with
every step. For the bare stone staircase set my memory working very
unpleasantly, recalling again my headlong flight and the terrible episode
that had preceded it--that episode that would so gladly have sponged out
of my recollection for ever.

I stood at the door with my hand on the bell, listening for Mr.
Smallwood's steps on the stair, and so might have remained until he
arrived; but suddenly the door opened and Mrs. Gregg confronted me.
Apparently she had some means of observing a visitor from within.

"What are ye standing there for?" she demanded. "Why did ye not ring?"

"I was just about to ring when you opened the door," I replied.

She smiled sourly and looked at me in that strange, inscrutable fashion
of hers that I found so disconcerting.

"And what might your business be?" she demanded.

"I have come about some letters of Mr. Otway's--some anonymous letters
that he has received from time to time. Perhaps you know about them?

"You mean, perhaps I have been in the habit of reading his letters. Weel,
mistress, I have not. I know nothing about his letters."

"Perhaps you can show me where his letters were kept."

"Indeed, I'll do no such thing. What! Do you think I'll have you
scratching up in his chambers and pawing over his letters and papers and
him not under-ground yet?"

At this moment I caught the welcome sound of footsteps on the stairs.
Mrs. Gregg listened suspiciously, and as Mr. Smallwood came into sight
there was a visible change in her demeanour.

"What does he want, I wonder?" she said.

"He has come to receive the letters and to be present at the search for
them," I replied, producing the coroner's order. She glanced at the
paper, and, as Mr. Smallwood stepped up to the door, she motioned us to
enter.

"Come in," she said, gruffly. "'Tis no affair of mine, but I'll no hinder
ye."

We were just about to enter when footsteps were again audible on the
stairs, and we waited to see who this other visitor might be. Somewhat to
my surprise it turned out to be Mr. Hyams, who certainly seemed to have a
genius for coincidences.

"Now this is quite a lucky chance," said he, doing himself, as I
suspected, less than justice. "I didn't expect to find you here, Mrs.
Otway. I presume you are just having a look round."

"I have come to search for some documents that have to be put in
evidence," said I. "The coroner has asked for them."

"Well," said Mr. Hyams, "you might, at the same time, see if you can find
any trace of my property."

"What property is that?" demanded Mrs. Gregg.

"A parcel of stones--a very valuable collection--that Mr. Otway had
from me on approval."

Mrs. Gregg snorted. "Man," said she, "ye're talkin' like a fool. Do you
suppose Lewis Otway would have left a valuable parcel of stones lying
about in his rooms like a packet of snuff? Ye'll find no stones here."

"That may or may not be," said Mr. Hyams. "At any rate, I'll stay and see
if anything turns up."

During this dialogue we had gradually moved from the lobby down the
corridor and now entered the living-room. As we crossed it I looked
curiously at the large cupboard and wondered idly what I could have found
so alarming in its appearance on the night of my visit. But if the
living-room had, by the light of day, lost its disturbing qualities, it
was otherwise with the bedroom. I opened the door with trepidation, and
as I did so and was confronted by the disordered bed, the horror of the
place began to come back to me. Nevertheless, I entered the room with a
firm step and with my eyes on the bedside table, which appeared to be in
the same condition as when I had last seen it. I had just noted this when
I felt my arm grasped, and turning quickly found Mrs. Gregg at my side.
Her eyes were fixed on me and with her disengaged hand she was pointing
towards the corner by the bed-head. Involuntarily my gaze followed the
direction in which she was pointing and lighted on the fatal peg, which
now bore a loop of the red bell-rope with two free ends. Of course I had
known it was there, but yet the sight of it made me turn sick and faint,
and I must have shown this in the sudden pallor of my face; for when,
controlling myself by an intense effort, I turned to speak to her she was
looking at me with a leer of triumph.

"Can we have Mr. Otway's keys?" I asked.

"Ye'll find them in the right dressing-table drawer," she answered. "I'm
no party to this, but I'll no hinder ye."

Mr. Smallwood opened the drawer and produced a bunch of keys which he
handed to me. I looked them over and selecting the most likely-looking
ones, tried them, one after the other, on the deed-box. The fourth key
fitted the lock, and when I had turned it and raised the lid of the box,
the letter which Mr. Otway had shown me lay in full view. I took it out
and laid it on the table and then proceeded to lift out the remaining
contents of the box. There was not much to remove: a cheque-book, a
pass-book, a small journal, a memorandum book, a bundle of
share-certificates, a canvas bag containing money, and at the bottom of
the box a foolscap envelope endorsed, "Anonymous Letters."

I opened the unsealed envelope and drew out the letters which I glanced
through one by one. There were seven in all, of which I had already seen
three. When I had looked at them I returned them to the envelope, adding
the last letter, and then began to replace the other things in the box.

"I see a cheque-book there, Mrs. Otway," said Mr. Hyams, who had followed
my proceedings with intense interest. "May I make a note of the banker's
address?"

I handed him the cheque-book and continued to replace the contents of the
box. When I had finished I paused with the box open, waiting for him to
return the cheque-book; and at this moment I became aware, with a start
of surprise, that an addition had been made to our party.

The new-comer was a short, stout, middle-aged man, obviously a Jew of
the swarthy, aquiline type, with a very large nose and rather prominent
dark eyes. He stood in the open doorway of the bedroom watching us with a
slightly unpleasant smile. As he noted my surprised look his smile became
broader and more unpleasant.

"Make yourselves at home, ladies and gentlemen," said he. "These are
public premises--at least I assume they are, as I found the door open."

Mr. Hyams looked round with a start--as, indeed, did the others.

"May I ask who you are, sir?" he enquired.

"You may," was the suave reply. "My name is Isaacs--of the firm of
Isaacs and Cohen, solicitors. I am one of the executors of Mr. Lewis
Otway's will. And having regard to my responsibilities in that capacity,
I may, perhaps, venture to enquire as to the nature of these proceedings.
You, sir, appear to be in possession of the testator's cheque-book. Did
you happen to require the loan of a fountain pen?"

Mr. Hyams turned very red and hastily laid down the cheque-book.

"That," he exclaimed angrily, "is perfectly unwarranted. I was simply
making a note of the banker's address."

"With what object?"

"With the object of enquiring whether certain property of mine, which was
in Mr. Otway's custody, had been deposited in the bank."

"What is the nature and value of this property?" asked Mr. Isaacs.

"It is a collection of precious stones of the approximate value of four
thousand pounds."

"Then," said Mr. Isaacs, "I can give you the information you want. No
property, other than documents, has been deposited at the bank."

"In that case," said Mr. Hyams, "the stones must be in these rooms."

"It is quite probable," Mr. Isaacs agreed.

"Is there any objection to ascertaining, now, whether they are here?"

"Yes, there is," replied Mr. Isaacs. "The will has not been proved and no
letters of administration have been issued. Pending probate of the will I
propose to take possession of these premises and seal all receptacles
that may contain valuable property. I shall interfere with nothing until
I have letters of administration."

"And how soon will that be?" asked Mr. Hyams.

"Seven days must elapse before the will can be proved. Under the
circumstances there may be some further delay. And now I should like to
know what has been taking place. You, for instance, madam--"

"I am Mrs. Lewis Otway," said I, "and I have come here by the coroner's
direction, to look for some letters that are to be put in evidence."

"Have you found them?"

"Yes," I answered, "they are here; and, as you are an executor, I had
better hand them to you, and you can deliver them to the coroner's
officer if you think fit."

I handed him the envelope and the coroner's letter, which he read, and
then asked: "Did you have to make a very extensive search?"

"No, she didn't," said Mrs. Gregg. "She kenned fine where to look for
them and she found them at the first cast."

On this I noticed that Mr. Hyams cast a quick, suspicious glance at me
and I thought it wise to explain.

"I looked first in this box because I had seen Mr. Otway put one of these
letters into it."

"Quite so," said Mr. Isaacs. "Very natural." But obvious as the
explanation was, I could see that it had left Mr. Hyams unconvinced.

I now returned the cheque-book to the deed-box, locked the latter and
handed the keys to Mr. Isaacs; who delivered the anonymous letters to the
coroner's officer and took his receipt for them on a slip of paper. My
business being now at an end, I offered my card to Mr. Isaacs, took his
in return, and departed in company with Mr. Smallwood.

"A queer business, this, ma'am," the officer remarked as we descended the
stairs. "Regular mix up. Seem to be a lot of Sheenies in it."

"Sheenies?" I repeated, interrogatively. "What are Sheenies?

"Jews, ma'am," he replied, apparently a little surprised at my ignorance.
"It's just a popular name, you know."

I reflected on Mr. Smallwood's remark, which seemed hardly justified by
the facts--two Jews only having appeared in the case, so far as I knew.
And yet I seemed to be aware of a sort of Semitic atmosphere surrounding
Mr. Otway. There were, for instance, the Campbells; and then Mrs. Gregg,
although a Scotswoman, might easily, but for her strong Scottish accent,
have passed for a Jewess; while Mr. Otway, himself, had been distinctly
Semitic in appearance.

At the entry, where we separated, Mr. Smallwood halted to give me a final
injunction.

"You had better be in good time to-morrow, ma'am," said he, "because it
will be necessary for you to view the body so that you can give evidence
as to the identity of the deceased."

I thanked him for the reminder, but would much rather have been without
it. For the prospect filled me with a vague alarm, and now the mental
picture of the sleeping man, which had haunted me by night and by day,
began to be replaced by one more dreadful, and one which I felt that my
visit to the mortuary would attach to me for ever.

Chapter XXIV--The Gathering Clouds

THE distaste which I felt for my errand did not prevent me from following
Mr. Smallwood's advice on the subject of punctuality. It was some minutes
short of half-past two when I turned into the mean little street off
Drury Lane in which the mortuary was situated. I had found the place
without much difficulty and had still less in finding the mortuary
itself, for, as I entered the street I observed a procession of about a
dozen men passing in through a narrow gateway, watched attentively by a
small crowd of loiterers. Assuming the former to be the jury, I walked
slowly past on the opposite side and continued for the length of the
short street. I had just turned to retrace my steps when the men filed
out of the gateway and proceeded to enter a building a few yards up the
street, and immediately afterwards Mr. Smallwood appeared at the gate. He
saw me at once and waited for me to approach.

"I am glad you have come in good time, ma'am," said he. "The jury have
just been in to view the body and the coroner will like to open the
inquest punctually. This is the way."

He preceded me down a narrow passage, at the end of which he pushed open
a door. Following him I entered the mortuary, a bare, stone-floored hall
containing two large slate-topped tables, one of which was occupied by a
recumbent figure covered by a sheet. Mr. Smallwood removed his helmet and
together we advanced slowly towards the awesome, shrouded form, lying so
still and lonely in its grim surroundings. Very quietly, the officer
picked up the two upper corners of the sheet and drew it back, retiring
then a couple of paces as if to avoid intruding on my meeting with the
dead.

Strung up as I was, the first impression was less dreadful than I had
anticipated. The face was pale and waxen, but it was placid in expression
and more peaceful than I had ever seen it in life. The hunted, terrified
look was gone and had given place to an air of repose, almost of dignity.
For a few moments I was sensible of a feeling of relief; but then my
glance fell upon a contorted length of crimson rope that lay on the slate
table, and instinctively my eye turned to the uncovered throat. And as I
noted the shallow groove under the chin, faintly marked with an
impression of the strands of the rope, the shocking reality came home to
me with overwhelming horror. Before my eyes arose that awful shape upon
the bedroom wall and the hardly less dreadful image of the sleeping man
unconsciously receiving the message of his doom.

With a new horror--an incredulous horror of myself--I looked on the
pale, placid face and seemed to read in it a gentle reproach. He had gone
to his death at my bidding. He had stood unsteadily on the brink of the
abyss, and I had pushed him over.

It seemed incredible. There had been no conscious intention; no guilty
premeditation. I would have told myself that there was no connection
other than mere coincidence. But there the plain, undeniable facts were.
Unconsciously--or subconsciously--my will had created that premonitory
shape upon the wall; the terrible words had formed themselves and issued
from my lips. And straightway the thing that my thoughts and words had
foreshadowed had come to pass. This waxen-faced effigy that lay on the
stone table, as its living counterpart had lain that night in the bed,
was its fulfilment, its realisation.

"Better not stay too long, ma'am," said Mr. Smallwood. And as he spoke I
became suddenly aware that I had reached the limits of endurance. My
knees began to tremble and I breathed the tainted air with difficulty.

"Better come away now," continued Mr. Smallwood. "It's been rather too
much for you. Good afternoon, Mrs. Gregg."

I looked up quickly and perceived Mrs. Gregg, who must have come in
without making a sound, standing at the foot of the table watching me
intently. That penetrating stare and the singular, enigmatical expression
would have been disturbing at any time. But now I was conscious of actual
fear. As I tottered unsteadily along the passage to the street, the
menace of that watchful, inscrutable gaze followed me. How much did this
woman know? What had she heard? And if she had overheard those last words
of mine, how much had she understood of their import? These were weighty
questions, the answers to which I should doubtless hear within an hour or
two.

When I was ushered by Mr. Smallwood into the room in which the inquest
was to be held, the court was already assembled and ready to begin. The
jurymen sat along one side of a long table and one or two reporters
occupied a part of the other, while a row of chairs accommodated the
witnesses and persons interested in the case, including Mr. Isaacs, Mr.
Hyams, Mr. and Mrs. Campbell, and a youngish man of a markedly Jewish
type whom I did not recognise. I took my seat at the end of the row, and
Mrs. Gregg, who had followed us in, seated herself near the middle.

As I took my seat the coroner addressed one of the reporters:

"Let me see, what paper do you represent?"

"I am not a pressman, sir," was the reply. "I am commissioned to make a
report for Dr. Thorndyke."

"Dr. Thorndyke! But what is his connection with the case? I know nothing
about him."

"I only know that he has asked me to make a verbatim report of the
evidence."

"Hm," grunted the coroner. "I'm not sure that it is quite in order for
private individuals to send their reporters to an inquest."

"It is an open court, sir," the reporter observed.

"I know. But still--however, I suppose it doesn't matter. Well,
gentlemen, I think we are ready to begin. The witnesses are all present
and it is on the stroke of three. I need not occupy your time with any
preliminary statement. It seems quite a straightforward case and you will
get the facts from the evidence of the witnesses. We are here, as you
know, to inquire into the circumstances of the death of Lewis Otway,
whose body you have just viewed, which occurred either on the night of
the 18th instant or the morning of the 19th. The body was found hanging
from a peg in his bedroom by his housekeeper, Mrs. Gregg, and it will be
best to take her evidence first."

Mrs. Gregg was accordingly called, and having taken a position near the
head of the table, was sworn and proceeded to give her evidence.

"My name is Rachel Gregg, age 51. I was housekeeper to the deceased,
Lewis Otway."

"How long," asked the coroner, "had you known the deceased?"

"Thirty-three years."

"What was deceased's occupation?"

"He was a retired solicitor; but he was a connoisseur in precious stones,
and, I think, dealt in them to some extent."

"Was he in financial difficulties of any kind, so far as you know?"

"No. I believe he was quite a well-to-do man."

"Had you any reason to suspect him of an intention to take his life?

"Yes. He used to say that he expected, if ever he had any trouble, that
he would hang himself. The tendency to suicide was in the family. His
only brother hanged himself, his mother hanged herself and his mother's
father hanged himself."

"But that was only a tendency that might not have affected him. Had you
any reason to expect that he actually might commit suicide? Was there
anything in his manner, in the state of his mind or in his circumstances
that led you to believe that he might take his life?

"Not until recently. He always used to be quite cheerful in a quiet way
until he got married. After that he was never the same. His marriage
seemed to bring all sorts of trouble into his life."

"Tell us exactly how this change came about."

"His marriage took place about eight months ago--on the 25th of last
April when he was living at Maidstone. It was quite sudden. I knew
nothing of it until the day before, when he told me he was going to marry
a Miss Helen Vardon, and that the marriage was to take place secretly
because the lady's father had refused his consent. On the morning of the
marriage I saw Mr. Otway go out, and soon afterwards I went out myself to
do some shopping. When I came back I found the new Mrs. Otway in the
study and her father, Mr. Vardon, lying dead on the floor. Mr. Otway had
gone to fetch a doctor. It appeared that Mr. Vardon had called directly
after the newly-married couple had arrived home from the church and that
there had been a quarrel and Mr. Vardon had fallen down dead. I
understand that Mr. Vardon was alone with Mr. Otway at the time.

"Soon after I arrived, Mrs. Otway left the house and went back to her own
home, and Mr. Otway told me that she refused to live with him. At any
rate, she never did live with him, and she never came near him until the
night of his death."

"Do you know if the deceased agreed to this separation?"

"Apparently she made him agree. But it was a great trouble to him, and I
know that he tried more than once to get her to live with him."

"Do you know what was the cause of the separation?"

"No. Mr. Otway never mentioned it to me."

"You say that the separation was a great trouble to the deceased. Did it
obviously affect his spirits?

"Yes; he was very depressed after his wife went away, and he never
recovered. He seemed to get more and more low-spirited."

"Do you know of any other reasons than the separation from his wife why
he should have been depressed in spirits?"

"Yes. Mr. Vardon's sudden death was a great shock to him. He felt that he
had been partly the cause of it, by quarrelling with Mr. Vardon. Then
there was a great deal of talk in Maidstone about the affair and people
blamed Mr. Otway for what had happened; and later rumours began to get
about that there had been foul play--that Mr. Otway had actually killed
Mr. Vardon. These rumours got on his nerves so badly that he gave up his
house at Maidstone and moved to London."

"You have spoken of a quarrel between deceased and Mr. Vardon. Do you
know what the quarrel was about?"

"I believe it was about the secret marriage, but I was not in the house
at the time."

"Were there any other causes for the mental depression which you say the
deceased suffered from?"

"I think so, but I can't say for certain. There were some letters that
came about once a month which seemed to worry him a good deal. I used to
see him reading them and looking very anxious and depressed; and after a
time he began to get very nervous and fidgety and couldn't sleep at
nights unless he took a dose of veronal. And I noticed that he was
smoking much more than he used to, and taking much more whisky."

"Did you ever see any of the letters that you have spoken of?"

"I never read one, but I saw the outsides and I noticed that they all
bore the post-mark of East London."

Here the coroner drew from the large envelope six of the letters which I
had found in the deed-box, and handed them, in their envelopes, to Mrs.
Gregg.

"Do you recognise any of these letters?"

Mrs. Gregg turned the envelopes over in her hand, looked closely at the
post-marks and replied, as she returned them:

"Yes; these look like the letters that I spoke of."

The coroner laid the letters on the table, and after a few moments
reflection said: "Now, Mrs. Gregg, we want you to tell us what you know
of the circumstances of Mr. Otway's death. You spoke of a visit from Mrs.
Otway."

"Yes. She came to Lyon's Inn Chambers on Wednesday night, about half-past
six and told me that Mr. Otway had written to her asking her to come. As
Mr. Otway was then expecting another visitor, I asked her to call again
about eight, which she agreed to do. Mr. Otway had been rather poorly for
the last few days--very nervous and despondent, and had been sleeping
badly--and for three days had kept to his bed. I told him that Mrs.
Otway was coming at eight o'clock and he then said that he had some
private business to talk over with her and that I need not sit up. I gave
him his supper at half-past seven and just after I had cleared it away
Mrs. Otway came. I showed her into the bedroom and went to the kitchen to
finish up my work. At half-past nine I went to bed--a little earlier
than usual because I thought they would like the place quiet for their
talk. At a quarter to seven on Thursday morning I got up, and as soon as
I was dressed, went into the living-room to tidy it up. Then, to my great
surprise, I saw that the door of the bedroom, which opens out of the
living-room, was wide open and that the gas in the bedroom was full on.

"Thinking that Mr. Otway might be worse, I called out to him to ask if he
wanted anything; but there was no answer. I could see the bed from where
I was and could see that he was not in it; so I called to him again, and
as there was still no answer, I went into the bedroom. At first I thought
he was not there; but suddenly I saw him in a corner of the room that was
in deep shadow. He seemed to be standing against the wall, with his arms
hanging down straight and his head on one side; but when I went nearer I
saw that he was hanging from a large peg and that his feet were three or
four inches off the floor. He had hanged himself with a length of
bell-rope that he had cut off with his razor--at least that was what it
looked like, for the razor was lying open on the bed. I picked up the
razor and ran to him and cut the loop of rope, and as he fell, I let him
down on the floor as gently as I could. He seemed to be quite dead and
his skin felt cold, so I ran out to fetch a doctor. Just outside the
buildings I met a policeman and told him what had happened, and he told
me to go back to the chambers and wait, which I did. A few minutes later
he arrived at the chambers with a doctor, who examined the body and said
that Mr. Otway had been dead some hours."

"Did you see any means by which deceased could have raised himself to the
peg from which he was hanging?

"Yes. There was an overturned chair lying on the floor nearly underneath
him. It looked as if he had stood on it to fix the loop of rope and then
kicked it away. Mrs. Otway's bag was lying on the floor by the side of
the chair."

"Mrs. Otway's bag! What bag was that?"

"A little wrist-bag such as ladies use to carry their purses and
handkerchiefs. She called for it the same day and I gave it to her. She
had not heard what had happened, and when I told her she fell down in a
dead faint."

The coroner reflected for a while with wrinkled brows, and I caught the
eyes of one or two of the jurymen regarding me furtively. After a
somewhat lengthy pause, the coroner asked:

"Do you know what time Mrs. Otway left the chambers?"

"I heard the outer door slam about half an hour after I had gone to bed.
That would be about ten o'clock."

"Did you see Mrs. Otway or deceased after you let her in?"

"No. I did not go into the bedroom again. I went into the living-room
twice and could hear them talking."

"Could you hear what they were talking about?"

"I could hear a few words now and then. When I went into the living-room
the first time they seemed to be talking about suicide. I heard Mr. Otway
say something about a peg on the wall."

"And when you went in the second time?"

"They seemed still to be talking about suicide. I heard Mrs. Otway ask
deceased what drove his brother to hang himself."

"You heard nothing suggesting a quarrel or disagreement?"

"No. They seemed to be talking in quite a friendly way."

"Do you know what kind of terms they were on?"

"No. I never saw them together before except for a few minutes on the
wedding day."

"You spoke of a visitor who came to deceased earlier in the evening. Who
was that visitor?

"A Mrs. Campbell. Her husband is a jeweller and curio-dealer whom
deceased had known for a good many years, and used to have business
dealings with. I understand she came on business and she only stayed
about ten minutes."

"Is that all you know about the case?"

"Yes, I think I have told you all I know about it."

The coroner glanced at the jury. "Do any of you gentlemen, wish to ask
the witness any questions?" he inquired.

Apparently none of them did, and when the coroner had complimented Mrs.
Gregg on the clear manner in which she had given her evidence, she was
dismissed.

There was a short interval in which the coroner read over his notes and
the jury conferred together in low under tones. Then the coroner
observed: "We had better dispose of the police and medical evidence as
they are merely formal and will not take much time. We will begin with
the constable."

The policeman was then called and briefly corroborated Mrs. Gregg's
evidence. When he had finished, the doctor, whom he had brought to the
chambers, took his place, and having been duly sworn deposed as follows:

"My name is John Shelburn. I am a member of the Royal College of Surgeons
and a Licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, and am acting as
locum tenens for the police surgeon of Saint Clement Danes. At seven
twenty-eight a.m., on Thursday, the 18th of October, I was summoned by
the last witness to accompany him to Lyon's Inn Chambers, where a man was
reported to have hanged himself. I went with the constable to a set of
chambers, over the door of which was painted the name of Mr. Lewis Otway.
I went into the bedroom where the gas was alight, the blinds down and the
curtains drawn. There, lying on the floor near the wall, I found the dead
body of a tall, heavily built man, about fifty or fifty-five years of
age, dressed in a suit of pyjamas. The surface of the body was cold and
rigor mortis was well established. I should say the man had been dead
about eight hours. Around the neck was a double loop of red bell-rope and
a portion of the same was hanging from a large peg on the wall about
seven feet from the floor. The rope had apparently been cut down for the
purpose as a portion was still attached to the bell-wire and the severed
tassel lay on the bed, on which were impressions of feet, as if someone
had stood on the bed to cut it off. The length of rope had been joined at
the ends with the kind of knot known as a 'granny' and formed into what
is known as a weaver's loop, which had been passed over the head and the
standing part of the rope hitched over the peg. This would form a running
loop, like this--"

Here the witness produced a piece of thick string and demonstrated the
arrangement on his thumb and the knob of a chair-back.

"I released the double loop from the neck and found a shallow groove on
the throat corresponding to the rope. The countenance of the deceased was
calm--as it usually is in cases of hanging--and there were no signs of
violence or anything remarkable about the body. A chair, on which the
deceased had apparently stood to adjust the rope on the peg, was lying
close by and near to it on the floor was a lady's hand-bag. The rope had
been cut with some sharp instrument--probably a razor, as I was informed
by the housekeeper. I looked round the room but saw nothing of any
significance excepting a half-empty whisky decanter and a nearly-full
bottle of veronal tablets on a table by the bed."

"Can you tell us at what time death took place?"

"Only approximately. I have said that the man appeared to have been dead
about eight hours. That would give us eleven o'clock on the night of the
18th as the time at which death occurred. But I will not bind myself to
that time exactly. It might have been an hour earlier or later."

"After hearing your evidence and that of the other witnesses which you
have also heard, it is a mere formality to ask your opinion as to the
cause of death."

"Yes. The cause of death was obviously suicidal hanging."

This concluded the surgeon's evidence, and when he had been dismissed,
the coroner turned to the jury.

"We have now, gentlemen," said he, "established the fact of death and its
immediate cause. Our next move is to seek to establish the contributory
circumstances--the more remote causes. We have ascertained that this
unfortunate man committed suicide. The question that we now have to
consider is, Why did he commit suicide? Possibly the evidence of his
widow may help us to answer that question. Helen Otway."

As I rose to take my place at the table I was dimly aware of a certain
ill-defined movement on the part of the jury and the spectators such as
one may notice in a church at the conclusion of a sermon. But in the
present case the cause was evidently a concentration rather than a
relaxation of attention. Clearly, my evidence was anticipated with
considerable interest.

"Your name is--?

"Helen Otway. My age is twenty-four and I live at 69, Wellclose Square."

"Have you viewed and do you identify the body now lying in St. Clement's
mortuary?"

"Yes; it is the body of Lewis Otway, my late husband."

"When did you last see the deceased alive?"

"On the night of Wednesday, the 18th of October."

"Tell us, please, what took place on that occasion."

"I went to see deceased in consequence of a letter that I had received
from him asking me to do so. I arrived at about half-past six and was
informed by Mrs. Gregg that deceased was expecting another visitor."

"Did you know who that other visitor was?"

"No; but as I went down the stairs I met Mrs. Campbell coming up and
assumed that she was the visitor."

"You know Mrs. Campbell, then?"

"Only by sight. I have seen her in her husband's shop. Mrs. Gregg asked
me to call again at eight, and I agreed to do so, and did so. I was then
admitted by Mrs. Gregg, who conducted me to the bedroom and left me
there, shutting the door as she went out. I did not see her again that
night. Deceased was in bed and had by his side a table on which were a
spirit decanter, a siphon of soda water, a box of cigarettes, a bottle of
veronal tablets and a deed-box."

"Did you notice anything peculiar in his appearance?"

"No. He was not looking well, but he seemed less ill than I had expected
from his letter; which conveyed the impression that he was in a dangerous
condition."

"Have you got that letter?"

"Yes," I replied, "I have it here." As I spoke, I drew the letter from my
pocket and handed it to the coroner who glanced through it and then laid
it down with some other papers.

"We will consider this letter," said he, "with the others that you have
handed to me, later. Will you now tell us what passed between you and the
deceased?"

"At first we talked about an anonymous letter that he had received a day
or two previously. He showed me the letter, and when I had read it, he
locked it in the deed-box."

"We will deal with the anonymous letters presently. What else did you
talk about?"

"Deceased repeated the statement that he had made in the letter, that he
did not expect to live much longer. I asked him if he had any reason for
saying this and he then told me that there was a strong family
predisposition suicide; that his brother, his mother and his mother's
father had all hanged themselves, and that since he had received the
anonymous letters he had been conscious of an impulse to make away with
himself in the same manner."

"Had you not known previously of this family tendency?"

"No. He had never mentioned it before, and I knew nothing of his family."

"Did deceased speak as if he actually intended to make away with
himself?"

"No, but he spoke of an impulse which he found it difficult to resist;
and he mentioned that a large peg on the bedroom wall seemed to fascinate
him and to make the impulse stronger. I advised him to have it taken
away."

"Previous to this conversation, had you ever thought it possible that the
deceased might commit suicide?

"No; the possibility never entered my mind."

The coroner considered these replies and made a few further notes; then
he proceeded to open a fresh subject.

"Now, Mrs. Otway, with regard to your relations with deceased. Were you
on friendly terms with him?"

"Not particularly. We were practically strangers."

"A witness has stated that you refused to live with deceased and that you
never had lived with him. Is that true?"

"Yes, it is quite true."

"Had you quarrelled with deceased?"

"No, there was no quarrel. Our marriage was a business transaction and
immediately after the ceremony I discovered that my consent had been
obtained, as I considered, by misrepresentation."

"We don't want to be inquisitive, Mrs. Otway, but we wish to understand
the position. Could you give us a few more particulars?"

"Do you wish me to describe the circumstances of my marriage and the
separation from my husband?"

"If you please."

"My marriage with Mr. Lewis Otway took place under the following
circumstances: I accidentally overheard a portion of a conversation
between Mr. Otway and my father from which I gathered that Mr. Otway
claimed the immediate payment of five thousand pounds held by my father-- who
was a solicitor--in trust. It appeared from the conversation that my
father was unable immediately to produce the money, and Mr. Otway
threatened to take criminal proceedings for misappropriation of trust
funds. To this my father made no very definite reply. Then Mr. Otway
offered to abstain from any proceedings and to allow the claim to remain
in abeyance on condition that a marriage should take place between him
and me. This my father refused very emphatically and angrily, and Mr.
Otway left our house.

"Being greatly alarmed on my father's account, I communicated with Mr.
Otway and informed him that I was prepared to accept his offer on the
terms stated--namely, that he should release my father from the
immediate claim and secure him from any proceedings in connection with
it. Mr. Otway accepted the conditions, and as it was certain that my
father would strongly object, we agreed not to inform him until after the
marriage had take place.

"In accordance with this arrangement we were married privately on the
25th April of the present year and we went together from the church to Mr.
Otway's house. I had left a letter for my father informing him of what
had been done, and very shortly after our return from the church he came
to the house. From an upper window I saw him enter the garden and I was
very much alarmed at his appearance. I had heard that he suffered from
complaint of the heart and had been warned against undue excitement and
exertion, and I could see that he was extremely excited and was looking
very ill. Mr. Otway let him in and, in answer to a question, admitted
that the marriage had taken place. Then I heard my father ask Mr. Otway
if he had told me about a letter that he--my father--had sent, and when
Mr. Otway gave an evasive reply my father called him a scoundrel and
accused him of having tricked and swindled me.

"I heard no more of what was said, as the two men went into the study and
shut the door; but a minute or two later I heard a heavy fall, and,
running down to the study found my father lying on the floor and already
dead. There was a small wound on his temple and Mr. Otway, who was
stooping over the body, held my father's walking-stick--a thick Malacca
cane with a loaded silver knob--in his hand. He stated that my father
had threatened him with the stick and that he had taken it away from him
and that during the struggle my father had fallen insensible, striking
his head on the corner of the mantel-piece as he fell."

"Did you believe him?

"I think, at the moment, I did not. But on reflection, remembering how
ill my father had looked, I had no doubt he was speaking the truth."

"Was there an inquest on your father's death?"

"Yes. The jury found, in accordance with the medical evidence, that death
was due to heart failure caused by excitement and anger."

"And after this you refused to live with deceased?

"Yes. I asked him about my father's letter and he said he had not seen
it. I went with him to the letter-box and there we found it. The postmark
showed that it had come by the first post and my father's address was on
the outside of the envelope. There were no other letters in the box. I
had no doubt that Mr. Otway had seen the letter and put it back in the
box."

"Was that why you refused to live with him?"

"Partly. The letter stated that my father was able to meet his
liabilities and gave a date on which payment would he made. Consequently
the threatened proceedings against my father were impossible and Mr.
Otway had obtained my consent by false pretences. But further, Mr.
Otway's action had been the cause of my father's death, and this alone
would have made it impossible for me to live with him as his wife."

"Did deceased agree to the separation?"

"Yes. He saw that the position was impossible; but he hoped that the
separation might be only temporary--that we might become reconciled at
some future time."

"Did you consider this possible?"

"No. I held him accountable for my father's death and could never have
overcome my repugnance to him."

The coroner noted down this answer and having glanced over his notes
reflectively, looked up at the jury.

"Do any of you, gentlemen, wish to put any questions on this subject?" he
asked.

The jurymen looked at one another and looked at me; and one of them
remarked that, "This young lady seems to have rather easy-going ideas
about the responsibilities of marriage."

"That," said the Coroner, "is hardly our concern. The next matter that we
have to consider is that of certain letters received by the deceased from
some unknown person or persons. There are seven of them and they seem by
the postmarks to have been sent at intervals of about three weeks and to
have been posted somewhere in the East end of London. We will begin with
the first." He handed a letter to me and asked: "Have you seen that
letter before?"

"Yes," I replied. "Deceased showed it to me one day last June when I met
him by appointment at his request. He seemed to be extremely worried
about it."

The coroner took the letter from me and read it aloud.

"'Mr. Lewis Otway,

"'The undersigned is writing to put you on your guard because Somebody
knows something about how Mr Vardon came by his death and that somebody
is not a friend, so you had better keep a sharp look-out for you enemy
and see what they mean to do. I can't tell you any more at present.

"A WELL WISHER."

"Do you know," the coroner asked, "who wrote that letter?"

"No, I do not."

"Have you no idea at all? Is there no one whom you suspect?"

"I have not the least idea who sent that letter."

"You say that deceased was extremely worried about it. Do you know why he
was worried?"

"I understand that there had been rumours in Maidstone that Mr. Otway had
killed my father. Those rumour seemed to have preyed upon his mind and
made him unreasonably nervous."

The coroner nodded gravely and opened another letter and as he read aloud
the well-remembered phrases I realised that I should need all the courage
and self-possession at my command.

"'The writer of this warns you once more,'" the letter ran, "'to look for
trouble. The person that I spoke of knows that something was held back at
the inquest at least they say so and that they know why your wife won't
live with you and that she knows all about it too and that someone knows
more than you think anybody knows. This is a friendly warning.

"'FROM A WELL WISHER.'"

The coroner looked keenly at me as he finished reading.

"Can you explain the meaning of this letter?" asked. "It refers to
something that was held back at the inquest. Was anything held back, so
far as you know?"

"I remember that there was one omission in the evidence. Mr. Otway made
no mention of my father's stick."

"Was it not mentioned at the inquest at all?"

"No."

"Did you not give evidence?"

"Yes; but I was merely asked if I confirmed Mr. Otway's evidence, which I
did."

"You confirmed Mr. Otway's evidence! But that evidence was not correct.
The duty of a witness is to state the whole truth; whereas Mr. Otway had
withheld a highly material fact. How was it that you did not supply this
very important fact?"

"It did not appear to me to be of any importance. The medical evidence
showed that death was due to heart failure.''

"Medical evidence!" the coroner exclaimed, testily. "There is too much of
this medical evidence superstition in these courts. People speak as if
doctors were infallible. It was your duty as a witness to state all that
you knew, not to decide what was or was not of importance. And I cannot
understand how you came to hold such an opinion. You found your father
lying dead with a wound on his head and a man standing over him with a
loaded stick, and you considered this fact of no consequence?"

"I see now that I ought to have mentioned it."

"What was the verdict?

"The verdict was in accordance with the medical evidence--Death from
natural causes."

"Did the medical witness or witnesses know that Mr. Otway had had a
loaded stick in his hand?"

"No."

"Did anybody besides yourself and Mr. Otway know about the loaded stick?"

"Mrs. Gregg came into the room when Mr. Otway had gone for a doctor. She
saw the stick in a corner and picked it up to examine it. She asked whose
it was and remarked on its weight."

"Did she know it had been in Mr. Otway's hand at the time of your
father's death?"

"I have no reason to suppose that she knew."

"Well," said the coroner, "it is a most extraordinary affair. You heard
Mr. Otway give his evidence, you knew that that evidence was incomplete,
and yet, though the dead man was your own father and you have declared an
unconquerable repugnance to Mr. Otway, you allowed this garbled evidence
to pass unchallenged. It is an amazing affair. However," he continued
turning to the jury, "that is not our concern. But what is our concern,
for the purposes of this inquiry, is that we now begin to see daylight.
We can now understand the extraordinary effect these letters seem to have
had on the man whose death we are investigating. Lewis Otway, when he
gave his evidence at the inquest, suppressed a most important and
damaging fact which he believed to be known only to himself and his wife.
Thereby he obtained a verdict of Death from Natural Causes, which
exonerated him from all blame. Had all the facts been known, the verdict
might have been very different.

"Now the receipt of these letters must have destroyed his sense of
security. Apparently someone else--and that someone evidently an enemy--knew
of this damaging fact and knew of the further damaging fact that it
had been suppressed at the inquest. In effect, these letters held out a
threat of a charge of murder, or at least, manslaughter. It is no wonder
that they alarmed him. But we had better take the rest of the evidence.
There is this letter deceased wrote to his wife, which I will read. It is
dated the 17th of October, and this is what it says:

"'My dear Helen,

"'I have not troubled you for quite a long time with my miserable affairs--which
are to some extent your affairs too. But they are going from bad to
worse, and now I feel that I am coming to the limits of endurance. I
cannot bear this much longer. My health is shattered, my peace of mind is
wrecked and my brain threatens to give way. Death would be a boon, a
relief, and I feel that it is not far off. I cannot go on like this.
Those wretches will not leave me in peace. Hardly a week passes but I get
some new menace and now--but I can't tell you in a letter. It is too
horrible, Come to me, Helen, for the love of God! I am in torment! Have
pity on me, even though you have never forgiven me. I cannot come to you,
for I am now unable to leave my bed. I am a wreck, a ruin. Come to me
just this once, and if you cannot help me, at least give me the comfort
of your sympathy. You will not be troubled by me much longer.

"'Your distracted husband,

"'LEWIS OTWAY.'"

When the coroner finished reading the letter (which evidently made a deep
impression on the jury) he looked at me gravely.

"Before passing to the next letter, I must ask one or two questions
about this one. What did you understand from the phrases 'I feel that
it (death) is not far off. I cannot go on like this. You will
not be troubled by me much longer.' Did they not suggest to you
an intention to commit suicide?"

"No. I understood them as referring to his state of health."

"If you had known of the family tendency to suicide, how would you have
understood these passages?"

"I should have suspected that he contemplated suicide."

"But you say you were not aware of this tendency?"

"No, I was not."

"He refers to his 'miserable affairs--which are to some extent your
affairs too.' What did you understand him to mean by that?"

"I understood him to refer to the fact that I was partly responsible for
the omission of certain details in the evidence at the inquest."

"When you received this pitiful letter, what did you do?"

"I went to him the same day to find out what the trouble was. He then
showed me an anonymous letter that he had received."

"Is this the one?" the coroner asked, handing it to me; and when I had
glanced at it and identified it, he proceeded to read it to the jury.

"'Mr. Lewis Otway,

"'Some funny questions are being asked. What about Mr. Vardon's stick?--the
loaded stick with the silver knob to hide the lead loading? Where is
it? Somebody says they know where it is and who's got it. And they say
there is a bruise on the silver-top, and they say something about a smear
of blood and a grey hair sticking to it, Do you know anything about that?
If you don't you'd better find out. Because I think you will hear from
that somebody before you are many weeks older or else from the police. A
WELL WISHER.'"

As he laid down the letter, the coroner looked at me curiously.

"There are one or two important questions, Mrs. Otway," said he, "that
arise out of this letter. The first is, What has become of this stick?"

"I don't know what has become of it. I saw Mrs. Gregg replace it in the
corner by the writing table and never saw it again. The deceased asked me
the same question when he showed me the letter; but I reminded him that I
did not take the stick with me when I left his house and that I never
went to the house again."

"It never occurred to you to ask what had become of your father's stick?"

"No. I always assumed that it was in Mr. Otway's possession."

"You have told us that Mrs. Gregg had seen the stick in Mr. Otway's
house. Had anyone else seen it there?"

"I don't know of anyone else having seen it; but, of course, it may have
been seen there by other persons. I know nothing of what went on in that
house. I never entered it after my father's death."

"With the exception of Mr. Otway and yourself, did anyone know that you
had seen that stick in Mr. Otway's hand on the occasion of your father's
death?"

"So far as I am aware, no one else knew."

"There is a statement in that letter referring to a bruise on the silver
knob and a smear of blood with a grey hair sticking to it. Is it
possible, so far as you know, that that statement might be true?

"I cannot say that it is impossible."

"After your father's death, did you examine the stick?"

"No. I saw it in Mrs. Gregg's hands, but I did not look at it closely."

At this point a police superintendent who had been sitting near to the
coroner's table, rose, and, approaching the table, stooped over it and
spoke to the coroner in a low voice. The latter listened attentively and
nodded once or twice, and when the superintendent had returned to his
seat he addressed me.

"I think that will do, Mrs. Otway--for the present, at any rate. We may
have to ask you one or two questions later. Do any of the jury wish to
ask anything before the witness sits down?"

As none of the jury responded, I returned to my seat, and the coroner
then recalled Mrs. Gregg.

"You have heard the last witness state that she saw you take up Mr.
Vardon's stick. What made you examine that stick?"

"I did not examine it. I noticed it standing in the corner and saw that
it was a strange stick--that it was not Mr. Otway's. I took it out of
the corner to look at it and then noticed that it was heavily loaded at
the top."

"Can you say whether there was or was not a bruise or a blood smear on
the knob?"

"I cannot. I did not look closely at the knob. I just picked the stick
up, felt its weight and put it back in the corner."

"Did you know that Mr. Otway had had that stick in his hand when Mr.
Vardon fell dead?"

"No. I never heard of that until to-day."

"Could anyone other than Mrs. Otway have known, so far as you are able to
say?

"I can't say. I should think not. I did not get back to the house until
it was all over. But I thought, and believe, that there was no one in the
house but those three--Mrs. Otway and her husband and her father."

"Do you know what became of that stick?"

"I do not. I put it back in the corner and never saw it again. It was not
in the corner when I tidied up the room the next day."

"Thank you, Mrs. Gregg. That will do."

Having dismissed the witness, the coroner turned to the jury.

"I had hoped, gentlemen," said he, "to finish the case to-day, but, as
you have seen, its apparent simplicity was rather illusory. Some rather
curious issues have arisen which will have to be considered in detail.
Moreover, there appears to be a suspicion that property of very great
value has been removed from the premises--at least, it seems to be
missing. Under these circumstances, the police authorities ask for an
adjournment to enable them to make some enquiries; and I am sure you will
agree with me that this, and certain other matters, should be cleared up
before a verdict is returned. I therefore propose to adjourn the enquiry
for fourteen days."

The court rose, and I rose with it. As I stood up and turned towards the
door I saw Jasper standing at the back of the hall. He made no sign, nor
did I; and as soon as our eyes had met, he turned and walked out. I did
not attempt to follow, for I understood at once that he did not consider
it desirable that we should recognise one another in this place.
Moreover, I was detained for a minute or two by the coroner, who informed
me, with a curious dry civility, that he wished me to attend at the
adjourned meeting of the court, as further evidence from me might be
required and after him, by Mr. Isaacs, who, as executor, was responsible
for the funeral arrangements and who promise to inform me when the date
had been fixed.

As I emerged from the gateway I glanced up the street with a wistfulness
which I would hardly acknowledge to myself. But, of course, Jasper was
already out of sight. Feeling very lonely, weary and exhausted, I walked
slowly down Drury Lane considering what I should do next. And suddenly
there came on me a longing for the quiet and comfort of the club. It was
quite near; and once there I could wash, refresh and rest in peace,
alone, or at least among civilised people. And it was even possible that
Jasper might be there.

At this thought I must have unconsciously quickened my pace, for a few
minutes later found me passing through the entrance hall, telling myself
that, of course, Jasper would not have come there. Nevertheless as I
opened the door to the large room my eye instantly sought the familiar
table in the corner; and when I saw Jasper sitting by it with a wishful
gaze fixed on the door, my weariness and loneliness seemed to drop from
me like a garment.

Chapter XXV--Suspense--and a Discovery

"I HAD hoped," said Jasper, as we met by the table, "that you would come
on here. I had to take the chance. You understood why I made myself
scarce as soon as you had seen me?"

"I assumed that you thought it better that we should not be seen together
just at present."

"It is more than unadvisable," said he. "It is vitally important. We
will talk about that letter--but not here. There is a lot that I have to
say to you, but we had better have our talk where we cannot be seen, or
possibly overheard. I propose that I run off now--nobody has seen us
here yet--and wait for you at my chambers. You just have a wash to
freshen you up and come along at once. Don't stop for tea; I will have
some ready for you. And you had better come by the least frequented way.
Go down the Embankment, up Middle Temple Lane, along Crown Office Row,
cross King's Bench Walk to Mitre Court, come out into Fleet Street by
Mitre Court Passage, cross to Fetter Lane and into Clifford's Inn by the
postern gate."

"All this sounds very secret and mysterious," said I.

"It is necessary," he replied. "We mustn't be seen together if we can
help it. Remember the jury and other interested parties are local men,
and might easily run against us in the public thoroughfares. So I will
run off now and you will come along as soon as you can."

To this arrangement I agreed, although the precautions seemed to me
somewhat excessive, and he hurried away while I went in quest of hot
water and the other means of ablution.

The process of purification did not take long, for the temptation to
linger luxuriously over the ceremonial of the toilet was combated by
curiosity and anxiety to rejoin Jasper. In a few minutes I emerged,
greatly refreshed and sensible of a very healthy appetite, and set forth
by the prescribed route towards Clifford's Inn, reflecting earnestly as I
went on Jasper's rather mysterious attitude. I did not have to ply the
knocker, for as I reached the landing I found Jasper standing at his open
door.

"Now," said he, when I had entered and he had softly closed both the
massive "oak" and the inner door, "we are secure from observers and
eavesdroppers, and we can pow-wow at any length we please."

"You are very secret and portentous," I remarked. "What is it all about?"

"The secrecy and portentosity," he replied, "are possibly by-products of
a legal training. We will discuss that presently. Meanwhile, the need of
the moment is to provide nourishment for a starving angel."

He placed an easy chair for me by the fire, and then retired to the
little kitchen, from which issued a gentle din of crockery very grateful
to my ear. Presently he emerged with a tray on which were a teapot and
two covers, and having deposited it on a small table, placed the latter
by my chair and removed the covers with a flourish.

"There is only one cup and one plate," said I, noting that the
"nourishment" had been provided on a scale of opulence appropriate to
masculine conceptions of appetite.

"Dear me!" exclaimed Jasper. "How many cups and plates do you generally
use?"

"Go and get another plate and cup and saucer," I commanded, severely.

When he had made the necessary addition to the table appointments, he
drew up a second armchair, and, as he poured out the tea, he said,
gravely:

"We have had a long probation, Helen, dearest--at least, it seems so to
me; and it is not over yet. But this little interlude should hearten
us for what remains. To me it is a glimpse into a future of perfect
happiness and comradeship. Do you realise, Helen, that we are now a
normal, engaged couple, free to marry when we choose?"

Of course I had realised that we were free; but as I thought of the
shrouded figure that even now reposed under its sheet in the mortuary, I
doubted whether the word "normal" was fully applicable.

"It is perfect peace and happiness to be here with you, Jasper," I
replied; "but I think I shall feel more normal when we can meet without
all this secrecy. And even now I don't quite understand it. Why is it so
important that we should not be seen together?"

"That is fairly obvious, I think," he replied. "I am going to be very
frank with you, Helen, because I have complete confidence in your courage
and strength of character. There is no use in blinking the fact that you
are in a difficult situation. That coroner man thinks you wrote those
anonymous letters; and he suspects that you knew about Otway's suicidal
tendencies."

"But I distinctly said I did not."

"Yes, but, you see, the person who wrote those letters is not a person
whose statements would carry any weight; and he thinks you are that
person. He thinks you have tried to drive Otway to suicide, and he will
be looking for a motive. There is a fairly obvious motive already, as you
were encumbered with a husband whom you didn't want; but if you add
another husband whom you did and do want, the motive for getting rid of
the unwanted one becomes much more definite. That is the kind of motive
he will be on the look-out for. Hence the necessity for the utmost
caution on our part. If a witness could be produced who could depose to
having seen us together, it might be possible for him to put some
inconvenient questions."

"Could he not question me on the subject apart from any such witness?"

"I don't think it would be admissible for the coroner to suggest the
existence of a lover if he had no facts. And that brings us to the point
that I was going to raise. You ought to be represented either by counsel
or by a solicitor; preferably by counsel, as a barrister is more agile--more
accustomed to deal with the sudden exigencies that arise in court."

"You seem to suggest that I am charged with having brought about Mr.
Otway's death."

"I wouldn't use the word 'charged' as I don't know that there is any such
offence recognised by law. Morally, to cause a man to commit suicide
would be much the same as to murder him, but I can't say off-hand what
the legal position would be. My impression is that it would not be an
offence that could be dealt with by law unless the act of murder could be
proven. Nonetheless, I would be happier to see you with some reliable
counsel we could trust."

It was then I thought of Dr Thorndyke. He had shown a kind interest in my
affairs, even to the extent of having a shorthand reporter at the
inquest. Surely he would be ideal, if I could persuade him to take up the
role of my advocate. I broached the possibility to Jasper, explaining Dr.
Thorndyke's interest in the case.

"The very man!" Jasper said enthusiastically. "You must see him, Helen,
and soon. He is a local resident, luckily, and lives only a few moments'
walk from here."

So fast did things seem to be moving that I was reluctant to take on
another visit after my already busy day, but Jasper was insistent that I
should seek out Dr. Thorndyke's help. "I wish I could accompany you," he
said, "but it is best if we are not seen out together. Will you see him?"

"Perhaps." I temporised, still feeling that to take on the services--and
the cost!--of such a distinguished advocate was an extreme reaction to
my current situation.

We talked a little longer, and then I took my leave, getting directions
to Dr. Thorndyke's rooms from Jasper.

"I suppose," said he, as he bade me farewell, "we had better not meet again
until this affair is over. It is only a fortnight, and after that we
shall be free. Meanwhile, we can write as often as we please."

I agreed to this the more readily as I saw that another meeting with
Jasper would make it difficult for me to escape from his demand that I
should invoke Dr. Thorndyke's help. Nevertheless, as I took my way
through Clifford's Inn Passage into Fleet Street, I found myself looking
forward somewhat gloomily to the lonely and anxious fortnight lay ahead.

For several days nothing out of the ordinary occurred. My friends at
Wellclose Square, who knew approximately what my position was, were
quietly sympathetic, but never referred to the matter; excepting the
incorrigible Peggy, who frankly congratulated me on my newly-acquired
freedom.

"It's horrid for you, Sibyl," said she, "but still it is for the best;
though he might have managed it a little more decently--a level
crossing, you know, or 'found drowned,' or something of that sort."

"You are a callous little wretch, Peggy," said I.

"I don't care," she replied, defiantly. "You know it is true. I am
awfully sorry for you now. It must be perfectly beastly to have to answer
all those impertinent questions, and have your answers printed in the
news papers. But it will soon be over, and then you can forget it and
have a good time. I shall dance at your wedding before I am six months
older."

I had to pretend to be shocked, but the Titmouse's optimism did me good.
For there was a bright side to the picture, and it was just as well to
gather encouragement from an occasional glance at it.

About ten days after the first sitting of the inquest I received a letter
from Mr. Isaacs. He had already written to me briefly to inform me that
the funeral had been postponed by the coroner's direction until after the
adjourned inquest, but had then said nothing about the will. The present
letter supplied the omission, and its contents surprised me very much. It
appeared that the will been proved and that I was the principal
beneficiary. "The testator," said Mr. Isaacs, "has bequeathed to you the
bulk of his personalty--upwards of eight thousand pounds--and the lease
of the premises in Lyon's Inn Chambers, together with the furniture and
effects contained therein. You are also constituted the residuary
legatee. The chambers have now been evacuated by Mrs. Gregg, and are at
your disposal. They are at present locked up, and the keys are in my
possession pending your instructions and advice as to whether you intend
to occupy the premises, to let them or to dispose of the lease. A copy of
the will can be seen at my office, and, of course, the original can be
examined at Somerset House."

The provisions of this will caused me, as I have said, considerable
surprise. I had regarded myself as having no pecuniary claim on Mr.
Otway, and had not considered myself as concerned in his will at all. Now
it was evident that, selfish as he had been during his life, he had been
anxious at least to make some atonement after his death for the injury he
had done me; and the fact did not tend to make my sense of guilt less
acute.

Before I had replied to Mr. Isaacs' letter I received two other
communications. One was from Jasper; and though it was written in a tone
of quiet cheerfulness, its contents filled me with alarm. It appeared
that Jasper, becoming uneasy at my continued neglect to take any measures
to secure a counsel to represent me, had called on Dr. Thorndyke with the
object of retaining him. "We have had rather bad luck," he continued,
"though I don't suppose it will matter. Dr. Thorndyke would have been
pleased to represent you, but unfortunately he has been commissioned at
the last moment by the Home Office to make an independent investigation
of the case. He gave me the name of a suitable counsel--a rising junior
named Cawley--with whom I have made the necessary arrangements. So your
interests will be looked after, and we can trust Thorndyke to clear up
the obscurities of the case."

The other letter was from Dr. Thorndyke himself, and confirmed Jasper's
account.

"Your friend, Mr. Davenant," it said, "called on me to-day to ask me
to watch the proceedings of the inquest on your behalf, which I would
have done with great pleasure if I had been at liberty. But I had just
received instructions from the Home Office to look into the case and
give evidence at the adjourned inquest; so I referred your friend to
Mr. Cawley, who is an excellent counsel and will be able to do all that
is necessary."

"Mr. Davenant expressed great disappointment that I should be, as he
expressed it, 'retained by the other side.' But I pointed out to him that
there is no 'other side.' I am not a 'witness advocate.' My evidence
would be the same whichever side employed me. I never undertake to
represent a particular interest, but merely to obtain what facts I can
and give those facts impartially in my evidence and I always make it
clear to clients that they employ me at their own risk--at the risk that
the facts elicited may be unfavourable to them. So, although I am not
retained by you, I shall act precisely as if I were. I shall find out all
I can, and tell the court all I know. This will, presumably, be entirely
in your interest.

"And now I am going to ask a favour of you. I wish to examine and make a
plan of the premises at Lyon's Inn Chambers, and I understand that the
tenancy of the Chambers is now vested in you. Will you be so kind as to
lend me the keys and authorise me to make this survey? If you will, I
shall be able to make my evidence more complete."

If Jasper's letter had alarmed me, Dr. Thorndyke's positively terrified
me. The cool, relentless impartiality, the unhuman indifference to
everything but the actual truth that the letter conveyed appalled me; and
I even seemed to read a direct menace in its tone. If I had employed him,
I should have done so at my own risk; so he seemed to hint. His intention
was to "find out all he could and tell the court all he knew." How much
would he find out? How much did he know already? He had a verbatim report
of the evidence so far. He had Mrs. Gregg's statement that "they seemed
to be talking about suicide." He would know all about suggestion and
silent willing. Was it possible that he already knew that I had sent that
wretched man on his last journey? When I recalled all that my father had
said of his amazing powers of inference; when I remembered how unerringly
he had detected the reservations in Mr. Otway's evidence and mine; I
could not but feel that my chance of keeping my guilty secret was
infinitesimal. The probability was that it was discovered already.

As to his request, obviously I had no choice but to grant it, and I was
on the point of writing to Mr. Isaacs to instruct him to hand the keys to
Dr. Thorndyke when it occurred to me that it might be well to avoid
unnecessarily taking the former gentleman into my confidence. I knew
nothing about Mr. Isaacs, and was not particularly prepossessed by him;
not did I know the object of the proposed survey of the premises,
concerning which indeed I was somewhat mystified and rather
uncomfortable. Eventually I decided to call at Mr. Isaacs' office for the
keys and deliver them myself to Dr. Thorndyke.

Accordingly I wrote a short a note to the latter informing him of my
intentions, and on the following morning betook myself to Mr. Isaacs'
office, which was situated in New Inn. I could see that my visit was
somewhat unexpected, and evidently aroused the solicitor's curiosity.

"You will see," said be, "that the keys are all labelled, and I have made
a rough inventory of the furniture and effects. Perhaps you would like me
to come with you and check it."

"Thank you," said I, "but I don't think I will check the inventory
to-day. We will postpone that until I take formal possession. At present
I am merely going to take a look at the premises."

When I said this, I had, of course, no intention of going to the chambers
at all, but as I walked down Wych Street with the keys in my bag, I
reflected that, as I had said I was going, I had better go. Moreover, it
was possible that the arrangement of the place had been disturbed and
that some things might need to be replaced; for I assumed that Dr.
Thorndyke would wish to see the premises as they were on the night of the
tragedy. And then I was not without some curiosity concerning this place
which had been the scene of events so momentous to me.

At the bottom of Wych Street I turned round by the "Rising Sun" and
walked along Holywell Street to the entrance of Lyon's Inn Chambers; and
as I, once again, ascended the gloomy stone stairs, the sinister
atmosphere of the place enveloped me as it had done on previous
occasions, and induced a vague sensation of fear. When I reached the
landing and stood at the ill portal, the feeling had grown so pronounced
that I hesitated for a while to enter the chambers. At length I summoned
up courage to insert the key, and as the massive door swung open I
stepped into the lobby.

But my nervousness by no means wore off. Leaving the outer door ajar, I
walked quickly down the corridor, peered into the kitchen and the little,
empty room that had presumably been occupied by Mrs. Gregg--apparently
the furniture had belonged to her--crossed the living-room and entered
the bedroom. Here nothing seemed to have been changed. Even the great peg
--on which, of course, my eye lit instantly--still bore the end of
crimson rope; the bed had been stripped, but the bedside table stood
intact even to the bottle of veronal tablets. I looked about me quickly
and nervously, noting the arrangement of the furniture and comparing it
with my recollections of that unforgettable night; and when I had decided
that it was unaltered, I turned to go.

As I crossed the living-room, the large, wardrobe-like cupboard attracted
my attention, and I recalled the mysterious sounds that had seemed to
issue from it. Was it possible, I wondered, that Mrs. Gregg could have
been concealed in it that night and have overheard those last
incriminating words of mine. She had not referred to them in her
evidence, but the inquiry was not finished yet. I resolved to settle the
question whether it was physically possible for her to have been
concealed in the cupboard, and having tried the door and found it locked,
I turned the keys over one by one until I found one labelled "cupboard in
living-room." It was a rather unusual type of key, with a solid stem
instead of the more usual barrel, and when I had inserted it and opened
the door, I noticed that the key-hole passed right through the lock, so
that the door could be locked from the inside as well as the outside. The
cupboard itself was fitted like a wardrobe with a single shelf just above
my eye level, beneath which a short woman like Mrs. Gregg could have
easily stood upright. Thus the construction of the cupboard and the
peculiar form of the lock made it at least possible that an eavesdropper
might have been concealed that night; and that was all that I could say.

Before shutting the door I stood on tip-toe to see if there was anything
on the shelf. In the semi-darkness of the interior I could see some kind
of metallic object, and reaching in, took hold of it. As I drew it into
the light of day I gave a gasp of astonishment. It was my father's stick.
I took it down and turned it over curiously in my hands, marvelling how
it should have got into this receptacle; and a turned it over, there came
into view a flattened dent on the silver knob covered by a thick smear of
blood to which two hairs had stuck. I looked at the hairs closely, but
could come to no opinion as to whether or not they were my father's. One
of these was white and the other a brownish grey. My father's hair had
been iron grey as a whole, but I could not judge what the appearance of
individual hairs might have been. If these were really his, then the man
who had gone to his account was my father's murderer. It was a dreadful
thought, but yet not without a certain compensation. As I looked at this
relic of that day of wrath I felt my heart hardening. If the message that
it bore was a true message, then I need have no more compunction for what
I had done. If I had known with certainty that Mr. Otway had killed my
father, those words which had slipped from me subconsciously would have
been consciously uttered with full and deliberate intent and without a
qualm.

I stood for a while with the stick in my hand considering what I should
do with it. That its mysterious reappearance would create a complication
I plainly foresaw, but to take it away and conceal it would be not only
dishonest but very unsafe; for it was almost certain that someone knew of
its existence. It must have been seen when the inventory was taken.
Eventually I replaced it on the shelf and locked the cupboard; and having
put the keys back in my bag made my way to the door, which had been
standing ajar all this time.

As I walked slowly to the Temple, I turned over in my mind the
significance of this strange discovery. Someone must have known of the
presence of this stick in the chambers, and that someone was either Mr.
Otway or Mrs. Gregg. But both had declared positively that they had never
seen it; and it was difficult to imagine why either of them should have
kept it hidden away and disclaimed all knowledge of it. I could make
nothing of the problem. Only one thing was clear to me. I must let Dr.
Thorndyke know of my discovery; for it did not incriminate me in any way
and might give him a clue to some of the elements of the mystery, the
unravelment of which would be to my advantage.

The door of Dr. Thorndyke's chambers was opened by Mr. Polton, who
greeted me with a friendly smile, all creases and wrinkles.

"I'm sorry to say that the Doctor is not at home, ma'am," said he; "and
he will be sorry, too. He would have liked to see you, I am sure."

"It doesn't matter, Mr. Polton," said I. "I have only called to leave
these keys. But I should like to leave a message. Will you ask him not to
disturb things more than he can help, as the inventory has not been
checked yet; and will you tell him that the stick is in the large
cupboard in the living-room? You won't forget, will you?"

"I shan't forget," he replied, with a slight emphasis on the last word,
"but I never trust my memory in important matters. Would you mind writing
the Doctor a little note?"

He produced writing materials and placed a chair by the table, and I sat
down and briefly put my message into writing. When I had given him the
note--which he set in a conspicuous place on the mantel-piece--he
looked at me as if he had something to say, and I waited to hear what it
was.

"I have got an old verge watch to pieces upstairs," he said at length. "I
don't know whether you would care to have a look at the movement. It's
worth looking at. If you want to know what workmanship is, you should
look at the inside of a good, old watch."

I was not, at the moment, much interested in watches or workmanship, but
I could not resist his companionable enthusiasm--to say nothing of the
implied compliment. So we went up together to the workshop, where he
exhibited with a craftsman's delight the delicate wheels, the engraved
plates and the little chased pillars, and even brought out a microscope
that I might appreciate the finish bestowed on the links of a fusee-chain
that was hardly thicker than a horse-hair.

As the day of the adjourned inquest drew near, my anxiety--intensified
by the consciousness of my guilty secret--grew more acute. My position
was, as Jasper had said, a difficult one in any case. But the really
alarming element in it was the introduction of Dr. Thorndyke into the
case. The suggestion factor in the suicide would probably remain
unsuspected by the coroner and the jury. But would it escape Dr.
Thorndyke's almost superhuman penetration? I could not believe that it
would, for the hint of it was plain in Mrs. Gregg's evidence. And if it
were detected, it would be revealed. Of that I had not the shadow of a
doubt. Dr. Thorndyke was a kindly, even a genial man; but he was Justice
personified. He would investigate the case with relentless accuracy and
completeness; and he would tell the truth to the last word. Of that I
felt certain. If he held my fate in his hands I was lost.

Of the view of the case taken by outsiders I had an unpleasant
illustration the day before the adjourned sitting. It was furnished by an
article in an evening paper that I had taken up to my room to read.
Glancing over its pages, my eyes was caught by the words "Lyon's Inn,"
and I read as follows:

"The new Lyon's Inn seems to be emulating the reputation of the old.
Within that ancient precinct occurred the famous Weare murder, forgotten
of the present generation, but immortalised in those rather brutal verses
of Tom Hood's:

"'They cut his throat from ear to ear,
His brains they battered in.
His name was Mr. William Weare,
He lived in Lyon's Inn.'

"The drama of Lyon's Inn Chambers, however, is not a murder--at least we
hope not. It is at present regarded as a suicide. But there are some
queer features in the case. There is, for instance, a handsome young
wife, who, it seems, flatly refused to live with her elderly husband from
the very wedding day; there is a series of unaccountable anonymous
letters; and there is a rumour of a hoard of precious gems spirited away
from the chambers, apparently on the very night when Mr. Lewis Otway
hanged himself from a peg on his bedroom wall. So the adjourned inquest,
which opens at 11 a.m. to-morrow, may elicit some curious revelations."

As I laid the paper down, a cold hand seemed to settle on my heart. The
writer had exaggerated nothing. He had not even stated all the accusing
facts. But even so, put quite impartially, the article exhibited me as
the central figure of the tragedy, as the visible agent of the sinister
events that had befallen in those ill-omened chambers. And could I say
that it misstated the case? Of the anonymous letters, indeed, and the
stolen gems--if stolen they were--I knew nothing. But the central fact
of the case was Mr. Otway's death. For that the coroner held me
accountable. And, though he misjudged the evidence as to the means, I
could not but admit that the coroner was right. The coming inquiry was,
in effect, the trial of Helen Otway.

Chapter XXVI--The Adjourned Inquiry

THE second sitting of the inquest was a much more portentous affair than
the first. The large room, or hall, in which it was held was nearly full
when I entered, and it was evident that a considerable proportion of the
occupants were spectators, attracted hither, no doubt, by the picturesque
comments of the newspapers. But besides these were a number of persons
connected with the inquiry. Behind the coroner's chair sat a group of
police officers. Mr. Isaacs and Mr. Hyams were again present; the
witnesses now included Mr. and Mrs. Campbell and a youngish man of a
pronouncedly Hebrew type, who sat next to them. The side of the long
table allotted to the press was filled by reporters--among whom I
noticed the gentleman employed by Dr. Thorndyke, and there was one or two
men whom I judged to be lawyers representing the various parties
interested.

My own counsel, Mr. Cawley, a shrewd-looking man of about thirty-five,
introduced himself to me as I took the seat reserved for me, and gave me
a few words of advice.

"I think," said he, "I have had all the necessary instructions from Mr.
Davenant, who, I see, is here." (I had had an instantaneous glimpse of
him as I entered the room.) "His impression is that the coroner is
disposed to put a certain amount of blame on you for your husband's
death. If that is so, you will have to be rather careful about answering
questions, especially any questions that the jury may put. Don't be in a
hurry to answer any doubtful questions. Give me time to object if they
seem inclined to go beyond the evidence."

I promised to bear his advice in mind, and then asked:

"Do you know if Dr. Thorndyke is giving evidence to-day?"

"I presume he is," was the reply; "but I notice that he is not present
and that his reporter is."

At this point the coroner laid down the papers which he had been looking
over, and opened the proceedings with a short address to the jury.

"The adjournment of this inquiry, gentlemen," said he, "which was decided
upon a fortnight ago, is amply justified by the mass of new facts which
are now available. These new facts bear chiefly on the property which, as
you heard at the last sitting, was believed to be missing; but in other
directions they throw a very curious light on the case. The first witness
will be Superintendent Miller, of the Criminal Investigation Department."

As his name was spoken, the officer rose and took his place by the table.
He took the oath, and disposed of the preliminaries with professional
facility, and then waited gravely for the coroner's next question.

"You had some knowledge of the deceased, Lewis Otway, and his affairs, I
understand?" said the coroner.

"Yes. I have known of his existence for more than twenty years."

"Will you tell us what you know of him?"

"I first made his acquaintance about twenty-three years ago. He was then
practising as a solicitor--chiefly as a police-court advocate--and was
known by his real name, Lewis Levy, which he subsequently changed to
Otway. After a time, he began to engage in business as a money lender,
and it was at this time that he took the name of Otway, Presently he
began to combine with money-lending a certain amount of trafficking in
precious stones, and it was then that the police began to keep a somewhat
close watch on him, with the idea that he might be also acting as a
receiver. We never really had anything against him, but we always had the
impression that he did some business as a middleman, or disposer of
stolen jewels.

"When I first knew him, he had living with him a young woman, named
Rachel Goldstein. She was nominally his housekeeper, but there were two
children--a boy named Morris, and a girl named Judith--whom he admitted
to be his. When he changed his name to Otway, Rachel Goldstein took the
name of Gregg, and used to pass as a Scotch-woman. The children lived
with their parents until they grew up, when Otway (or Levy) provided for
them in a way that made the police watch still more closely. Judith
married a David Samuels, who traded under the name of Campbell as a
dealer in works of art, especially goldsmith's work and jewellery; and
Morris Goldstein started as a dealer in antiques, with a shop in Hand
Court, and some workshops in Mansell Street, Whitechapel, where most of
the antiques were made.

"Now both these men were practical working jewellers. It was believed
that Otway financed them both, and it was known that he was the lessee of
the premises that they occupied. Moreover, as soon as they were
established in business, Otway gradually abandoned the money-lending, and
occupied himself almost exclusively in dealing in gem stones. He was an
exceedingly good judge of stones, and was quite successful as a
legitimate dealer; but the police had an impression that he did a
considerable amount of business that was not legitimate. I want it to be
quite clear that I am not making any accusations; I am referring merely to
an impression that the police had; it may have been quite a mistaken
impression, but I mention it because the matter bears directly on this
enquiry.

"The idea of the police, then, was that Otway dealt to a considerable
extent in stolen property. We supposed that he obtained this property--precious
stones, without the mounts--not from the thieves, but from the
receivers, and that he disposed of them with the aid of his son and
son-in-law. Both those men did a fairly large trade in high-class
jewellery. They did not touch commercial goods, but dealt exclusively in
work produced individually by skilled goldsmiths and jewellers, some of
whom they kept regularly employed. They also did a good deal of repairing
and re-setting, and their transactions were always with private
customers, not with the trade.

"Our idea of the way it was worked was this: We thought that when Otway
had got a collection of stolen stones he would pass on some of them to
these two men. They would then commission their craftsmen to make some
articles of jewellery, and would provide them with stones which had been
bought from the regular dealers, and the purchase of which could be
proved if necessary. Then, when the jewels were delivered--or even after
they had been sold to a private buyer--Campbell or Goldstein would take
the purchased stones out of their settings and replace them by stolen
stones. And a similar method could have been employed when jewels were
brought for alteration, repair or re-setting. This kind of substitution
would be very difficult to trace, for it is not easy to identify
particular stones and prove that they are not the ones referred to in the
dealers' receipts. As a matter of fact we never did trace any stolen gems
excepting on a single occasion; and then the evidence was not good enough
for us to risk a prosecution.

"And now we come to the case that concerns this enquiry. About a year ago
there was a burglary at the premises of Messrs. Middleburg, of New Bond
Street, the well-known jewellers, and, among other things, a collection
of valuable stones, worth about five thousand pounds, was carried off. It
was a small collection, but all the stones were individually of
considerable value, and several of them were remarkable, either in
respect of size or other peculiarities. The collection has never been
traced, and none of the stones has reappeared either here or abroad; and
the police have reason to believe that the whole collection is still in
this country.

"When these stones disappeared so completely, the police formed the
opinion that they had passed into the possession of Otway, and that he
was holding them up until an opportunity occurred to issue them one by
one. At this time he was living at Maidstone--he had been there a year
or two, but he had kept his old chambers at Lyon's Inn, and often stayed
in them for a week or more at a time. Last May or June he left Maidstone
and came back to his old chambers, and we then began to keep a closer
watch on him.

"About a couple of months ago he bought--or rather took on approval--from
Mr. Hyams, of Hatton Garden, a collection of stones of which I have
seen the list. These stones were carefully selected by Otway, and the
remarkable thing about them is that, taken as a whole, they are
singularly like the stolen collection. Among the stolen stones, for
instance, there were two large tourmalines, one green and one deep blue,
both table stones with step-cut backs; four emeralds, two step-cut and
two cut _en cabochon_; two large chrysoberyls, one brilliant-cut, green
and one en cabochon, yellow; one pale-blue diamond; and one pale-pink.
Now, the collection taken from Mr. Hyams includes tourmalines, emeralds,
chrysoberyls, and diamonds, of almost exactly the same size, colour and
cutting; and there are many other passable duplicates of the stolen
stones.

"When I became aware of this I inferred that Otway was making
arrangements to release the stolen stones, and I caused a still closer
watch to be kept on him; but up to the present not one of the missing
stones has been discovered. Now I understand that the Hyams collection
has disappeared; and if that is so, it seems probable that the person who
has taken it is also in possession of the stolen collection. But that, of
course, is only a guess."

"Quite so!" said the coroner, "and it is a matter that is more in your
province than in ours. Is there anything more that you have to tell us
that is relevant to the enquiry?'

"No, I think that is all."

"You will be remaining here, in case we want to refer to you again?"

"Yes; I want to hear Dr. Thorndyke's evidence, and, of course, I want to
hear the verdict."

"I am afraid you may have a long time to wait, for I have had a telegram
from Dr. Thorndyke saying that he has been detained at Maidstone, and has
missed his train. It is a great nuisance for us all. However, we will go
on with the evidence. The next witness will be Mr. Samuel Isaacs."

As the superintendent retired to his seat and Mr. Isaacs approached the
table, I reflected rapidly on what I had just heard. Dr. Thorndyke had
apparently been down to Maidstone. Was his visit connected with the
present enquiry? And if so, what was it that he had been investigating?
The locality suggested some kind of research in which I was concerned,
but at the nature of that research I could make no guess whatever.
However, there was no time to speculate on the subject, for Mr. Isaacs
had been sworn, and was ready to begin his evidence.

"You were solicitor to the deceased, I understand, Mr. Isaacs?"

"Yes; I am one of the executors of his will."

"In that capacity have you heard of any property said to be missing from
the chambers which he occupied?

"I have. Mr. Hyams has made a claim to have restored to him a parcel of
precious stones, valued at about four thousand pounds, which, he states,
was his property, and which he asserts the deceased had in his
possession."

"Have you examined the premises with a view to discovering that
property?"

"Yes, I have examined the premises very thoroughly, and have made a
complete inventory of all the effects of the deceased. I have gone
through the contents of the safe and all other receptacles, and have
checked the property which he had deposited at his bank. I have made a
most exhaustive search, but have failed to find any trace of the parcel
referred to, or of any precious stones whatever."

"Is it possible that you may have overlooked the parcel?"

"I should say it is impossible. My opinion is that the parcel is not on
the premises, and it certainly is not at the bank."

The coroner and a legal-looking gentleman at the table both noted down
this reply. Then the former said: "You are, no doubt, in a position to
tell us what was the state of the deceased man's affairs. Was there any
kind of financial embarrassment?"

"I should say, certainly not. The gross value of the estate--which is
entirely personal--is a little over seventeen thousand pounds: and the
liabilities, so far as they are known to me, are quite trivial."

"Can you tell us roughly, what are the main provisions of the will, that
is, if it has been proved?

"It has been proved. The principal beneficiary is the widow, who receives
eight thousand pounds, and the lease of the chambers in Lyon's Inn, with
the furniture and effects, and is made residuary legatee. Rachel Gregg--or
Goldstein--receives one thousand, and Morris and Judith, each two
thousand pounds, and the lease of the premises in which they respectively
carry on their business. There are a few small legacies--less than a
thousand pounds in the aggregate; so that there will probably be a
residue of about three thousand pounds, which will go to the widow."

"What is the date of this will?"

"It is dated the 10th June last."

"Do you know whether the provisions of the will were known to the widow,
or the other beneficiaries?"

"I do not know. They were not disclosed by me until probate had been
granted."

"Thank you," said the coroner. "I think we need not trouble you any
further, unless the jury wish to ask any questions."

The jury did not; but the legal-looking gentleman at the table did, and
springing up like a Jack-in-the-box, he addressed the coroner.

"As representing Mr. Hyams, sir," said he, "I should like to ask the
witness whether, in the event of the missing gems not coming to light,
their loss would be chargeable to the estate?"

The countenance of Mr. Isaacs hereupon assumed that peculiar expression
known to students of sculpture as "the archaic smile."

"You are asking me to admit liability," he replied; "I can't do that, you
know. There is a recognised procedure in these cases, with which I have
no doubt you are acquainted."

The questioner sat down with a jerk, and Mr. Cawley stood up.

"May I ask the witness, sir, whether, in the event of this loss being
adjudged to be chargeable to the estate, that loss would affect equally
all the beneficiaries?"

"No," replied Mr. Isaacs, "it would not. It would fall, in the first
place, on the residuary legatee. It would only affect the estate as a
whole in so far as the amount of the charge exceeded that of the
residue."

"Thank you," said Mr. Cawley. "There is one other question that I should
like to ask. The present will is dated the 10th of last June. Did the
execution of that will involve the revocation of a previously-existing
will?"

"Yes, it did. After his marriage deceased re-acknowledged the existing
will by a fresh signature and attestation, but he revoked this will when
he made the new one."

"Could you tell us who were the beneficiaries under that will?"

Mr. Isaacs fixed a thoughtful (and somewhat beady) eye on the coroner's
pewter ink-pot, and cogitated for a few moments.

"Is it necessary, sir, for me to answer that question?" he asked at
length, looking up at the coroner.

"Is the point material?" the latter asked, looking at Mr. Cawley.

"I submit, sir, that it may become highly important," was the reply.

The coroner reflected with his eyes fixed on Mr. Cawley. Then he nodded.
"Yes," he said, "I think you are right. We must ask you to answer the
question, Mr. Isaacs."

Mr. Isaacs bowed. "The beneficiaries under that will were Rachel
Goldstein, Morris Goldstein, and Judith Samuels."

"In what proportions was the property devised?"

"The bulk of the personalty was divided between Morris and Judith. Rachel
Goldstein--or Gregg--received two thousand pounds, but she was also the
residuary legatee."

"And the value of the estate?

"I can't tell you that. I only know what it is now."

Mr. Cawley sat down, and Mr. Isaacs retired to his seat. Then the coroner
pronounced the name of Mr. Hyams, and its owner took his place by the
table.

"We have heard, Mr. Hyams," said the coroner, "of certain property of
yours which was in the deceased man's custody. Will you give us a few
particulars of the transaction. When, for instance, did it come into the
possession of the deceased?"

"Two months ago--on the tenth of August, when the deceased called at my
office, and asked me to let him have a selection of stones for a special
purpose. He said that he had an opportunity of disposing of a number of
pieces of jewellery to a wealthy American gentleman, and that he had
discovered an extremely clever artist whom he proposed to commission to
make them. They were to be important pieces, chiefly pendants, brooches,
and bracelets. The stones were to be exceptional in size and quality, and
he wanted an assortment for Mr. Campbell--who was conducting the
transaction--to show the intending purchaser. He had a list in his
pocket-book, which he referred to as he made his selection from my stock.
The stones which he selected were rather unusual--the sort of stones
that appeal to collectors and connoisseurs, rather than ordinary wearers
of jewels. And some of them were very valuable; one ruby alone that he
took was worth fifteen hundred pounds. The total value of the parcel that
he carried away with him was four thousand two hundred pounds."

"I understand that he did not pay you for them?"

"No; he was not proposing to keep them all. They were a selection to show
to the customer. I made out a full list, and he signed a receipt at the
foot of it. I had known deceased for many years, and had often had
similar dealings with him."

"And did he never return these stones, or any part of the collection?"

"No. From the time that he left my office with the stones in his pocket I
never saw him or heard from him again."

This was the sum of Mr. Hyams' evidence; and when he had retired the name
of Judith Samuels was called. The new witness took her place at the
table, and, after the usual preliminaries, proceeded to give her
evidence.

"I am the wife of David Samuels who trades under the name of Donald
Campbell. He is a dealer in works of art, principally goldsmith's work
and jewellery. He is a practical jeweller himself, but most of the
alterations and repairs are put out. The new work that he sells, or which
is commissioned by customers, is executed for him by independent
goldsmiths, not by workmen employed by him."

"You visited the deceased on the night preceding his death, I understand,
is that so?"

"Yes. I came to his chambers about half-past six, and left about seven
o'clock."

"Did you notice anything unusual in his manner or appearance?"

"He was not looking very well, and he seemed rather depressed but he
brightened up as we talked. He was very much interested in the business
which I had come to discuss."

"What was the nature of that business?"

"It was connected with a collection of stones that he had got on approval
from Mr. Hyams to carry out a commission that he expected to get from a
very wealthy American gentleman, to whom he had an introduction. He did
not disclose the name of the gentleman, but it was understood that if he
secured the commission, my husband should conduct the negotiations, and
get the work executed."

"Did you gather that he had the stones in his possession?"

"Yes; he showed them to me. They were in a small wooden box, the
different kinds of stones wrapped up separately in little paper packets.
He took the box from a deed-box on the table by his bed-side, and put it
back there when he had shown me the stones."

"Did you make any arrangements as to the disposal of these stones?"

"No final arrangements. He advised that we should get some of our artist
goldsmiths to submit designs for the customer to see; and he suggested
that my husband should ask Mrs. Otway to design and execute a pendant to
take some of the finest stones."

"Mrs. Otway!" exclaimed the coroner. "What Mrs. Otway do you refer to?"

"I mean Helen Otway, the wife of the deceased."

"Are we to understand that Mrs. Otway is a designer of jewellery?"

"She is not only a designer; she is a practical goldsmith, and a very
clever one too. My husband admires her work exceedingly and has paid her
some very high prices. He paid her, for instance, twenty-five guineas for
a set of silver tea-spoons."

The looks of astonishment that the coroner, the jury, and the press-men
bestowed on me might, in other circumstances, have flattered my vanity.
Now, I could see that Mrs. Campbell, without (so far as I knew) departing
one single jot from the truth, was enveloping me in the most hideous
entanglements.

After a pause--filled in with strenuous note-taking--the coroner again
addressed the witness. "It has been given in evidence that the deceased
had received a number of anonymous letters. Do you know anything about
these letters?"

"I know nothing beyond what I heard when the evidence was given."

"Have you any means of judging who wrote these letters?"

"I have heard the evidence, and I can make a pretty good guess who wrote
them."

"That is not quite what I mean. Have you any information about them other
than what you gathered from the evidence?"

"No; I never heard of them until then."

This concluded Mrs. Campbell's evidence. When she had retired Mrs. Gregg
was recalled and questioned concerning the missing stones.

"Did you know that deceased had these stones in his possession?"

"Yes. He showed them to me on one occasion, and I often saw him looking
at them. He was very fond of precious stones. He used to set them out on
a small square of black velvet, and try them in different lights, and
look at them through a magnifying glass."

"When did you last see these stones?"

"After Mrs. Campbell--that is the last witness--had left and just
before Mrs. Otway arrived. Deceased was then sitting up in bed looking at
a large green stone. I reminded him that Mrs. Otway was due at eight, and
he then put the stones back in their box, and put the box away in the
deed-box that was on the table."

"When did you first learn that the stones were missing?"

"The day after the discovery that the deceased had committed suicide,
when Mrs. Otway came to the chambers with Mr. Hyams and the coroner's
officer. She came to search for the anonymous letters, and she went
straight to the deed-box, and there they were. But the stones were not
there. I saw her take all the things out of the deed box for Mr. Hyams to
see and there were no stones there."

"Thank you." said the coroner "That will do. We must now, gentlemen, see
if Mrs Otway can give us any further information."

I once more took my place at the table and was again sensible of a
generally heightened curiosity on the past of the jury and the
spectators.

"We may as well dispose of the question of the missing stones," said the
coroner; "for though it does not affect our enquiry directly but is
rather the business of the police, it seems to have an important,
indirect bearing. You have heard, Mrs. Otway, the evidence of Judith
Samuels, and Rachel Goldstein--or Gregg. Can you throw any light on the
disappearance of these stones?"

"No, I cannot."

"Did you know that deceased had these valuable stones in his possession?"

"No; I never heard of the stones until Mr. Hyams called on me on the
evening of the day on which Mr. Otway's death was discovered."

"Do you know, or have you any idea, where those stones are now?"

"I do not know, and I have no idea where they are."

"Did you know that deceased was a dealer in precious stones?"

"No; my father told me that deceased collected gem-stones, and that he
sometimes had dealings in them. But I supposed that he was merely a
collector, not a professional dealer."

"How long had you known deceased when you married him?"

"I had known of his existence about a year, but I had hardly ever spoken
to him. He was virtually a stranger to me."

"Had you never heard of the suicidal tendency in his family?"

"Never until the night preceding his death, when he told me."

"It has been stated that you are a practical goldsmith, and that you have
executed work for Mr. Samuels, or Campbell. Is that true?"

"I work as a goldsmith and I have sold some of my productions to Mr.
Campbell; but I have never been employed by him. I work as an independent
artist."

"Has he ever supplied you with precious stones?"

"No. I purchase my own materials."

"Have you ever done any alterations or resettings for him?"

"No. I have done no work of any kind for him, or anyone else. I work on
my own account, and sell what I make."

The coroner nodded, and glanced over his notes. After a pause he asked:
"At what time on the night of your visit to deceased did you leave his
chambers?"

"A little before ten o'clock."

"What was the condition of deceased when you left? Did he seem
particularly depressed or worried?"

"He was asleep when I left."

"Asleep!" exclaimed the coroner, "How long had he been asleep?"

"Not very long; perhaps a quarter of an hour. When he took his usual dose
of veronal he asked me to stay with him until he went to sleep, and I did
so."

"I see that the housekeeper states that when she entered the living-room
in the morning, the bedroom door was wide open, and the gas full on. What
was the condition of affairs when you left?"

"The gas was full on, and I did not shut the bedroom door. I was not
aware that the housekeeper had gone to bed and assumed that she would
look in on deceased and make what arrangements were usual for the night."

"But if you had turned down the gas, and shut the bedroom door, that
would have prevented the house keeper from going to deceased."

"No. It did not appear to matter either way."

"When you went away, did you leave your hand-bag behind?"

"Yes, I had hung it on the back of my chair, and when I got up to go, I
forgot about it."

"When did you discover that you had left it behind?"

"I first remembered it when I halled a cab at the corner of Holywell
Street to take me home."

"Why did you not then go back for it?"

"I did not like to disturb Mrs. Gregg and deceased, as it was so late."

"Was your purse in the bag?"

"Yes; but that was of no consequence. I knew there would be someone
sitting up who could pay the cabman."

"The housekeeper has told us that you came to fetch the bag on the
following day."

"Yes, in the afternoon, about three. It was then that I first heard of
Mr. Otway's death."

"The housekeeper states that, when she told you what had happened, you
fell down in a dead faint. Is that so?"

"Yes. It gave me a great shock, especially as Mrs. Gregg told me the bad
news so very abruptly."

"Were you expecting to hear that the deceased had committed suicide?"

"No; the subject was not in my mind."

"Is that not rather remarkable, having regard to your conversation with
deceased on the previous night?"

"I don't think so. That conversation had certainly given me the
impression that there was a danger that deceased might be driven to
suicide if this persecution were continued. But I had not supposed that
the danger was immediate."

"And that pitiful letter that you received from deceased? Did that convey
no note of warning?"

"At the time when I received it I was not aware of any predisposition to
suicide on the part of deceased. What he told me caused me some alarm,
but he became so much calmer after our talk that I thought the danger was
past, so far as the immediate future was concerned."

"And when you went to his chambers on the following day, you felt no
uneasiness as to what might have happened?"

"No, the possibility that anything unusual might have happened was not in
my mind at all."

"Well," said the coroner, "it seems to me rather remarkable that the
possibility did not even occur to you. However, we are dealing with the
facts, and if those are the facts, there is no more to be said. We will
now pass on to the consideration of the will. When did you first learn
that deceased had made a fresh will?"

"Four days ago, when I received a letter from Mr. Isaacs informing me of
the fact that I was one of the beneficiaries."

"Had deceased never mentioned to you that he had made a will in your
favour? Was there no stipulation on your part at the time of the marriage
that he should make such a will?

"No. Nothing ever passed between us on the subject."

"And had you no knowledge or belief that a will affecting you had been
executed?"

"I had no knowledge or belief that such a will had been executed nor any
expectation that it would be. I did not consider myself as having any
pecuniary claim on the deceased."

"Did you not receive an allowance from deceased?"

"No. He wished to make me an allowance, but I declined to accept it."

"But you were entitled to an allowance for maintenance. Why did you
refuse to accept it?

"I did not consider that I had any claim on the deceased so long
as I insisted on living apart."

"Then do we understand that you subsist entirely on your own means or
earnings?"

"Yes, entirely."

"Would you kindly tell us what those means and earnings respectively
amount to? And what are their sources?"

"I have a small private income--about sixty pounds a year--derived from
the realisation of my father's estate. I cannot estimate my earnings very
exactly, as I have been working only a few months. Probably I shall be
able to earn from a hundred and fifty to two hundred pounds a year, when
I am established. Up to the present I have sold all my work to Mr.
Campbell."

"How did you first become acquainted with Mr Campbell--or Samuels, to
give him his correct name?"

"Deceased recommended him to me when I first came to London. He stated
that he had known him for many years."

"Did you know that Mr. Campbell was related to deceased?"

"Not until I heard it here to-day."

The coroner considered a while, turning over his notes reflectively. At
length he said, "Before you sit down, Mrs. Otway, I should like to ask
you again about those anonymous letters. You have stated that you have no
idea who wrote them."

"That is so," I replied.

"When you discussed them with deceased, did neither of you arrive at any
conclusion as to who might have written them?"

"Deceased assured me that he could make no guess as to who had sent them.
Naturally, I could not, since all his acquaintances, whether friends or
enemies, were unknown to me."

"And you adhere to your statement that you know nothing about these
letters?"

"I know nothing about them whatever, excepting that deceased received
them; and that I have only known by his telling me."

"And with regard to your father's stick? You have stated that you have no
knowledge as to what became of it, or where it is now. Do you adhere to
that statement too?

"That statement was correct when I made it; but the stick has since come
to light."

"Indeed!" exclaimed the coroner. "When and how did that happen?"

"It occurred three days ago, when I went to look over the chambers in
Lyon's Inn. I chanced to open a large cupboard in the living room, and
there, on the single shelf at the top, I saw the stick lying at the back,
and hardly visible in the deep shadow."

"In-deed!" said the coroner, with a strong emphasis on the second
syllable. It was perfectly evident that he did not believe me, and he
made no secret of it. Nor were the jury any better impressed. In the
silence that followed my statement they whispered together eagerly, and
disbelief was writ large on the faces of them all.

"Had you any particular occasion to look over the chambers?" the coroner
asked after an interval.

"Yes; I had received a letter from Dr. Thorndyke saying that be wished to
make a survey of the premises and asking me to give him permission and
the necessary facilities to do so. I accordingly went, on the following
day, and fetched the keys from Mr. Isaacs to leave them at Dr.
Thorndyke's chambers. On the way, I called in at Lyon's Inn to see what
condition the chambers were in."

"And to plant the stick for Dr. Thorndyke to find, eh?" said one of the
jurors, with a truculent leer.

Mr. Cawley rose instantly to protest, but he was anticipated by the
coroner, who said severely: "That, sir, is quite out of order. Members of
the jury must not suggest motives or actions on the part of witnesses
which are not given in evidence. They may have their opinion but those
opinions must not be expressed until all the evidence has been heard and
the verdict has to be considered." Having administered this reproof, he
again turned to me.

"When you looked over the chambers, did you examine the other furniture
and receptacles. Did you, for instance look in the other cupboards and
drawers?"

"No."

"Only this one cupboard? Now what made you look into this cupboard in
particular?"

I saw the awkwardness of the question; but I also saw that a complete
explanation of my motives would land me on much more dangerous ground. My
immediate motive had been to ascertain what the inside of the cupboard
was like, and this was as much as I dared tell.

"I wished to see what kind of a cupboard it was--whether it had shelves,
drawers, or simply an open space."

"Did you take the stick out of the cupboard?"

"Yes, I took it out to examine it and see if the statement in the letter
as to the bruise, the blood-smear and the hairs was correct."

"And was the statement correct?"

"Yes; there was a bruise on the silver knob, and a thick smear of what
looked like dried blood, to which two hairs had stuck."

"Did those hairs look to you like hairs from your father's head?"

"I could not say. They might have been. They were short and looked as if
they had come from the head of a grey-haired man. My father's hair was
grey."

"What did you do with the stick?"

"I put it back in the cupboard."

"Why did you not bring it here?"

"I thought it best to leave it where I found it."

"Are the keys of the chambers in your possession now?"

"No; I left them at Dr. Thorndyke's chambers, and he has not yet returned
them. I left a note informing him that the stick was in the cupboard."

"May I ask why you did that?"

"Dr. Thorndyke mentioned in his letter that he was investigating the case
on instructions from the Home Office, and I wished to give him any
assistance that I could."

"But," the coroner exclaimed irritably, "don't you understand that this
court is investigating the case? That a coroner's court is the proper
authority to carry out such investigations? I don't know why this medical
specialist has been brought into the case at all. I have not asked for
his assistance. It is quite irregular and most unnecessary. And how did
this gentleman come to write to you?"

"He wanted to survey the premises, and someone--I don't know who--had
told him that I was the present lessee."

The coroner grunted in evident displeasure. The importation of Dr.
Thorndyke into the case was clearly a sore point, for he rejoined: "The
whole affair is highly unsatisfactory. I am not clear that you had any
right to give permission to any unofficial person to survey these
premises without obtaining my consent; or that he had any right to ask
you. The jury have surveyed the premises, and that ought to be enough.
However, we shall see what comes of these mysterious investigations.
Meanwhile, I think that is all we have to ask you, Mrs. Otway, unless the
jury have any questions to put."

The jury, warned, perhaps, by the result of the last question put by a
juryman, had no question to ask; and I returned to my seat by Mr. Cawley,
in time to hear Mr. Isaacs recalled.

"You have heard," said the coroner, "the very remarkable evidence given
by the last witness concerning the finding of a stick in a large cupboard
in the living-room of the chambers in Lyon's Inn?"

"I have."

"In your previous evidence you stated that you had made a minute search
of those chambers, and drawn up an inventory of their contents. Do you
remember whether, when you made that search, you examined that particular
cupboard?"

"Yes, I remember quite clearly that I examined it, and found it empty. I
have marked it 'empty' in the inventory."

"Are you sure that it was really empty? Is it not possible that this
stick lying in the shade on the shelf might have been overlooked?"

"It is quite impossible. I made a most exhaustive search, and I used an
electric torch for examining cupboard interiors. Moreover, the object
that I was looking for a little parcel of precious stones--was much
smaller, and less conspicuous than a walking stick. I could not have
missed a large object like that. And I have quite a clear recollection of
looking on that shelf--it was the only shelf in the cupboard--and
throwing the light of the torch along it. I had to stand on tip-toe to
see in distinctly, and so I suppose, had Mrs. Otway."

"Do you swear that the cupboard was empty when you examined it?"

"I swear that it was absolutely empty."

The coroner entered the reply in his notes, and then asked: "Did you
receive any communication from Dr Thorndyke respecting his proposed
survey of the chambers at Lyon's Inn?"

"He called to enquire in whom the tenancy of the chambers was vested, but
did not state why he wanted know. I told him that the widow was the
lessee. I don't know how he got her address. I didn't give it to him. I
may say that when I had finished the inventory I locked up the chambers,
and kept the keys until I delivered them up to Mrs. Otway."

"Thank you," said the coroner. "That is all I wanted you to tell us. And
that, gentlemen," he continued, turning to the jury, "appears to be the
whole of the evidence, with the exception of Dr. Thorndyke's; and the
question now arises, what are we to do? Let me explain the position, and
then you can decide on our procedure.

"This enquiry was adjourned to enable the police to make some
investigations in connection with it. On their application, Dr. John
Thorndyke, who, I may inform you is an eminent medico-legal expert, was
instructed by the Home Office to proceed to Maidstone to conduct an
exhumation of the body of the late John Vardon, the father of Mrs. Otway.
He was to make an examination of the body, and ascertain if possible,
whether the cause of the said John Vardon's death was as stated at the
inquest, or whether, as is hinted in these anonymous letters, he died
from the effects of violence. The question is an important one, but it is
more important to the police than to us. Then, it seems that the Home
Office further instructed this gentleman to carry out an independent
investigation into the facts of this case which we, in our humble and
inefficient way, are trying to investigate. It is an extraordinary
proceeding, and one that I do not in the least understand; but then I am
not a medico-legal specialist. I am only a mere coroner, and you are only
a mere coroner's jury. It is just as well that we should know our place.

"Well, I understand that Dr. Thorndyke has made an examination of the
body of Lewis Otway, and, as you have heard, he has made a survey of the
deceased man's chambers. We, also, have surveyed these chambers, but
apparently our survey doesn't count; and Dr. Shelburn, whose evidence you
have heard, examined the body within a few hours of death. It would seem
as if medical evidence were the last thing we want. Meanwhile I have had
a telegram from Dr. Thorndyke saying that he has been detained at
Maidstone, and has missed his train. I don't know when he will arrive
here. He may be here in a few minutes, or he may arrive in an hour or
two. It is for you to decide what is to be done. We have a great deal of
evidence to consider. We do not seem to need any more medical evidence,
and the question of Mr. Vardon's death is not of vital importance to this
enquiry.

"The question is shall we wait to hear Dr. Thorndyke's evidence or shall
we proceed to consider the great mass of evidence that we already have?
It is for you to decide, gentlemen."

The jury conferred for a couple of minutes, and then the foreman
announced their decision. "The jury say, sir, that we are enquiring into
the death of Lewis Otway, not John Vardon. They would like to proceed
with the consideration of the evidence without waiting for Dr.
Thorndyke."

"I am entirely with you, gentlemen," said the coroner. "I think that the
evidence that we have heard will prove amply sufficient to guide us to
our verdict; and we can still revise our opinions if the expert witness
should have something fresh to tell us."

Chapter XXVII--The Indictment

DURING the short interval, in which the coroner took a final glance over
his notes, there was a general stirring among the occupants and a
suggestion of preparation for the next act. Jurymen re-settled themselves
in their seats, reporters straightened their backs, and looked about
them, the police officers and the spectators conversed in low undertones.
At length the coroner laid on the table before him a single sheet of
paper--probably an abstract of the evidence--sat back in his chair, and
looked towards they jury; whereupon a deep silence fell upon the court,
and he began his address:

"It is hardly necessary to remind you, gentlemen, that we are assembled
for the purpose of ascertaining how, when, and by what means Lewis Otway
came by his death; but it may be necessary to remark that our enquiry is
not entirely concerned with the immediate causes of that death but is
also--and in fact, principally--concerned with the more remote
contributory circumstances. For in this case, the 'How, when, and by what
means' are simple enough. We have the testimony of an eye-witness who saw
the deceased hanging dead, from a peg on the wall, under conditions
strongly suggestive--in fact characteristic--of suicide; and we have
the testimony of the deputy-police surgeon that all the appearances were
those of suicide; and we have his expert opinion that the cause of death
was undoubtedly suicidal hanging. Indeed, we may say that the immediate
cause of death is self-evident, and that the whole of our enquiry is
concerned with the remote cause. We are not asking 'Did this man commit
suicide?' for the evidence of the first two witnesses settled that
question. We are asking ourselves, Why did he commit suicide? The
questions that we have to answer are, Was that suicide the spontaneous
act of the deceased, for which he alone is responsible? Or was deceased
driven to suicide by the deliberate, purposive, and malicious acts of
some other person, or persons? And if the latter appears to be the case,
Who is, or are, that person or persons, and what degree of criminal
responsibility attaches to such acts?

"Now we have at our disposal a considerable mass of rather miscellaneous
evidence, and, I think the best way to deal with it will be to sketch out
lightly the general course of events, and fill in the details later. The
deceased, Lewis Otway, is the central figure of our picture, and the
history that we have to trace, is his history. As to what we may call his
past, that does not much concern us. Among the Ancient Egyptians the
deceased was conceived as being brought before the tribunal of Osiris to
answer for his conduct during his earthly life. We are not a tribunal of
that kind. We are not trying Lewis Otway. If, as the police suspect, he
had feathered his nest with a certain amount of illicit plumage, that is
not our concern. Our interest in him is mainly confined to his connection
with a particular series of events which began with his marriage and
ended with his death. Let us now trace that succession of events, at
first in outline, and then in more detail.

"Lewis Otway first comes into our view on the occasion of his marriage.
As presented in the evidence of his widow, Helen Otway, that marriage
offers us the spectacle of an act of the most amazing folly. We see an
elderly man--and an unattractive one at that, as you must have observed
--marrying by compulsion, under threats, and greatly against her wishes,
a young woman, of very unusual physical attractions, of great talent, and
of exceptional mental gifts, and strength of character. You have seen
this lady, and have heard her give her evidence, and you can confirm my
description of her.

"It was, I repeat, an act of amazing folly. For she must, in any case,
have detested him. His conduct towards her was cruel and unscrupulous to
the last degree, and in marrying her he could not fail to introduce a
bitter enemy into his household. But there were added causes for that
repugnance to him which she has freely admitted. In the first place, she
believed that her consent had been secured by actual fraud. And in the
second place, Otway's action was the undoubted cause--whether directly
or indirectly, we need not enquire at this stage--of John Vardon's
death. So that our history opens with the tableau of an elderly man who
has married a young, beautiful, and clever wife, who loathes him, and has
abundant reason for loathing him.

"And now we pass on to the second scene--a scene almost more amazing
than the first. Within an hour or two of the marriage ceremony, the young
wife has repudiated the marriage, and demanded a separation for an
indefinite period--practically a permanent separation. But it is not the
demand that is so astonishing. The really astounding thing is that the
husband seems to have agreed to this demand without demur. Consider the
extraordinary inconsistency of his conduct. On the one hand we see this
man, in his eagerness to possess this beautiful girl, trampling without
scruple on her happiness, and her father's, oblivious of everything but
his own desires; on the other, we see him meekly submitting to a demand
which--natural as it may have been--the law would not have supported.

"Whence this sudden compliance? Why did he consent? He need not have
consented. The marriage was quite regular. No suit for nullity could have
been sustained, whereas he could have sued at once for restitution. Why
did he agree in this incomprehensible manner to surrender his
unquestionable rights?

"But this is not the only inconsistency. The conduct of the wife is even
more inexplicable. When Otway gave evidence at the inquest on Mr. Vardon
he omitted all reference to the loaded stick; which is not unnatural,
seeing that it was a highly incriminating circumstance. But that
suppression of a material fact made his evidence in effect, false
evidence. For the truth is, according to the terms of the witnesses oath,
the whole truth. Yet Helen Otway, when she gave evidence, confirmed this
virtually false testimony; and she also suppressed--or, at least,
omitted--the facts relating to the loaded stick. Her explanation is
that, feeling convinced that her father died from a heart attack, she did
not consider the stick incident of any importance. In estimating the
credibility of that explanation you will bear in mind that the verdict
was 'Death from natural causes,' but that the jury were not in possession
of the facts. You will also bear in mind that this woman had seen her
father lying dead, with a wound on his head, and this man, whom she
loathed, and detested, standing over the body, grasping a formidable
weapon. But whatever view you take of the explanation, the fact remains
that at the inquest she not only refrained from accusing him, but she
withheld a material fact which, if it had been disclosed, might have put
Otway in the dock on a charge of murder.

"Here, then, are two cases of incomprehensible inconsistency of conduct.
But they are only incomprehensible so long as they are considered
separately. Consider them together and a perfectly intelligible
suggestion emerges. The husband had the power to compel his wife to live
with him--and he did not exercise it. The wife had the power to expose
the husband to a suspicion of having committed a capital crime--and she
did not exercise it. The appearance is that of a surrender by each of the
power to injure the other; in short, of a bargain or agreement, involving
collusion to suppress evidence.

"But this suggestion of collusion raises another question, which we shall
consider later, but which we may note in passing. What was really the
cause of Mr. Vardon's death? Did he die from natural causes as the
coroner's jury believed and affirmed? Or was his death due to violence
inflicted by Otway? It is by no means clear that Otway did not kill him,
either inadvertently or with malice. And supposing Otway to have killed
Mr. Vardon, was the fact known to Helen Otway? If it was, Otway's easy
compliance is the more readily understood; for he would be absolutely in
his wife's power. But we shall consider these points at more length
presently, and perhaps we may get further light on them from the evidence
of Dr. Thorndyke--if he should arrive before the verdict is agreed on.

"The next phase of this drama opens about two months after the marriage.
On the 21st of June, the deceased received an anonymous letter, the first
of a series of seven, which were sent thereafter at fairly regular
intervals of about a fortnight. Now, let us consider those letters from
various points of view in relation to their probable authorship. You have
heard them read, and know their general purport. They all contain veiled
threats to make certain exposures. Some are vague and some are more
explicit, but there is a general crescendo note, culminating in the last
letter, which pretty openly makes an accusation of murder and threatens
criminal proceedings.

"First, what is the purpose of these letters? It is clearly not to levy
blackmail. They hold out menaces, but there is no suggestion of an
attempt to extort money. Those menaces are incomprehensible until we
supply an explanatory fact. The man to whom these letters were sent
suffered from a strong inherited predisposition to suicide. The very
obvious inference to which we are forced, in the absence of any other
explanation, is that the purpose of these letters was to convert that
latent tendency into action--to produce a state of mind in which the
deceased would be likely to take his own life.

"But that purpose implies knowledge on the part of the writer that this
inherited tendency existed, and consequently limits the possible
authorship to persons possessing such knowledge. The only persons known
by us to possess such knowledge are deceased's own family. His widow has
sworn that she had no knowledge of this tendency, and if you believe her
statement to be true, you will tend to exclude her from the possible
authorship of these letters.

"Next we have to consider the characters of the letters themselves. They
all bear the East-London postmark, but there is not much in that.
Anonymous letter-writers commonly post their letters in districts remote
from their own residences. Still, we must take it into consideration. The
two persons known to us who occupy premises in East London are Morris
Goldstein and Helen Otway.

"Then as to the style of the letters. They are rather markedly uneducated
in manner. The composition is ungrammatical and the phraseology vulgar.
But that does not help us much; for, on the one hand, none of the persons
known to us is grossly uneducated, and on the other it is usual for
anonymous letter-writers to disguise their personality. Obviously, it is
easy enough for an educated person to write an apparently illiterate
letter.

"The next point is a much more important one. We have decided that the
purpose of these letters was to produce in the deceased a state of mind
which would render his suicide probable. Now, what was the motive behind
that purpose? Who could have wished deceased to commit suicide, and why
should that person have wished it?

"The possible motives in this case are, in effect, the usual motives of
murder, with full premeditation, viz revenge, or hatred; direct profit;
and indirect profit by the elimination of an undesired person. Let us
consider each of these motives in relation to the known facts of this
case.

"First as to hatred or revenge. The only persons known to us are the
family of deceased and his wife. His family certainly had a grievance
against him, for the children were illegitimate, and the mother was
unmarried. But it was an old grievance, and the family appeared to be on
quite amicable terms. The children were quite well provided for, and
their mother continued to live with deceased. There was, indeed, a new
factor of possible discord. The deceased had married, and that marriage
was manifestly to the disadvantage of his family; a fact of which it is
necessary to take due account.

"When, however, we turn to the consideration of the wife, the facts are
much more striking. She had suffered grievous injuries from deceased. He
had ruined her life. He had virtually condemned her to perpetual
spinsterhood, since she would not live with him and she could not marry
anyone else. He had caused the death of her father; and she has admitted
that she had an unconquerable repugnance to him. That is actually known
to us; and there is a further possibility that he was actually her
father's murderer, though we must leave that out of consideration in the
absence of positive evidence. But on the evidence which is before us, you
will see that the motive of personal animosity is much more evident in
the case of the wife than in that of the family.

"We now come to the motive of direct profit, and the question that we ask
ourselves is, Who stood to benefit by the death of Lewis Otway? And as
soon as we ask that question, a very striking fact comes into view. The
first letter is dated by the postmark, the 21st of June. But on the 10th
of that month--only eleven days previously--deceased had made a new
will. By the provisions of that will Helen Otway stood to gain from eight
to twelve thousand pounds by the death of her husband.

"But did anyone else stand to gain by Lewis Otway's death? Observe that
we are still dealing with the same group of persons--the only persons
known to us in connection with the case. Well, the family of deceased
stood to gain by his death, though to a much smaller extent; but the fact
that must instantly impress us is the opposite effects of the new will on
the family and the wife respectively. The execution of the new will
involved the revocation of a previous will, which had left the bulk of
the estate to the family. The position of affairs is consequently this:
up to the 10th of June, the family, jointly, stood to benefit by Lewis
Otway's death to the extent of the bulk of his estate and the wife did
not stand to benefit at all; after the 10th of June the wife stood to
benefit by Otway's death to the extent of the bulk of his estate, and the
family to a relatively small extent.

"But the first of the anonymous letters was sent almost immediately after
the 10th of June. That is to say, it was sent almost immediately after
the family had ceased to be and the wife had become the principal
beneficiary.

"From the motive of direct profit we turn to that of indirect profit, by
the elimination of a person whose existence was a hindrance, a danger, or
an inconvenience, Is there anyone known to us who could have regarded
deceased in that light? We cannot attribute any such view to his family,
for, as I have said, they appear to have been on quite amicable terms,
and deceased seems to have maintained an interest in his children's
welfare to the last. But what are we to say with regard to the wife? She
was married against her wishes to a man unsuitable in age, uncomely in
appearance; a man whom she loathed--and had good reason to loathe--who,
while she repudiated him as a husband yet held her chained to him for
life; who stood inexorably between her, and any marriage which she might
wish to contract; whose existence condemned her for life to the dubious
position of a married woman who is not living with her husband. Think,
gentlemen, of this woman--young, handsome, clever, accomplished,
capable; think of what life might have been to her, and what it was with
this millstone hung round her neck! And then ask yourselves whether--apart
from all pecuniary considerations--she did not stand to gain
incalculably by his death; whether his elimination from her life would
not have opened to her the gates of a world of happiness and freedom.

"And it is here that the importance of that further evidence, which we
unfortunately have not yet heard, appears. For if it should now transpire
that Otway did actually kill John Vardon and that Helen Otway was privy
to the homicide, then there would be yet another powerful reason why she
should desire to be rid of him. But this evidence is not in our
possession and we must, therefore, leave this aspect of the case out of
our consideration. Nor is it essential. The facts within our knowledge
are amply sufficient to enable us to answer the question whether Helen
Otway's position would or would not have been improved by the death of
her husband.

"And now we come to something much more definite. Hitherto we have been
dealing with the question: 'Who might have written these letters?' We
shall now consider the more specific question, 'Who could have written
them?'

"There seems to be only one possible answer. The writer of those letters
had knowledge that was possessed by only two persons--the deceased and
his wife. One letter refers to something that was held back at the
inquest. But who knew that anything had been held back at the inquest? No
one, according to the evidence, but those two persons. Of course, it is
possible that there may have been some watcher secreted in that house at
Maidstone who knew that Lewis Otway had stood over the body of John
Vardon with a loaded stick in his hand. But the evidence before us is to
the effect that there was no one in the house but John Vardon, Lewis
Otway, and Helen Otway. Consequently, unless Lewis Otway wrote these
letters to himself, there is nobody, so far as we know, who could have
written them but Helen Otway.

"The last letter refers explicitly to the loaded stick, and even
describes its condition minutely and, as it appears, correctly. The
writer had, therefore, presumably seen the stick and very probably had
possession of it. But where was that stick? Deceased certainly did not
know where it was; the housekeeper states that she had never seen it
since that fatal morning, and Helen Otway has denied all knowledge of its
whereabouts. No one knew what had become of it.

"But if its disappearance was a mystery, its reappearance is a greater
mystery still. The account given by Helen Otway is obviously
unsatisfactory. She went to the chambers, for no very apparent reason.
When there she did not examine the various cupboards, drawers, and other
receptacles; but she went direct to this particular cupboard, unlocked
it, stood on tiptoe and looked on the shelf. And behold! there was the
missing stick. She took it out, examined it, and put it back. And she not
only put it back, but she went out of her way to inform a person who is
to give evidence on this enquiry that the stick was to be found in that
cupboard.

"Now, how did that stick get into that cupboard, and when was it put
there? You have heard Mr. Isaacs swear that it was not there when he made
out the inventory, and you will probably agree that he could hardly be
mistaken. A stick is a fairly large and conspicuous object, whereas he
was searching for a small and inconspicuous one. Clearly the stick was
put into the cupboard after his search was made. But when he had
finished, the chambers were locked up, and the keys remained in his
possession until he delivered them up to Helen Otway. Bearing these facts
in mind, you have to consider whether you can accept Mrs. Otway's
statement, or whether it is more probable that she took the stick to the
chambers, and put it into the cupboard herself.

"We now come to the incidents of that terrible night. What really
happened in those chambers on that occasion will probably never be known.
But the accounts that we have are full of sinister suggestions. We
cannot, for instance, but note the fact that after this, the first and
only visit from his wife, Lewis Otway made away with himself. Why he did
the dreadful deed on this particular: occasion, and at this particular
time, is not clear. According to his wife's account he was much calmer,
and more cheerful after their talk, and she left him peacefully asleep.
That is what she has told us. But what are the facts? Within an hour or
two hours after she had left, his dead body was hanging from that peg.
Nay! There is even a more dreadful possibility. The medical witness has
told us that death took place about eleven, 'But it might have been an
hour later or earlier.' So that it is physically possible--since Mrs.
Otway left the chambers about ten--that the suicide may have actually
taken place before she left. It is a horrible suggestion, and I should
not have made it but for the fact that there are certain appearances
which seem to support it.

"You must have been struck by the singular circumstance that when Mrs.
Otway took her departure she left the gas full on, and the bedroom door
open. You have heard her explanation, but we are not concerned with that
for the moment. The remarkable thing is that in the morning, the gas was
still full on, and the bedroom door still open. Now how could that have
been? If deceased was asleep when his wife left, then he must have
arisen, made his preparations, and finally hanged himself, not only with
the gas full on--which might easily have been the case--but with the
door open, which is improbable in the extreme. Men do not usually commit
suicide coram publico. Commonly suicides lock themselves in their rooms
or otherwise seek security from interruption. Yet this man, whose bedroom
opened directly into the living-room and whose housekeeper might still
have been about, cuts down the bell-rope, arranges the chair and hangs
himself, all in a brightly-lighted room with the door open. It is
certainly against common probabilities.

"But there are other suggestions of a similar tendency. If the
fully-lighted gas and the open door suggest a hurried and agitated
departure, so does the forgotten hand-bag containing the purse. And you
will have noted that Mrs. Otway remembered that she had left her purse
behind when she hailed a cab at the corner of Holywell Street. Now why
did she not go back for it? She was quite near Lyon's Inn. She could have
left the cab waiting, or brought it to the gate. She says she did not
like to disturb Mrs. Gregg. But she has also said that she thought that
Mrs. Gregg was still up and about. The explanation is not convincing, but
on the other hand there is a strong suggestion of dislike to the idea of
going back--a dislike which we can understand well enough if we believe
that the tragedy had already been enacted, and that the body was even
then hanging on the wall.

"Then, too, the disappearance of the precious stones points in the same
direction. They might have been taken when the deceased was asleep; but
the theft would have been far easier if he was dead. But, of course, we
cannot say with certainty that Helen Otway took the stones. We can only
consider the evidence. That evidence, however, is almost overwhelmingly
strong. It goes to show that the stones were in the deed-box within
half-an-hour of Helen Otway's arrival. There is no reason to suppose they
were then removed. It is practically certain that they were there when
she arrived, and they were never seen there or anywhere else after she
left. And there is a further corroborative circumstance. To ordinary
persons unmounted precious stones illicitly obtained are difficult to
dispose of. But this woman is not an ordinary person; she is a working
goldsmith and jeweller who buys her own materials and sells the finished
works to individual buyers. She could easily dispose of stolen gems in a
manner that would render them untraceable.

"The theft of these stones is not directly our business. It is that of
the police. But indirectly it is of great importance. For it furnishes
strong support to the suggestion that deceased was already dead when
Helen Otway took her hurried departure. But what is the importance of
that suggestion? The answer to that question will be found in the
consideration of certain further facts and certain points of criminal
law.

"First, we must notice that if deceased committed suicide while Helen
Otway was in the chambers, he must have done so with her consent and
connivance. But was it only a matter of consent? Is there not a
suggestion that some direct means may have been employed to induce or
compel him to commit suicide? On this point we have very little
information. But we have the evidence of Rachel Goldstein or Gregg that
she overheard the conversation between Helen Otway and deceased on two
separate occasions; and that on both occasions they seemed to be talking
about suicide. There seems to be a strong suggestion that some active,
direct, means were employed: persuasion, threats, or perhaps the
mysterious agency of suggestion. We cannot say that it was so; but it
would be in close agreement with the known circumstances and quite
consistent with the course of action exhibited by the anonymous letters.

"Supposing such active, direct means to have been employed, what degree
of criminal responsibility would their employment entail? With regard to
the letters, though the moral responsibility for their effect is beyond
question, I should hesitate to give an opinion as to the exact legal
position. But in the case of direct means there is no doubt at all. The
law on the subject is quite clear. Let us consider it for a moment.

"First as to the legal nature of suicide. In law, suicide is murder. It
has been expressly laid down that a person cannot commit manslaughter on
himself. But since suicide is necessarily murder, it follows that any
person who is accessory to suicide is accessory to murder. If such person
aids or abets any other person in so killing himself, that person is an
accessory before the fact, or a principal in the second degree in the
murder so committed; an accessory before the fact being defined as one
who directly or indirectly counsels, procures, or commands any person to
commit any felony or piracy which is committed in consequence of such
counselling, procuring, or commandment.

"Here, then, is the importance of the matter. The criminal responsibility
attaching to the anonymous letters may be involved in some obscurity; but
if it can be proved that any person counselled, procured, or commanded
the deceased to kill himself, that person can be dealt with as a
principal in the second degree in the murder of deceased. It is for you
to say whether, in your judgment, such action can be proved in the case
of any person, and if so, who that person is.

"There is only one more item of evidence that I shall refer to, and that
I shall touch upon only lightly. You have heard the witness Rachel
Goldstein state that when she informed Helen Otway that deceased had
hanged himself, Mrs. Otway fell down in a dead faint. You have heard the
explanation that Mrs. Otway gave, and you must decide what weight you
attach to it; whether you can regard this fainting as due to the shock of
an unexpected tragedy, or as the culminating effect of prolonged and
extreme nervous tension. In any case, its evidential value is but small.

"And now, as our expert witness has still not arrived, let us take a last
look over the evidence to see what material we have for our verdict."
Here the coroner paused, a laying a number of sheets of paper in a row
before him glanced rapidly through them.

I watched him with a dreadful fascination, even as a bird might watch the
stealthy approach of a snake, terrified, but despairing of any hope of
escape. So I had listened to this terrible summing-up--all false and
erroneous in detail, but so horribly true in regard to the central fact.
Through that dense fog of error and false appearances the coroner had
seen the essential truth; that Lewis Otway had gone to his death at my
bidding. Like some great spider he had wound around me a network of
horrid entanglements; and now he was about to wind up the final turns.

At length he looked up, and laid his hand on one of the papers. Then
he turned once more towards the jury and began his summary of the
evidence. And at that moment, unnoticed, apparently, by anyone save
myself, Dr. Thorndyke entered silently by a side door, and seated himself
on a vacant chair.

Chapter XXVIII--The Verdict

THE arrival of Dr. Thorndyke seemed to me to close the last avenue of
escape. The coroner had guessed at my guilty secret, but he only offered
his guess as a speculative possibility on which no decisive opinion could
be founded. But Dr. Thorndyke was not a guesser. If he had penetrated to
that secret he would offer no speculative probabilities, but definite
evidence, which would reduce the matter to certainty.

It was a terrible thought. Self-accusation--the denunciations of a
guilty conscience--had been dreadful enough. But there is a world of
difference between self-accusation in secret and a public criminal
indictment; between calling oneself a murderess, and standing in the dock
to answer the charge.

During the coroner's address I furtively watched Dr. Thorndyke. But I
could gather nothing from his face. As he sat motionless, with his eyes
steadily bent on the coroner, his expression denoted nothing but a grave
and concentrated attention. After the first quick glance round the court,
he never looked at me. What was in his mind I could not guess, though I
felt that he held my fate in the hollow of his hand.

"There is no need, gentlemen," the coroner began, "for us to go through
the mass of evidence again. We have looked over it as a whole, and we
have seen that certain striking suggestions emerge from it. In our last
glance we have to bring those suggestions to a definite focus. Our
inquiry deals with a man who committed suicide, but the appearances
suggest that that suicide was not a voluntary, spontaneous act, but was
the effect of a compelling force exerted by some other person.

"Who was that other person? The compelling force seems to have been
exerted by means of certain menacing letters. The person who procured the
suicide of deceased was therefore the writer of those letters. Now who
was the writer of those letters? The question is best answered by asking
certain other questions.

"First: Had deceased any enemies? Well, we know of one, and one only. His
wife, Helen Otway, has confessed to a deep repugnance to him. She had
suffered grievous injuries at his hands, and she resented those injuries
profoundly.

"Second: Who gained most by his death? Again, the answer is his wife,
Helen Otway.

"Third: Did anyone stand to gain in any other way by his death? The
answer again is yes; and the person who stood to gain--by liberation
from an intolerable bondage--was Helen Otway.

"Fourth: Who could have written those letters? who possessed the secret
knowledge that those letters exhibit? Only one such person is known to us
besides deceased himself. That person is Helen Otway.

"Fifth: Who was the last person who was with him before his death? Again
the answer is, Helen Otway.

"Sixth: Is there any evidence of the use of more direct means to procure
or compel this act of suicide? And if so, by whom do those means appear
to have been employed? The answer is that there is such evidence, and
that the person who appears to have used those means is Helen Otway.
There is evidence suggesting that she was actually present when the
suicide took place; there is evidence of a hurried flight and
unwillingness to return for the purse that she had left behind; there is
the open door, the lighted gas, and the missing jewels, which were in the
chambers when she arrived, and which were never seen after she left. And
then there is the mysterious stick which had vanished, and which
reappeared so strangely after her unexplained visit to the chambers.

"That, gentlemen, is in brief the whole of the evidence with the
exception of that relating to John Vardon's death. That evidence is
important to this enquiry; for if it should be proved that John Vardon
was killed by Lewis Otway, and that Helen Otway was privy to the
homicide, that would furnish a further motive for procuring the suicide
of deceased--the motive of the removal of the sole accomplice in a
serious crime. But that evidence is not vitally important, and it is for
you to decide whether you will still await the arrival of Dr. Thorndyke,
or whether you will proceed to consider your verdict on the evidence that
you have heard."

As the coroner concluded, Dr. Thorndyke rose and advanced to the table,
placing on an empty chair a small green-covered suit-case. The coroner
looked up at him sharply and with somewhat definitely unfriendly
recognition.

"How long have you been here, sir?" the former demanded.

"About seven minutes," Dr Thorndyke replied glancing at his watch. "You
were just beginning your summary when I entered."

"You should have announced your arrival immediately," said the coroner.
"However, as you are here, you had better take the oath, and give your
evidence without further delay."

The coroner's brusque, and even rude manner, did not appear to disturb
Dr. Thorndyke in the smallest degree. With the same impassive expression
and quiet, composed demeanour, he took the oath and disposed of the usual
preliminaries.

"We understand," said the coroner, "that you have made an examination of
the body of the late John Vardon."

"Yes, I proceeded to Maidstone on instructions from the Home Office and
conducted an exhumation of the body of John Vardon, of which I then made
an examination. The object of the proceeding was to ascertain whether the
cause of death had been correctly stated at the inquest."

"And what was the result of your examination--I don't think we want
minute details."

"I found that the cause of death was, as stated at the inquest by the
medical witnesses, failure of an extremely dilated heart. There was a
small wound on the right side of the forehead adjoining the temple, which
I examined very thoroughly. It was a glancing wound caused by a very
oblique impact, and was such a wound as might have been produced in the
manner described--by striking the corner of the mantelpiece in falling.
There was no injury to the bone nor to the brain or its membranes. It was
quite a trivial wound, and was not either wholly or partially the cause
of death."

"Could that wound have been caused by a blow with a loaded stick?"

"I should say not. It was an oblique tear in the scalp and was apparently
produced by some object more angular than the knob of a stick."

"Well," said the coroner, "that seems to dispose of the question of Mr.
Vardon's death. It is a thousand pities that it was not cleared up more
completely at the time. However, it is cleared up now; and that, really,
is all, I think, that we want you to tell us, unless you have some other
information. I understand that you had a sort of roving commission to
investigate the matter of this enquiry?"

"I received instructions to make certain investigations with a view to my
giving evidence at this inquest, and I have made such investigations as
seemed to me to be necessary."

"Yes, you have, in fact, held a sort of one-man inquest on your own
account. Well, the question is, do you suppose that you are in a position
to tell us anything that we do not know already?"

"I am quite sure that I am. If you will allow me to present a summary of
the facts in my possession--"

"I shall allow nothing of the kind. You will be good enough to answer
questions like any other witness."

Dr. Thorndyke bowed with the same immovable serenity, and the coroner
proceeded with his examination.

"Have you had much experience of cases of suicide?"

"I have."

"Have you had personal experience of any cases in which the suicidal act
was procured, or brought about, by acts of persons other than the
suicide, performed by them with deliberate intent?"

"Yes, I have had experience of several such cases."

"In those cases, what methods were used to procure the other person to
commit suicide?"

"The majority were cases in which two persons agreed mutually to commit
suicide together. In the less common cases in which the procurer did not
propose to commit suicide, the method employed was usually some form of
suggestion."

"Can you give us an instance of the employment of suggestion?"

"A very typical case occurred in my practice some years ago. A young man,
who had a strong inherited predisposition to suicide, was caused by
certain persons, who stood to benefit very considerably by his death, to
make away with himself. The method adopted was this: The victim was made
to believe that a certain Chinese jewel in his possession carried a
curse; that all previous owners of it had hanged themselves, and that the
appointed time for the suicide was made known by the apparition of a dead
mandarin. When by frequent repetitions of this story the suitable state
of mind had been produced, one of theses persons dressed himself in a
mandarin's costume and presented himself to the victim, with the result
that, within an hour or two, the latter hanged himself."

"In that case," observed the coroner, "the suggestion seems to have been
in two stages. Is that usual?"

"One could hardly call it usual, as the cases are so rare. But it is the
most obvious and effective method--to produce a suicidal state of mind
by preparatory suggestion, and then, as it were, to explode the mine by a
definite determining suggestion."

"Are you acquainted with the evidence which has been given in this
inquiry?"

"I have read a verbatim report of the first proceedings, and I have heard
your summary of the whole case."

"You have, then, read the evidence relating to the anonymous letters.
What opinion did you form as to the purpose of those letters?"

"I formed the opinion that their purpose was to impel deceased to commit
suicide."

"Do you consider that, in the case of a person predisposed to suicide,
they would be likely to produce that effect?"

"I should say that they would have a tendency to induce a suicidal state
of mind."

"And suppose such a person, having received a series of such letters, and
being greatly depressed by them, should be engaged--in his bedroom, the
last thing at night--in a conversation on suicide, his own suicide, and
that of relatives who had killed themselves, what would you expect to be
the effect of such conversation?"

"It would not be possible to predict the effect, but the tendency would
be to reinforce the influence of the letters."

"And what would be the condition of such a person in regard to his
susceptibility to further suggestion?

"His susceptibility to further suggestion would probably be increased."

"Looking at this case as a whole, by the light of your experience of
suicide, do you regard the death of deceased as the result of his own
spontaneous act or as due in part to the acts of some other person or
persons?

"I regard his death as due entirely to the acts of some other person or
persons."

At these terrible words my heart seemed to stand still. There was a
fearful certainty and confidence in Dr. Thorndyke's tone that chilled my
very blood. He did not guess. He knew. In the short pause that followed,
I set my teeth and waited for my condemnation.

"You consider that the suggestion conveyed in the letters and in that
conversation and by other possible means operated so as to convert
deceased into an automaton? Is that what you mean?"

"No. I do not consider that the letters or the conversation had any
effect in causing his death."

The coroner frowned, perplexedly. "I don't think I quite understand,"
said he. "There seems to be--if you will pardon me--some
self-contradiction. You state that the letters and the conversation would
tend to produce a suicidal state of mind; but yet, though the letters
were actually received and the conversation occurred, neither had any
effect in causing the death which followed them. Do I state the case
correctly?"

"Yes; quite correctly."

"Then I do not understand you in the least. You appear to be flatly
contradicting yourself. I think you will agree that we are not making
much progress."

"We are not making any progress at all. The examination has not elicited
a single, relevant fact."

"Indeed, sir!" exclaimed the coroner. "And, pray, whose fault is that?

"I suggest," Dr. Thorndyke replied, suavely, "that it is due to the
method of examination."

The coroner turned purple. "This is insufferable!" he exclaimed; "that a
witness should presume to instruct an experienced officer of justice in
the duties of his office! But I suppose we must be humble in the presence
of an expert. May I ask, sir, what you object to in my methods of
examination?"

"The lack of result," Dr. Thorndyke replied, "is due to the fact that
your examination has been conducted to support a particular theory; and
that theory happens to be the wrong theory."

"Again, I don't understand you," the coroner said, angrily. "No theory
has been advanced by me. Will you be good enough to explain what theory
you are alluding to?"

"I allude to the theory, which you seem to have adopted, that the
deceased Lewis Otway committed suicide by hanging himself from a peg on
the bedroom wall. That theory is erroneous. It is practically certain
that Lewis Otway did not commit suicide; and it is quite certain that he
never hung from that peg on the bedroom wall."

"But," exclaimed the coroner, "we have the evidence of a witness who saw
deceased hanging from that peg; and not only saw him, but cut him down
and found him to be dead."

"As a witness," said Dr. Thorndyke, "I am not concerned with the
testimony of other witnesses, but only with the facts as ascertained by
me."

"No doubt," retorted the coroner. "But we are concerned with the
testimony of all the witnesses; and the statement of this witness that
she saw the body hanging from the peg, and that she cut it down from the
peg, is a clear statement on a question of fact. If that statement is
true, deceased hung from that peg. If he did not hang from that peg the
statement is false. You say that he never hung from that peg. On what
facts do you base that statement?

"On the strength of the peg and the weight of the body of deceased. The
strength of the peg--that is, the maximum weight it was capable of
supporting--was under 175 pounds. But the body of deceased weighed 231
pounds--that is half a hundredweight in excess of the greatest weight
that the peg was capable of supporting."

"What method did you employ to measure the strength of the peg?"

"I used simple weights, which I thought preferable to a dynamometer for
purposes of evidence. These weights I had conveyed to the chambers, and I
carried out the experiment in the presence of Mr. Anstey, K.C., and my
assistant, Francis Polton. I hung from the peg a wooden tray, slung by a
chain, the total weight of which was ten pounds. On this tray I placed--with
great care to avoid shocks--two half-hundredweights. I then added
weights, five pounds at a time, until the total weight, including that of
the tray and chain, reached 170 pounds. This was evidently very near the
limit of what the peg would bear, for it was bending noticeably under the
weight; and when I added another five pounds the peg doubled under,
breaking half-way through. I have brought it with me for your
inspection." He opened the green suit-case and produced the peg, which he
handed to the coroner.

"You see," he said, "that, in spite of its massive appearance, it had
very little strength. It is merely a piece of thinnish, brass tube."

The coroner was impressed, but puzzled. "You consider," said he, as he
handed the peg to the foreman of the jury, "that the test is conclusive?"

"Quite," replied Dr. Thorndyke. "Clearly, a peg which breaks under a
weight of 175 pounds could not have supported a body weighing 231
pounds."

"Yes," agreed the coroner, "that appears to be undeniable." He again
reflected for a few moments, and then said: "I notice that you went to
the chambers provided with this apparatus. The suggestion is that you had
already a definite suspicion in your mind. Is that the case?

"Yes; I had already come to the conclusion that deceased had never hung
from that peg."

"Will you tell us what led you to that conclusion?"

"When I received instructions to investigate the case I proceeded to make
an inspection of the body, and it struck me, at once, that the
appearances were not quite in agreement with the alleged facts, which I
had learned from a verbatim report of the evidence. The amount of injury
to the structures of the neck was much less than I should have expected
in the case of so heavy a man, and the characteristic signs of death by
hanging were absent. It is my invariable rule, in all cases of suspicious
death, no matter what the apparent cause of the death may be, to examine
the contents of the stomach and the secretions. In this case the
procedure appeared to be necessary, and I made a careful examination of
the contents of the stomach. The examination disclosed the presence of
small quantities of veronal and alcohol, but when I tested for alkaloids,
I obtained from the stomach and its contents no less than twenty-three
minims of nicotine, the alkaloid of tobacco.

"Now nicotine--which differs from all other alkaloids but conein, the
alkaloid of hemlock, in being a liquid--is an intensely poisonous
substance. The fatal dose has not been exactly ascertained, but it may be
stated at not more: than five minims; that is, roughly, five drops. So
that the quantity of this virulent poison actually obtained from the
stomach of deceased was about four times the fatal dose. But this was
only a part of the quantity that had been swallowed, for the examination
was made ten days after death, by which time an appreciable amount of the
poison would have been lost by post-mortem diffusion. I also examined the
liver and other organs and the secretions, and in these I detected minute
quantities of nicotine. The evidence afforded by these minute quantities
is very important. Nicotine is a poison that acts with great rapidity--in
fact, with the exception of hydrocyanic acid (prussic acid) it is
probably the most rapidly-acting poison known. The importance, therefore,
of these minute traces of the poison in remote organs is this: their
existence proves that the poison entered the stomach during life--while
the blood was still circulating; and the minuteness of the quantity
absorbed proves that death occurred very rapidly--practically
instantaneously.

"But the very large quantity of the poison and the evidence of its almost
instantaneous effect created this dilemma: a witness had stated that she
saw deceased hanging from the peg; but since death was practically
instantaneous, he could not have hanged himself after taking the poison;
and obviously he could not have taken the poison after he had hanged
himself. This discrepancy, coupled with the absence of appreciable injury
to the neck, raised a doubt as to whether deceased had ever hung from the
peg at all. That doubt was increased by certain other circumstances.
There were, for instance, post-mortem lacerations of the hamstring
muscles and other muscles of the thighs, which could not be accounted for
in the case of a body which had hung vertically, fully extended. There
were faint impressions below the knees of some coarse-textured fabric,
not part of his clothing, and there was the condition of a length of red,
worsted rope by which deceased was said to have been suspended. Both ends
of this rope--which had formed part of a loop--had been cut through
with a very sharp instrument; and both ends were cut cleanly right
through. But this could not possibly have happened in the alleged
circumstances. If a body of this great weight had been suspended by two
thicknesses of a flimsy, woollen rope, and an attempt had been made to
cut that rope, the cutting instrument would not have passed right
through, but would have divided the rope until the remaining portion was
too weak to sustain the weight, and then that portion would have broken,
leaving a ragged end. Having regard to the great evidential importance of
the question, I decided to clear up the doubt, if possible, by examining
the peg itself. There are not many pegs which could carry this great
weight without either bending, breaking or pulling out of the woodwork,
and I thought it probable that an actual test with weights would settle
the question. I accordingly obtained the keys from Mrs. Otway, went to
the chambers and applied the tests as I have stated."

"If the deceased was not suspended at all," the coroner objected, "how do
you account for the marks of the rope on his neck?"

"He was suspended--or rather partially suspended. I looked about the
chambers for the probable means of suspension, and decided that this was
the knob of the bedpost at the right-hand side of the head of the bed. On
this side of the bed was a hard jute matting, the texture of which
corresponded exactly with the impressions on the knees, the faintness of
which is accounted for by the partial protection furnished by the
pyjamas. The procedure seems to have been this: the rope was secured to
the neck of deceased immediately after death, while he was lying on the
bed. It was then hitched over the knob of the bedpost and the body drawn
off the bed so that it was supported against the bedpost in a kneeling
position. This would account for the shallowness of the marks on the
neck, the impressions of the matting on the knees, and the post-mortem
lacerations of the muscles. With regard to these latter, it is evident
that the body was left suspended in an approximately kneeling position
for a good many hours--probably for the purpose of producing as deep an
indentation as possible on the neck--and that during that time cadaveric
rigidity became well established; so that when the rope was cut and the
body allowed to fall to the floor, the legs were found to have stiffened
and to be firmly set in the kneeling posture. As deceased was to be
represented as having hanged himself from the peg, it would be necessary
to straighten out the legs by force; but as the muscles were already
rigid, the forcible extension would tend to produce such lacerations as
were found. These lacerations were, of course, under the skin and would
not be noticeable excepting on close examination."

"Is that the whole of your evidence?" the coroner asked, as Dr. Thorndyke
paused.

"It is the whole of my evidence concerning the immediate circumstances of
the death of Lewis Otway. I have certain other information, but you will
probably not consider it of much importance to the enquiry. I have
examined the two hairs that were found adhering to Mr. Vardon's stick.
They were not his hairs. As a matter of fact, the wound on his head was
on a part in which there was no hair; but in any case, these were not his
hairs. One of these was apparently a hair of Lewis Otway's--probably
taken from his hair brush. His hair was white, but was dyed with a stain
containing sulphide of lead. This hair was of a similar character and
stained with the same material. The other was white and appeared to be a
woman's hair. It was cut at both ends, and was evidently part of a much
longer hair. I have also made some enquiries concerning the anonymous
letters. Mrs. Otway consulted me about them a month or two back, and I
promised her to look into the matter, and did so. I collected very few
facts, but if I may look at the letters, I can tell you at once whether
those facts throw any light on the authorship of these letters."

"It really is not of much importance to us," said the coroner, "though it
may be important evidence in another place. Still, you may as well look
at the letters."

He handed the bundle of letters to Dr. Thorndyke, who examined each of
them closely, holding them up to the light to inspect the watermark
and comparing them with some other letters which he produced from his
pocket.

"I think," said he, as he returned the letters to the coroner, "there is
no doubt that all these letters were written by Morris Goldstein. I have
several letters which were received from and signed by him, which are
identically similar in character. All are typed on the same foreign paper
--made in Sweden--with an old Calligraph machine which had three
type-bars slightly bent--the lower-case 'g' and 's' and the capital 'O.'
I have further evidence on the subject, if you care to hear it."

The foreman of the jury interposed at this point. "We don't want to hear
any more about those letters. If deceased did not commit suicide, the
letters don't matter."

"They will matter a good deal in another court," said, the coroner, "but
I agree with you that they do not affect our probable verdict; but there
is one question to which we may as well have a definite answer, and then
we need not detain Dr. Thorndyke any longer. You have told us, sir, that
the immediate cause of Lewis Otway's death was nicotine poisoning. Can
you say whether the poison was taken by deceased himself, or whether it
was administered by some other person?"

"The medical evidence proper furnishes no answer to that question, but
from the attendant circumstances I infer that the poison was administered
by some other person--probably while deceased was asleep. But that is
only an opinion, based on the circumstantial evidence."

"Exactly. It is really a question for the jury. And now I don't think we
need trouble you any further." The coroner bowed, a little stiffly, and
as Dr. Thorndyke walked back to his chair, he once more faced the jury.

"Well, gentlemen," said he, "you have heard Dr. Thorndyke's very
remarkable evidence, and you will see that it compels us completely to
revise our views of the case. The suicide by hanging, which we have been
considering at such length, is seen to be an illusion, carefully,
elaborately and ingeniously prepared. The question now is, was there a
suicide at all? The cause of death was poisoning by nicotine, and death
was almost instantaneous. Is this, then, a case of suicidal poisoning or
of homicide?

"It is unnecessary for me to dwell on the suggested probabilities. You
have heard a witness swear, in the most circumstantial manner, that she
saw deceased hanging from a peg, and that she cut the body down. You now
know that deceased could never have hung from that peg. That statement
was false. But what was the object of that false statement? Its object
must be considered in conjunction with the illusory appearances produced
by an elaborate set of preparations--the cord-marks on the neck, the
overturned chair, the end of the rope fastened to the peg--a set of
preparations, the only intelligible object of which seems to be the
concealment of the real cause of death. And then there is a further
series of preparations revealed by the anonymous letters. These we now
have reason to believe were written and sent by Morris Goldstein. Our
reason for connecting Mrs. Otway with those letters was based on Rachel
Goldstein's statement that no one was in the house at Maidstone but Mrs.
Otway, and her husband and father. But we can no longer accept that
statement. The suggested probability is that she was in the house, and
that she either saw, or heard enough to gather what had taken place. In
that case we seem to detect a carefully-laid plan to procure the suicide
of the deceased, and throw suspicion on his wife; and when the suicide
failed to occur, the alternative of poison would seem to have been
adopted.

"I must draw your attention to the circumstances existing at the time of
the tragedy. In deceased's chambers were precious stones to the value of
over four thousand pounds. Possibly there were stolen gems of a somewhat
greater aggregate value. It is highly probable that Rachel Goldstein knew
of the deceased's letter to his wife, for as he was bed-ridden at the
time, the letter would have been posted by her, and could easily have
been opened and read. The time of the interview was arranged by her so
that Mrs. Otway should be the last visitor.

"Here then is a group of circumstances furnishing a perfect opportunity
for the carrying out of the plan. The gems were within reach, and a
visitor was expected on whom could be thrown the suspicion of the theft,
and the responsibility of the apparent suicide.

"As to the motive, apart from the theft of the gems, we must remember
that here was an illegitimate Jewish family into which had been
introduced a legitimate Gentile wife. Her arrival had affected the
interests of the family injuriously, and if a reconciliation between
husband and wife should have occurred, those interests would have been
still more unfavourably affected.

"But we are not called on to go deeply into the question of motive. This
is a coroner's inquest, and our business is to decide how and by what
means deceased met with his death. That decision is with you, gentlemen.
You have heard the evidence, and I shall now leave you to consider your
verdict."

As the coroner ceased speaking, and silence fell upon the court I allowed
myself, for the first time, to think of my own position. Previously I had
not dared; for when Dr. Thorndyke had made his dramatic statement, the
revulsion of feeling had been so great that I had much ado to restrain
myself from bursting into hysterical tears or laughter. But now I was
more calm, and could think upon the change that a few magic words had
wrought in my condition. I was free--free in body and soul. My imagined
guilt had been a delusion; the silent willing and suggestion, a myth. I
had never had any conscious intention to procure Lewis Otway's suicide;
and no suicide had been procured. The death of that wretched man--my
evil genius--had been brought about by no act of mine, conscious or
unconscious. I was guiltless, I was free.

The jury took but a short time to consider their verdict. In a few
minutes the foreman intimated that they had come to a unanimous decision.
The coroner then formally put the question.

"Have you considered the evidence, gentlemen, and are you agreed upon
your verdict?"

"We are," replied the foreman. "Our verdict is that the deceased, Lewis
Otway, met his death as the result of a poisonous dose of nicotine
administered to him by Rachel Goldstein."

"Do you say that the poison was administered inadvertently or with
malice?"

The foreman consulted his colleagues, and then replied; "With malice."

"That," said the coroner, "amounts to a verdict of wilful murder against
Rachel Goldstein; and I may say, that I am entirely in agreement with
you."

As the coroner concluded, I looked at Mrs. Gregg. Her face was set, and
had turned a horrible, livid grey. Presently she rose slowly from her
chair, and looked furtively over her shoulder; and as she did so she
looked into the face of Superintendent Miller.

EPILOGUE

THE history that I have set forth in the foregoing pages is the history
of an episode. That episode opened with instantaneous abruptness; and in
an instant it came to an abrupt end. The fatal words that I had overheard
in my father's house had been as an incantation that had cast over me a
malign spell. In the moment in which they were spoken the sinister shadow
of Lewis Otway had fallen upon my life: and in the long months that
followed it had never lifted. Even the death of the unhappy wizard had
left the spell still working, the shadow deepening from hour to hour,
until Dr. Thorndyke, like a benevolent magician, had spoken the
counter-charm. Then, in an instant, the spell was broken; the shadow
lifted and lifted for ever.

And with the breaking of the spell and the lifting of the shadow, the
episode is at an end, and my tale is told. Yet I am loth to lay down my
pen until the reader who has followed my pilgrimage through the valley of
the shadow has been given at least one glimpse of me straying in the
sunshine, "along the meads of asphodel." I would crave his attendance at
the sombre, old church of St. Clement Danes, where, on a bright May
morning, was spoken another incantation that opened to four faithful
hearts the gates of a Paradise of life-long happiness and love. I would
bid him admire sweet Peggy, tripping forth, all smiles and blushes,
beside her stalwart husband to foregather with Jasper and me and our
friends from Wellclose Square and the Temple in the ancient rooms in
Clifford's Inn.

But my tale is told. The curtain is rung down; and I may not linger
before it, babbling over the extinguished footlights on an empty
stage--perchance to an empty house.


THE END


?JOHN THORNDYKE'S CASES

RELATED BY CHRISTOPHER JERVIS, M.D.

AND EDITED BY R. AUSTIN FREEMAN
AUTHOR OF "THE GOLDEN POOL," ETC.

WITH SIX ILLUSTRATIONS BY H. M. BROCK, AND
NINE FROM PHOTOGRAPHS, ETC.


[Illustration: PROFESSOR POPPELBAUM IS ENLIGHTENED.]


TO MY FRIEND

FRANK STANDFIELD

IN MEMORY OF MANY A PLEASANT EVENING
SPENT WITH MICROSCOPE AND CAMERA
THIS VOLUME IS DEDICATED




PREFACE


The stories in this collection, inasmuch as they constitute a somewhat
new departure in this class of literature, require a few words of
introduction. The primary function of all fiction is to furnish
entertainment to the reader, and this fact has not been lost sight of.
But the interest of so-called "detective" fiction is, I believe, greatly
enhanced by a careful adherence to the probable, and a strict avoidance
of physical impossibilities; and, in accordance with this belief, I have
been scrupulous in confining myself to authentic facts and practicable
methods. The stories have, for the most part, a medico-legal motive, and
the methods of solution described in them are similar to those employed
in actual practice by medical jurists. The stories illustrate, in fact,
the application to the detection of crime of the ordinary methods of
scientific research. I may add that the experiments described have in
all cases been performed by me, and that the micro-photographs are, of
course, from the actual specimens.

I take this opportunity of thanking those of my friends who have in
various ways assisted me, and especially the friend to whom I have
dedicated this book; by whom I have been relieved of the very
considerable labour of making the micro-photographs, and greatly
assisted in procuring and preparing specimens. I must also thank Messrs.
Pearson for kindly allowing me the use of Mr. H. M. Brock's admirable
and sympathetic drawings, and the artist himself for the care with which
he has maintained strict fidelity to the text.

R. A. F.

Gravesend,
_September 21, 1909_.




CONTENTS


I.      THE MAN WITH THE NAILED SHOES
II.     THE STRANGER'S LATCHKEY
III.    THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AT LARGE
IV.     THE BLUE SEQUIN
V.      THE MOABITE CIPHER
VI.     THE MANDARIN'S PEARL
VII.    THE ALUMINIUM DAGGER
VIII.   A MESSAGE FROM THE DEEP SEA




ILLUSTRATIONS


PROFESSOR POPPLEBAUM IS ENLIGHTENED, _Frontispiece_
PLAN OF ST. BRIDGET'S BAY
THE SERGEANT'S SKETCH
FLUFF FROM KEY-BARREL
THE STRANGER IS RUN TO EARTH
TRANSVERSE SECTIONS OF HUMAN HAIR
THORNDYKE'S STRATEGY
THE DISCOVERY
THE MOABITE CIPHRE
THE PROFESSOR'S ANALYSIS
THE APPARITION IN THE MIRROR
THE ALUMINUM DAGGER
THE SAND FROM THE MURDERED WOMAN'S PILLOW
HUMAN HAIR, SHOWING ROOTS
SUPERINTENDENT MILLER RISES TO THE OCCASION




JOHN THORNDYKE'S CASES


I

THE MAN WITH THE NAILED SHOES


There are, I suppose, few places even on the East Coast of England more
lonely and remote than the village of Little Sundersley and the country
that surrounds it. Far from any railway, and some miles distant from any
considerable town, it remains an outpost of civilization, in which
primitive manners and customs and old-world tradition linger on into an
age that has elsewhere forgotten them. In the summer, it is true, a
small contingent of visitors, adventurous in spirit, though mostly of
sedate and solitary habits, make their appearance to swell its meagre
population, and impart to the wide stretches of smooth sand that fringe
its shores a fleeting air of life and sober gaiety; but in late
September--the season of the year in which I made its acquaintance--its
pasture-lands lie desolate, the rugged paths along the cliffs are seldom
trodden by human foot, and the sands are a desert waste on which, for
days together, no footprint appears save that left by some passing
sea-bird.

I had been assured by my medical agent, Mr. Turcival, that I should find
the practice of which I was now taking charge "an exceedingly soft
billet, and suitable for a studious man;" and certainly he had not
misled me, for the patients were, in fact, so few that I was quite
concerned for my principal, and rather dull for want of work. Hence,
when my friend John Thorndyke, the well-known medico-legal expert,
proposed to come down and stay with me for a weekend and perhaps a few
days beyond, I hailed the proposal with delight, and welcomed him with
open arms.

"You certainly don't seem to be overworked, Jervis," he remarked, as we
turned out of the gate after tea, on the day of his arrival, for a
stroll on the shore. "Is this a new practice, or an old one in a state
of senile decay?"

"Why, the fact is," I answered, "there is virtually no practice.
Cooper--my principal--has been here about six years, and as he has
private means he has never made any serious effort to build one up; and
the other man, Dr. Burrows, being uncommonly keen, and the people very
conservative, Cooper has never really got his foot in. However, it
doesn't seem to trouble him."

"Well, if he is satisfied, I suppose you are," said Thorndyke, with a
smile. "You are getting a seaside holiday, and being paid for it. But I
didn't know you were as near to the sea as this."

We were entering, as he spoke, an artificial gap-way cut through the low
cliff, forming a steep cart-track down to the shore. It was locally
known as Sundersley Gap, and was used principally, when used at all, by
the farmers' carts which came down to gather seaweed after a gale.

"What a magnificent stretch of sand!" continued Thorndyke, as we reached
the bottom, and stood looking out seaward across the deserted beach.
"There is something very majestic and solemn in a great expanse of
sandy shore when the tide is out, and I know of nothing which is capable
of conveying the impression of solitude so completely. The smooth,
unbroken surface not only displays itself untenanted for the moment, but
it offers convincing testimony that it has lain thus undisturbed through
a considerable lapse of time. Here, for instance, we have clear evidence
that for several days only two pairs of feet besides our own have
trodden this gap."

"How do you arrive at the 'several days'?" I asked.

"In the simplest manner possible," he replied. "The moon is now in the
third quarter, and the tides are consequently neap-tides. You can see
quite plainly the two lines of seaweed and jetsam which indicate the
high-water marks of the spring-tides and the neap-tides respectively.
The strip of comparatively dry sand between them, over which the water
has not risen for several days, is, as you see, marked by only two sets
of footprints, and those footprints will not be completely obliterated
by the sea until the next spring-tide--nearly a week from to-day."

"Yes, I see now, and the thing appears obvious enough when one has heard
the explanation. But it is really rather odd that no one should have
passed through this gap for days, and then that four persons should have
come here within quite a short interval of one another."

"What makes you think they have done so?" Thorndyke asked.

"Well," I replied, "both of these sets of footprints appear to be quite
fresh, and to have been made about the same time."

"Not at the same time, Jervis," rejoined Thorndyke. "There is certainly
an interval of several hours between them, though precisely how many
hours we cannot judge, since there has been so little wind lately to
disturb them; but the fisherman unquestionably passed here not more than
three hours ago, and I should say probably within an hour; whereas the
other man--who seems to have come up from a boat to fetch something of
considerable weight--returned through the gap certainly not less, and
probably more, than four hours ago."

I gazed at my friend in blank astonishment, for these events befell in
the days before I had joined him as his assistant, and his special
knowledge and powers of inference were not then fully appreciated by me.

"It is clear, Thorndyke," I said, "that footprints have a very different
meaning to you from what they have for me. I don't see in the least how
you have reached any of these conclusions."

"I suppose not," was the reply; "but, you see, special knowledge of this
kind is the stock-in-trade of the medical jurist, and has to be acquired
by special study, though the present example is one of the greatest
simplicity. But let us consider it point by point; and first we will
take this set of footprints which I have inferred to be a fisherman's.
Note their enormous size. They should be the footprints of a giant. But
the length of the stride shows that they were made by a rather short
man. Then observe the massiveness of the soles, and the fact that there
are no nails in them. Note also the peculiar clumsy tread--the deep toe
and heel marks, as if the walker had wooden legs, or fixed ankles and
knees. From that character we can safely infer high boots of thick,
rigid leather, so that we can diagnose high boots, massive and stiff,
with nailless soles, and many sizes too large for the wearer. But the
only boot that answers this description is the fisherman's
thigh-boot--made of enormous size to enable him to wear in the winter
two or three pairs of thick knitted stockings, one over the other. Now
look at the other footprints; there is a double track, you see, one set
coming from the sea and one going towards it. As the man (who was
bow-legged and turned his toes in) has trodden in his own footprints, it
is obvious that he came from the sea, and returned to it. But observe
the difference in the two sets of prints; the returning ones are much
deeper than the others, and the stride much shorter. Evidently he was
carrying something when he returned, and that something was very heavy.
Moreover, we can see, by the greater depth of the toe impressions, that
he was stooping forward as he walked, and so probably carried the weight
on his back. Is that quite clear?"

"Perfectly," I replied. "But how do you arrive at the interval of time
between the visits of the two men?"

"That also is quite simple. The tide is now about halfway out; it is
thus about three hours since high water. Now, the fisherman walked just
about the neap-tide, high-water mark, sometimes above it and sometimes
below. But none of his footprints have been obliterated; therefore he
passed after high water--that is, less than three hours ago; and since
his footprints are all equally distinct, he could not have passed when
the sand was very wet. Therefore he probably passed less than an hour
ago. The other man's footprints, on the other hand, reach only to the
neap-tide, high-water mark, where they end abruptly. The sea has washed
over the remainder of the tracks and obliterated them. Therefore he
passed not less than three hours and not more than four days
ago--probably within twenty-four hours."

As Thorndyke concluded his demonstration the sound of voices was borne
to us from above, mingled with the tramping of feet, and immediately
afterwards a very singular party appeared at the head of the gap
descending towards the shore. First came a short burly fisherman clad in
oilskins and sou'-wester, clumping along awkwardly in his great
sea-boots, then the local police-sergeant in company with my
professional rival Dr. Burrows, while the rear of the procession was
brought up by two constables carrying a stretcher. As he reached the
bottom of the gap the fisherman, who was evidently acting as guide,
turned along the shore, retracing his own tracks, and the procession
followed in his wake.

"A surgeon, a stretcher, two constables, and a police-sergeant,"
observed Thorndyke. "What does that suggest to your mind, Jervis?"

"A fall from the cliff," I replied, "or a body washed up on the shore."

"Probably," he rejoined; "but we may as well walk in that direction."

We turned to follow the retreating procession, and as we strode along
the smooth surface left by the retiring tide Thorndyke resumed:

"The subject of footprints has always interested me deeply for two
reasons. First, the evidence furnished by footprints is constantly being
brought forward, and is often of cardinal importance; and, secondly, the
whole subject is capable of really systematic and scientific treatment.
In the main the data are anatomical, but age, sex, occupation, health,
and disease all give their various indications. Clearly, for instance,
the footprints of an old man will differ from those of a young man of
the same height, and I need not point out to you that those of a person
suffering from locomotor ataxia or paralysis agitans would be quite
unmistakable."

"Yes, I see that plainly enough," I said.

"Here, now," he continued, "is a case in point." He halted to point with
his stick at a row of footprints that appeared suddenly above high-water
mark, and having proceeded a short distance, crossed the line again, and
vanished where the waves had washed over them. They were easily
distinguished from any of the others by the clear impressions of
circular rubber heels.

"Do you see anything remarkable about them?" he asked.

"I notice that they are considerably deeper than our own," I answered.

"Yes, and the boots are about the same size as ours, whereas the stride
is considerably shorter--quite a short stride, in fact. Now there is a
pretty constant ratio between the length of the foot and the length of
the leg, between the length of leg and the height of the person, and
between the stature and the length of stride. A long foot means a long
leg, a tall man, and a long stride. But here we have a long foot and a
short stride. What do you make of that?" He laid down his stick--a
smooth partridge cane, one side of which was marked by small lines into
inches and feet--beside the footprints to demonstrate the discrepancy.

"The depth of the footprints shows that he was a much heavier man than
either of us," I suggested; "perhaps he was unusually fat."

"Yes," said Thorndyke, "that seems to be the explanation. The carrying
of a dead weight shortens the stride, and fat is practically a dead
weight. The conclusion is that he was about five feet ten inches high,
and excessively fat." He picked up his cane, and we resumed our walk,
keeping an eye on the procession ahead until it had disappeared round a
curve in the coast-line, when we mended our pace somewhat. Presently we
reached a small headland, and, turning the shoulder of cliff, came full
upon the party which had preceded us. The men had halted in a narrow
bay, and now stood looking down at a prostrate figure beside which the
surgeon was kneeling.

"We were wrong, you see," observed Thorndyke. "He has not fallen over
the cliff, nor has he been washed up by the sea. He is lying above
high-water mark, and those footprints that we have been examining appear
to be his."

As we approached, the sergeant turned and held up his hand.

"I'll ask you not to walk round the body just now, gentlemen," he said.
"There seems to have been foul play here, and I want to be clear about
the tracks before anyone crosses them."

Acknowledging this caution, we advanced to where the constables were
standing, and looked down with some curiosity at the dead man. He was a
tall, frail-looking man, thin to the point of emaciation, and appeared
to be about thirty-five years of age. He lay in an easy posture, with
half-closed eyes and a placid expression that contrasted strangely
enough with the tragic circumstances of his death.

"It is a clear case of murder," said Dr. Burrows, dusting the sand from
his knees as he stood up. "There is a deep knife-wound above the heart,
which must have caused death almost instantaneously."

"How long should you say he has been dead, Doctor?" asked the sergeant.

"Twelve hours at least," was the reply. "He is quite cold and stiff."

[Illustration: PLAN OF ST. BRIDGET'S BAY.

+ Position of body.         D D D, Tracks of Hearn's shoes.
A, Top of Shepherd's Path.  E, Tracks of the nailed shoes.
B, Overhanging cliff.       F, Shepherd's Path ascending shelving cliff.
C, Footpath along edge of cliff.]

"Twelve hours, eh?" repeated the officer. "That would bring it to about
six o'clock this morning."

"I won't commit myself to a definite time," said Dr. Burrows hastily. "I
only say not _less_ than twelve hours. It might have been considerably
more."

"Ah!" said the sergeant. "Well, he made a pretty good fight for his
life, to all appearances." He nodded at the sand, which for some feet
around the body bore the deeply indented marks of feet, as though a
furious struggle had taken place. "It's a mighty queer affair," pursued
the sergeant, addressing Dr. Burrows. "There seems to have been only one
man in it--there is only one set of footprints besides those of the
deceased--and we've got to find out who he is; and I reckon there won't
be much trouble about that, seeing the kind of trade-marks he has left
behind him."

"No," agreed the surgeon; "there ought not to be much trouble in
identifying those boots. He would seem to be a labourer, judging by the
hob-nails."

"No, sir; not a labourer," dissented the sergeant. "The foot is too
small, for one thing; and then the nails are not regular hob-nails.
They're a good deal smaller; and a labourer's boots would have the nails
all round the edges, and there would be iron tips on the heels, and
probably on the toes too. Now these have got no tips, and the nails are
arranged in a pattern on the soles and heels. They are probably
shooting-boots or sporting shoes of some kind." He strode to and fro
with his notebook in his hand, writing down hasty memoranda, and
stooping to scrutinize the impressions in the sand. The surgeon also
busied himself in noting down the facts concerning which he would have
to give evidence, while Thorndyke regarded in silence and with an air of
intense preoccupation the footprints around the body which remained to
testify to the circumstances of the crime.

"It is pretty clear, up to a certain point," the sergeant observed, as
he concluded his investigations, "how the affair happened, and it is
pretty clear, too, that the murder was premeditated. You see, Doctor,
the deceased gentleman, Mr. Hearn, was apparently walking home from Port
Marston; we saw his footprints along the shore--those rubber heels make
them easy to identify--and he didn't go down Sundersley Gap. He
probably meant to climb up the cliff by that little track that you see
there, which the people about here call the Shepherd's Path. Now the
murderer must have known that he was coming, and waited upon the cliff
to keep a lookout. When he saw Mr. Hearn enter the bay, he came down the
path and attacked him, and, after a tough struggle, succeeded in
stabbing him. Then he turned and went back up the path. You can see the
double track between the path and the place where the struggle took
place, and the footprints going to the path are on top of those coming
from it."

"If you follow the tracks," said Dr. Burrows, "you ought to be able to
see where the murderer went to."

"I'm afraid not," replied the sergeant. "There are no marks on the path
itself--the rock is too hard, and so is the ground above, I fear. But
I'll go over it carefully all the same."

The investigations being so far concluded, the body was lifted on to the
stretcher, and the cort\E8ge, consisting of the bearers, the Doctor, and
the fisherman, moved off towards the Gap, while the sergeant, having
civilly wished us "Good-evening," scrambled up the Shepherd's Path, and
vanished above.

"A very smart officer that," said Thorndyke. "I should like to know what
he wrote in his notebook."

"His account of the circumstances of the murder seemed a very reasonable
one," I said.

"Very. He noted the plain and essential facts, and drew the natural
conclusions from them. But there are some very singular features in this
case; so singular that I am disposed to make a few notes for my own
information."

He stooped over the place where the body had lain, and having narrowly
examined the sand there and in the place where the dead man's feet had
rested, drew out his notebook and made a memorandum. He next made a
rapid sketch-plan of the bay, marking the position of the body and the
various impressions in the sand, and then, following the double track
leading from and to the Shepherd's Path, scrutinized the footprints with
the deepest attention, making copious notes and sketches in his book.

"We may as well go up by the Shepherd's Path," said Thorndyke. "I think
we are equal to the climb, and there may be visible traces of the
murderer after all. The rock is only a sandstone, and not a very hard
one either."

We approached the foot of the little rugged track which zigzagged up the
face of the cliff, and, stooping down among the stiff, dry herbage,
examined the surface. Here, at the bottom of the path, where the rock
was softened by the weather, there were several distinct impressions on
the crumbling surface of the murderer's nailed boots, though they were
somewhat confused by the tracks of the sergeant, whose boots were
heavily nailed. But as we ascended the marks became rather less
distinct, and at quite a short distance from the foot of the cliff we
lost them altogether, though we had no difficulty in following the more
recent traces of the sergeant's passage up the path.

When we reached the top of the cliff we paused to scan the path that ran
along its edge, but here, too, although the sergeant's heavy boots had
left quite visible impressions on the ground, there were no signs of any
other feet. At a little distance the sagacious officer himself was
pursuing his investigations, walking backwards and forwards with his
body bent double, and his eyes fixed on the ground.

"Not a trace of him anywhere," said he, straightening himself up as we
approached. "I was afraid there wouldn't be after all this dry weather.
I shall have to try a different tack. This is a small place, and if
those boots belong to anyone living here they'll be sure to be known."

"The deceased gentleman--Mr. Hearn, I think you called him," said
Thorndyke as we turned towards the village--"is he a native of the
locality?"

"Oh no, sir," replied the officer. "He is almost a stranger. He has only
been here about three weeks; but, you know, in a little place like this
a man soon gets to be known--and his business, too, for that matter," he
added, with a smile.

"What was his business, then?" asked Thorndyke.

"Pleasure, I believe. He was down here for a holiday, though it's a good
way past the season; but, then, he had a friend living here, and that
makes a difference. Mr. Draper up at the Poplars was an old friend of
his, I understand. I am going to call on him now."

We walked on along the footpath that led towards the village, but had
only proceeded two or three hundred yards when a loud hail drew our
attention to a man running across a field towards us from the direction
of the cliff.

"Why, here is Mr. Draper himself," exclaimed the sergeant, stopping
short and waving his hand. "I expect he has heard the news already."

Thorndyke and I also halted, and with some curiosity watched the
approach of this new party to the tragedy. As the stranger drew near we
saw that he was a tall, athletic-looking man of about forty, dressed in
a Norfolk knickerbocker suit, and having the appearance of an ordinary
country gentleman, excepting that he carried in his hand, in place of a
walking-stick, the staff of a butterfly-net, the folding ring and bag of
which partly projected from his pocket.

"Is it true, Sergeant?" he exclaimed as he came up to us, panting from
his exertions. "About Mr. Hearn, I mean. There is a rumour that he has
been found dead on the beach."

"It's quite true, sir, I am sorry to say; and, what is worse, he has
been murdered."

"My God! you don't say so!"

He turned towards us a face that must ordinarily have been jovial
enough, but was now white and scared and, after a brief pause, he
exclaimed:

"Murdered! Good God! Poor old Hearn! How did it happen, Sergeant? and
when? and is there any clue to the murderer?"

"We can't say for certain when it happened," replied the sergeant, "and
as to the question of clues, I was just coming up to call on you."

"On me!" exclaimed Draper, with a startled glance at the officer. "What
for?"

"Well, we should like to know something about Mr. Hearn--who he was, and
whether he had any enemies, and so forth; anything, in fact, that would
give as a hint where to look for the murderer. And you are the only
person in the place who knew him at all intimately."

Mr Draper's pallid face turned a shade paler, and he glanced about him
with an obviously embarrassed air.

"I'm afraid," he began in a hesitating manner, "I'm afraid I shan't be
able to help you much. I didn't know much about his affairs. You see he
was--well--only a casual acquaintance--"

"Well," interrupted the sergeant, "you can tell us who and what he was,
and where he lived, and so forth. We'll find out the rest if you give us
the start."

"I see," said Draper. "Yes, I expect you will." His eyes glanced
restlessly to and fro, and he added presently: "You must come up
to-morrow, and have a talk with me about him, and I'll see what I can
remember."

"I'd rather come this evening," said the sergeant firmly.

"Not this evening," pleaded Draper. "I'm feeling rather--this affair,
you know, has upset me. I couldn't give proper attention--"

His sentence petered out into a hesitating mumble, and the officer
looked at him in evident surprise at his nervous, embarrassed manner.
His own attitude, however, was perfectly firm, though polite.

"I don't like pressing you, sir," said he, "but time is precious--we'll
have to go single file here; this pond is a public nuisance. They ought
to bank it up at this end. After you, sir."

The pond to which the sergeant alluded had evidently extended at one
time right across the path, but now, thanks to the dry weather, a narrow
isthmus of half-dried mud traversed the morass, and along this Mr.
Draper proceeded to pick his way. The sergeant was about to follow, when
suddenly he stopped short with his eyes riveted upon the muddy track. A
single glance showed me the cause of his surprise, for on the stiff,
putty-like surface, standing out with the sharp distinctness of a wax
mould, were the fresh footprints of the man who had just passed, each
footprint displaying on its sole the impression of stud-nails arranged
in a diamond-shaped pattern, and on its heel a group of similar nails
arranged in a cross.

The sergeant hesitated for only a moment, in which he turned a quick
startled glance upon us; then he followed, walking gingerly along the
edge of the path as if to avoid treading in his predecessor's
footprints. Instinctively we did the same, following closely, and
anxiously awaiting the next development of the tragedy. For a minute or
two we all proceeded in silence, the sergeant being evidently at a loss
how to act, and Mr. Draper busy with his own thoughts. At length the
former spoke.

"You think, Mr. Draper, you would rather that I looked in on you
to-morrow about this affair?"

"Much rather, if you wouldn't mind," was the eager reply.

"Then, in that case," said the sergeant, looking at his watch, "as I've
got a good deal to see to this evening, I'll leave you here, and make my
way to the station."

With a farewell flourish of his hand he climbed over a stile, and when,
a few moments later, I caught a glimpse of him through an opening in the
hedge, he was running across the meadow like a hare.

The departure of the police-officer was apparently a great relief to Mr.
Draper, who at once fell back and began to talk with us.

"You are Dr. Jervis, I think," said he. "I saw you coming out of Dr.
Cooper's house yesterday. We know everything that is happening in the
village, you see." He laughed nervously, and added: "But I don't know
your friend."

I introduced Thorndyke, at the mention of whose name our new
acquaintance knitted his brows, and glanced inquisitively at my friend.

"Thorndyke," he repeated; "the name seems familiar to me. Are you in the
Law, sir?"

Thorndyke admitted the impeachment, and our companion, having again
bestowed on him a look full of curiosity, continued: "This horrible
affair will interest you, no doubt, from a professional point of view.
You were present when my poor friend's body was found, I think?"

"No," replied Thorndyke; "we came up afterwards, when they were removing
it."

Our companion then proceeded to question us about the murder, but
received from Thorndyke only the most general and ambiguous replies. Nor
was there time to go into the matter at length, for the footpath
presently emerged on to the road close to Mr. Draper's house.

"You will excuse my not asking you in to-night," said he, "but you will
understand that I am not in much form for visitors just now."

We assured him that we fully understood, and, having wished him
"Good-evening," pursued our way towards the village.

"The sergeant is off to get a warrant, I suppose," I observed.

"Yes; and mighty anxious lest his man should be off before he can
execute it. But he is fishing in deeper waters than he thinks, Jervis.
This is a very singular and complicated case; one of the strangest, in
fact, that I have ever met. I shall follow its development with deep
interest."

"The sergeant seems pretty cocksure, all the same," I said.

"He is not to blame for that," replied Thorndyke. "He is acting on the
obvious appearances, which is the proper thing to do in the first place.
Perhaps his notebook contains more than I think it does. But we shall
see."

When we entered the village I stopped to settle some business with the
chemist, who acted as Dr. Cooper's dispenser, suggesting to Thorndyke
that he should walk on to the house; but when I emerged from the shop
some ten minutes later he was waiting outside, with a smallish
brown-paper parcel under each arm. Of one of these parcels I insisted on
relieving him, in spite of his protests, but when he at length handed it
to me its weight completely took me by surprise.

"I should have let them send this home on a barrow," I remarked.

"So I should have done," he replied, "only I did not wish to draw
attention to my purchase, or give my address."

Accepting this hint I refrained from making any inquiries as to the
nature of the contents (although I must confess to considerable
curiosity on the subject), and on arriving home I assisted him to
deposit the two mysterious parcels in his room.

When I came downstairs a disagreeable surprise awaited me. Hitherto the
long evenings had been spent by me in solitary and undisturbed enjoyment
of Dr. Cooper's excellent library, but to-night a perverse fate decreed
that I must wander abroad, because, forsooth, a preposterous farmer, who
resided in a hamlet five miles distant, had chosen the evening of my
guest's arrival to dislocate his bucolic elbow. I half hoped that
Thorndyke would offer to accompany me, but he made no such suggestion,
and in fact seemed by no means afflicted at the prospect of my absence.

"I have plenty to occupy me while you are away," he said cheerfully; and
with this assurance to comfort me I mounted my bicycle and rode off
somewhat sulkily along the dark road.

My visit occupied in all a trifle under two hours, and when I reached
home, ravenously hungry and heated by my ride, half-past nine had
struck, and the village had begun to settle down for the night.

"Sergeant Payne is a-waiting in the surgery, sir," the housemaid
announced as I entered the hall.

"Confound Sergeant Payne!" I exclaimed. "Is Dr. Thorndyke with him?"

"No, sir," replied the grinning damsel. "Dr. Thorndyke is hout."

"Hout!" I repeated (my surprise leading to unintentional mimicry).

"Yes, sir. He went hout soon after you, sir, on his bicycle. He had a
basket strapped on to it--leastways a hamper--and he borrowed a basin
and a kitchen-spoon from the cook."

I stared at the girl in astonishment. The ways of John Thorndyke were,
indeed, beyond all understanding.

"Well, let me have some dinner or supper at once," I said, "and I will
see what the sergeant wants."

The officer rose as I entered the surgery, and, laying his helmet on the
table, approached me with an air of secrecy and importance.

"Well, sir," said he, "the fat's in the fire. I've arrested Mr. Draper,
and I've got him locked up in the court-house. But I wish it had been
someone else."

"So does he, I expect," I remarked.

"You see, sir," continued the sergeant, "we all like Mr. Draper. He's
been among us a matter of seven years, and he's like one of ourselves.
However, what I've come about is this; it seems the gentleman who was
with you this evening is Dr. Thorndyke, the great expert. Now Mr. Draper
seems to have heard about him, as most of us have, and he is very
anxious for him to take up the defence. Do you think he would consent?"

"I expect so," I answered, remembering Thorndyke's keen interest in the
case; "but I will ask him when he comes in."

"Thank you, sir," said the sergeant. "And perhaps you wouldn't mind
stepping round to the court-house presently yourself. He looks uncommon
queer, does Mr. Draper, and no wonder, so I'd like you to take a look at
him, and if you could bring Dr. Thorndyke with you, he'd like it, and so
should I, for, I assure you, sir, that although a conviction would mean
a step up the ladder for me, I'd be glad enough to find that I'd made a
mistake."

I was just showing my visitor out when a bicycle swept in through the
open gate, and Thorndyke dismounted at the door, revealing a square
hamper--evidently abstracted from the surgery--strapped on to a carrier
at the back. I conveyed the sergeant's request to him at once, and asked
if he was willing to take up the case.

"As to taking up the defence," he replied, "I will consider the matter;
but in any case I will come up and see the prisoner."

With this the sergeant departed, and Thorndyke, having unstrapped the
hamper with as much care as if it contained a collection of priceless
porcelain, bore it tenderly up to his bedroom; whence he appeared, after
a considerable interval, smilingly apologetic for the delay.

"I thought you were dressing for dinner," I grumbled as he took his seat
at the table.

"No," he replied. "I have been considering this murder. Really it is a
most singular case, and promises to be uncommonly complicated, too."

"Then I assume that you will undertake the defence?"

"I shall if Draper gives a reasonably straightforward account of
himself."

It appeared that this condition was likely to be fulfilled, for when we
arrived at the court-house (where the prisoner was accommodated in a
spare office, under rather free-and-easy conditions considering the
nature of the charge) we found Mr. Draper in an eminently communicative
frame of mind.

"I want you, Dr. Thorndyke, to undertake my defence in this terrible
affair, because I feel confident that you will be able to clear me. And
I promise you that there shall be no reservation or concealment on my
part of anything that you ought to know."

"Very well," said Thorndyke. "By the way, I see you have changed your
shoes."

"Yes, the sergeant took possession of those I was wearing. He said
something about comparing them with some footprints, but there can't be
any footprints like those shoes here in Sundersley. The nails are fixed
in the soles in quite a peculiar pattern. I had them made in Edinburgh."

"Have you more than one pair?"

"No. I have no other nailed boots."

"That is important," said Thorndyke. "And now I judge that you have
something to tell us that bears on this crime. Am I right?"

"Yes. There is something that I am afraid it is necessary for you to
know, although it is very painful to me to revive memories of my past
that I had hoped were buried for ever. But perhaps, after all, it may
not be necessary for these confidences to be revealed to anyone but
yourself."

"I hope not," said Thorndyke; "and if it is not necessary you may rely
upon me not to allow any of your secrets to leak out. But you are wise
to tell me everything that may in any way bear upon the case."

At this juncture, seeing that confidential matters were about to be
discussed, I rose and prepared to withdraw; but Draper waved me back
into my chair.

"You need not go away, Dr. Jervis," he said. "It is through you that I
have the benefit of Dr. Thorndyke's help, and I know that you doctors
can be trusted to keep your own counsel and your clients' secrets. And
now for some confessions of mine. In the first place, it is my painful
duty to tell you that I am a discharged convict--an 'old lag,' as the
cant phrase has it."

He coloured a dusky red as he made this statement, and glanced furtively
at Thorndyke to observe its effect. But he might as well have looked at
a wooden figure-head or a stone mask as at my friend's immovable visage;
and when his communication had been acknowledged by a slight nod, he
proceeded:

"The history of my wrong-doing is the history of hundreds of others. I
was a clerk in a bank, and getting on as well as I could expect in that
not very progressive avocation, when I had the misfortune to make four
very undesirable acquaintances. They were all young men, though rather
older than myself, and were close friends, forming a sort of little
community or club. They were not what is usually described as 'fast.'
They were quite sober and decently-behaved young follows, but they were
very decidedly addicted to gambling in a small way, and they soon
infected me. Before long I was the keenest gambler of them all. Cards,
billiards, pool, and various forms of betting began to be the chief
pleasures of my life, and not only was the bulk of my scanty salary
often consumed in the inevitable losses, but presently I found myself
considerably in debt, without any visible means of discharging my
liabilities. It is true that my four friends were my chief--in fact,
almost my only--creditors, but still, the debts existed, and had to be
paid.

"Now these four friends of mine--named respectively Leach, Pitford,
Hearn, and Jezzard--were uncommonly clever men, though the full extent
of their cleverness was not appreciated by me until too late. And I,
too, was clever in my way, and a most undesirable way it was, for I
possessed the fatal gift of imitating handwriting and signatures with
the most remarkable accuracy. So perfect were my copies that the writers
themselves were frequently unable to distinguish their own signatures
from my imitations, and many a time was my skill invoked by some of my
companions to play off practical jokes upon the others. But these jests
were strictly confined to our own little set, for my four friends were
most careful and anxious that my dangerous accomplishment should not
become known to outsiders.

"And now follows the consequence which you have no doubt foreseen. My
debts, though small, were accumulating, and I saw no prospect of being
able to pay them. Then, one night, Jezzard made a proposition. We had
been playing bridge at his rooms, and once more my ill luck had caused
me to increase my debt. I scribbled out an IOU, and pushed it across the
table to Jezzard, who picked it up with a very wry face, and pocketed
it.

"'Look here, Ted,' he said presently, 'this paper is all very well, but,
you know, I can't pay my debts with it. My creditors demand hard cash.'

"'I'm very sorry,' I replied, 'but I can't help it.'

"'Yes, you can,' said he, 'and I'll tell you how.' He then propounded a
scheme which I at first rejected with indignation, but which, when the
others backed him up, I at last allowed myself to be talked into, and
actually put into execution. I contrived, by taking advantage of the
carelessness of some of my superiors at the bank, to get possession of
some blank cheque forms, which I filled up with small amounts--not more
than two or three pounds--and signed with careful imitations of the
signatures of some of our clients. Jezzard got some stamps made for
stamping on the account numbers, and when this had been done I handed
over to him the whole collection of forged cheques in settlement of my
debts to all of my four companions.

"The cheques were duly presented--by whom I do not know; and although,
to my dismay, the modest sums for which I had drawn them had been
skilfully altered into quite considerable amounts, they were all paid
without demur excepting one. That one, which had been altered from three
pounds to thirty-nine, was drawn upon an account which was already
slightly overdrawn. The cashier became suspicious; the cheque was
impounded, and the client communicated with. Then, of course, the mine
exploded. Not only was this particular forgery detected, but inquiries
were set afoot which soon brought to light the others. Presently
circumstances, which I need not describe, threw some suspicion on me. I
at once lost my nerve, and finally made a full confession.

"The inevitable prosecution followed. It was not conducted vindictively.
Still, I had actually committed the forgeries, and though I endeavoured
to cast a part of the blame on to the shoulders of my treacherous
confederates, I did not succeed. Jezzard, it is true, was arrested, but
was discharged for lack of evidence, and, consequently, the whole burden
of the forgery fell upon me. The jury, of course, convicted me, and I
was sentenced to seven years' penal servitude.

"During the time that I was in prison an uncle of mine died in Canada,
and by the provisions of his will I inherited the whole of his very
considerable property, so that when the time arrived for my release, I
came out of prison, not only free, but comparatively rich. I at once
dropped my own name, and, assuming that of Alfred Draper, began to look
about for some quiet spot in which I might spend the rest of my days in
peace, and with little chance of my identity being discovered. Such a
place I found in Sundersley, and here I have lived for the last seven
years, liked and respected, I think, by my neighbours, who have little
suspected that they were harbouring in their midst a convicted felon.

"All this time I had neither seen nor heard anything of my four
confederates, and I hoped and believed that they had passed completely
out of my life. But they had not. Only a month ago I met them once more,
to my sorrow, and from the day of that meeting all the peace and
security of my quiet existence at Sundersley have vanished. Like evil
spirits they have stolen into my life, changing my happiness into bitter
misery, filling my days with dark forebodings and my nights with
terror."

Here Mr. Draper paused, and seemed to sink into a gloomy reverie.

"Under what circumstances did you meet these men?" Thorndyke asked.

"Ah!" exclaimed Draper, arousing with sudden excitement, "the
circumstances were very singular and suspicious. I had gone over to
Eastwich for the day to do some shopping. About eleven o'clock in the
forenoon I was making some purchases in a shop when I noticed two men
looking in the window, or rather pretending to do so, whilst they
conversed earnestly. They were smartly dressed, in a horsy fashion, and
looked like well-to-do farmers, as they might very naturally have been
since it was market-day. But it seemed to me that their faces were
familiar to me. I looked at them more attentively, and then it suddenly
dawned upon me, most unpleasantly, that they resembled Leach and
Jezzard. And yet they were not quite like. The resemblance was there,
but the differences were greater than the lapse of time would account
for. Moreover, the man who resembled Jezzard had a rather large mole on
the left cheek just under the eye, while the other man had an eyeglass
stuck in one eye, and wore a waxed moustache, whereas Leach had always
been clean-shaven, and had never used an eyeglass.

"As I was speculating upon the resemblance they looked up, and caught my
intent and inquisitive eye, whereupon they moved away from the window;
and when, having completed my purchases, I came out into the street,
they were nowhere to be seen.

"That evening, as I was walking by the river outside the town before
returning to the station, I overtook a yacht which was being towed
down-stream. Three men were walking ahead on the bank with a long
tow-line, and one man stood in the cockpit steering. As I approached,
and was reading the name _Otter_ on the stern, the man at the helm
looked round, and with a start of surprise I recognized my old
acquaintance Hearn. The recognition, however, was not mutual, for I had
grown a beard in the interval, and I passed on without appearing to
notice him; but when I overtook the other three men, and recognized, as
I had feared, the other three members of the gang, I must have looked
rather hard at Jezzard, for he suddenly halted, and exclaimed: 'Why,
it's our old friend Ted! Our long-lost and lamented brother!' He held
out his hand with effusive cordiality, and began to make inquiries as to
my welfare; but I cut him short with the remark that I was not proposing
to renew the acquaintance, and, turning off on to a footpath that led
away from the river, strode off without looking back.

"Naturally this meeting exercised my mind a good deal, and when I
thought of the two men whom I had seen in the town, I could hardly
believe that their likeness to my quondam friends was a mere
coincidence. And yet when I had met Leach and Jezzard by the river, I
had found them little altered, and had particularly noticed that
Jezzard had no mole on his face, and that Leach was clean-shaven as of
old.

"But a day or two later all my doubts were resolved by a paragraph in
the local paper. It appeared that on the day of my visit to Eastwich a
number of forged cheques had been cashed at the three banks. They had
been presented by three well-dressed, horsy-looking men who looked like
well-to-do farmers. One of them had a mole on the left cheek, another
was distinguished by a waxed moustache and a single eyeglass, while the
description of the third I did not recognize. None of the cheques had
been drawn for large amounts, though the total sum obtained by the
forgers was nearly four hundred pounds; but the most interesting point
was that the cheque-forms had been manufactured by photographic process,
and the water-mark skilfully, though not quite perfectly, imitated.
Evidently the swindlers were clever and careful men, and willing to take
a good deal of trouble for the sake of security, and the result of their
precautions was that the police could make no guess as to their
identity.

"The very next day, happening to walk over to Port Marston, I came upon
the _Otter_ lying moored alongside the quay in the harbour. As soon as I
recognized the yacht, I turned quickly and walked away, but a minute
later I ran into Leach and Jezzard, who were returning to their craft.
Jezzard greeted me with an air of surprise. 'What! Still hanging about
here, Ted?' he exclaimed. 'That is not discreet of you, dear boy. I
should earnestly advise you to clear out.'

"'What do you mean?' I asked.

"'Tut, tut!' said he. 'We read the papers like other people, and we know
now what business took you to Eastwich. But it's foolish of you to hang
about the neighbourhood where you might be spotted at any moment.'

"The implied accusation took me aback so completely that I stood staring
at him in speechless astonishment, and at that unlucky moment a
tradesman, from whom I had ordered some house-linen, passed along the
quay. Seeing me, he stopped and touched his hat.

"'Beg pardon, Mr. Draper,' said he, 'but I shall be sending my cart up
to Sundersley to-morrow morning if that will do for you.'

"I said that it would, and as the man turned away, Jezzard's face broke
out into a cunning smile.

"So you are Mr. Draper, of Sundersley, now, are you?' said he. 'Well, I
hope you won't be too proud to come and look in on your old friends. We
shall be staying here for some time.'

"That same night Hearn made his appearance at my house. He had come as
an emissary from the gang, to ask me to do some work for them--to
execute some forgeries, in fact. Of course I refused, and pretty
bluntly, too, whereupon Hearn began to throw out vague hints as to what
might happen if I made enemies of the gang, and to utter veiled, but
quite intelligible, threats. You will say that I was an idiot not to
send him packing, and threaten to hand over the whole gang to the
police; but I was never a man of strong nerve, and I don't mind
admitting that I was mortally afraid of that cunning devil, Jezzard.

"The next thing that happened was that Hearn came and took lodgings in
Sundersley, and, in spite of my efforts to avoid him, he haunted me
continually. The yacht, too, had evidently settled down for some time at
a berth in the harbour, for I heard that a local smack-boy had been
engaged as a deck-hand; and I frequently encountered Jezzard and the
other members of the gang, who all professed to believe that I had
committed the Eastwich forgeries. One day I was foolish enough to allow
myself to be lured on to the yacht for a few minutes, and when I would
have gone ashore, I found that the shore ropes had been cast off, and
that the vessel was already moving out of the harbour. At first I was
furious, but the three scoundrels were so jovial and good-natured, and
so delighted with the joke of taking me for a sail against my will, that
I presently cooled down, and having changed into a pair of rubber-soled
shoes (so that I should not make dents in the smooth deck with my
hobnails), bore a hand at sailing the yacht, and spent quite a pleasant
day.

"From that time I found myself gradually drifting back into a state of
intimacy with these agreeable scoundrels, and daily becoming more and
more afraid of them. In a moment of imbecility I mentioned what I had
seen from the shop-window at Eastwich, and, though they passed the
matter off with a joke, I could see that they were mightily disturbed by
it. Their efforts to induce me to join them were redoubled, and Hearn
took to calling almost daily at my house--usually with documents and
signatures which he tried to persuade me to copy.

"A few evenings ago he made a new and startling proposition. We were
walking in my garden, and he had been urging me once more to rejoin the
gang--unsuccessfully, I need not say. Presently he sat down on a seat
against a yew-hedge at the bottom of the garden, and, after an interval
of silence, said suddenly:

"'Then you absolutely refuse to go in with us?'

"'Of course I do,' I replied. 'Why should I mix myself up with a gang of
crooks when I have ample means and a decent position?'

"'Of course,' he agreed, 'you'd be a fool if you did. But, you see, you
know all about this Eastwich job, to say nothing of our other little
exploits, and you gave us away once before. Consequently, you can take
it from me that, now Jezzard has run you to earth, he won't leave you in
peace until you have given us some kind of a hold on you. You know too
much, you see, and as long as you have a clean sheet you are a standing
menace to us. That is the position. You know it, and Jezzard knows it,
and he is a desperate man, and as cunning as the devil.'

"'I know that,' I said gloomily.

"'Very well,' continued Hearn. 'Now I'm going to make you an offer.
Promise me a small annuity--you can easily afford it--or pay me a
substantial sum down, and I will set you free for ever from Jezzard and
the others.'

"'How will you do that?' I asked.

"'Very simply,' he replied. 'I am sick of them all, and sick of this
risky, uncertain mode of life. Now I am ready to clean off my own slate
and set you free at the same time; but I must have some means of
livelihood in view.'

"'You mean that you will turn King's evidence?' I asked.

"'Yes, if you will pay me a couple of hundred a year, or, say, two
thousand down on the conviction of the gang.'

"I was so taken aback that for some time I made no reply, and as I sat
considering this amazing proposition, the silence was suddenly broken
by a suppressed sneeze from the other side of the hedge.

"Hearn and I started to our feet. Immediately hurried footsteps were
heard in the lane outside the hedge. We raced up the garden to the gate
and out through a side alley, but when we reached the lane there was not
a soul in sight. We made a brief and fruitless search in the immediate
neighbourhood, and then turned back to the house. Hearn was deathly pale
and very agitated, and I must confess that I was a good deal upset by
the incident.

"'This is devilish awkward,' said Hearn.

"'It is rather,' I admitted; 'but I expect it was only some inquisitive
yokel.'

"'I don't feel so sure of that,' said he. 'At any rate, we were stark
lunatics to sit up against a hedge to talk secrets.'

"He paced the garden with me for some time in gloomy silence, and
presently, after a brief request that I would think over his proposal,
took himself off.

"I did not see him again until I met him last night on the yacht.
Pitford called on me in the morning, and invited me to come and dine
with them. I at first declined, for my housekeeper was going to spend
the evening with her sister at Eastwich, and stay there for the night,
and I did not much like leaving the house empty. However, I agreed
eventually, stipulating that I should be allowed to come home early, and
I accordingly went. Hearn and Pitford were waiting in the boat by the
steps--for the yacht had been moved out to a buoy--and we went on board
and spent a very pleasant and lively evening. Pitford put me ashore at
ten o'clock, and I walked straight home, and went to bed. Hearn would
have come with me, but the others insisted on his remaining, saying
that they had some matters of business to discuss."

"Which way did you walk home?" asked Thorndyke.

"I came through the town, and along the main road."

"And that is all you know about this affair?"

"Absolutely all," replied Draper. "I have now admitted you to secrets of
my past life that I had hoped never to have to reveal to any human
creature, and I still have some faint hope that it may not be necessary
for you to divulge what I have told you."

"Your secrets shall not be revealed unless it is absolutely
indispensable that they should be," said Thorndyke; "but you are placing
your life in my hands, and you must leave me perfectly free to act as I
think best."

With this he gathered his notes together, and we took our departure.

"A very singular history, this, Jervis," he said, when, having wished
the sergeant "Good-night," we stepped out on to the dark road. "What do
you think of it?"

"I hardly know what to think," I answered, "but, on the whole, it seems
rather against Draper than otherwise. He admits that he is an old
criminal, and it appears that he was being persecuted and blackmailed by
the man Hearn. It is true that he represents Jezzard as being the
leading spirit and prime mover in the persecution, but we have only his
word for that. Hearn was in lodgings near him, and was undoubtedly
taking the most active part in the business, and it is quite possible,
and indeed probable, that Hearn was the actual _deus ex machina_."

Thorndyke nodded. "Yes," he said, "that is certainly the line the
prosecution will take if we allow the story to become known. Ha! what
is this? We are going to have some rain."

"Yes, and wind too. We are in for an autumn gale, I think."

"And that," said Thorndyke, "may turn out to be an important factor in
our case."

"How can the weather affect your case?" I asked in some surprise. But,
as the rain suddenly descended in a pelting shower, my companion broke
into a run, leaving my question unanswered.

On the following morning, which was fair and sunny after the stormy
night, Dr. Burrows called for my friend. He was on his way to the
extemporized mortuary to make the _post-mortem_ examination of the
murdered man's body. Thorndyke, having notified the coroner that he was
watching the case on behalf of the accused, had been authorized to be
present at the autopsy; but the authorization did not include me, and,
as Dr. Burrows did not issue any invitation, I was not able to be
present. I met them, however, as they were returning, and it seemed to
me that Dr. Burrows appeared a little huffy.

"Your friend," said he, in a rather injured tone, "is really the most
outrageous stickler for forms and ceremonies that I have ever met."

Thorndyke looked at him with an amused twinkle, and chuckled
indulgently.

"Here was a body," Dr. Burrows continued irritably, "found under
circumstances clearly indicative of murder, and bearing a knife-wound
that nearly divided the arch of the aorta; in spite of which, I assure
you that Dr. Thorndyke insisted on weighing the body, and examining
every organ--lungs, liver, stomach, and brain--yes, actually the
brain!--as if there had been no clue whatever to the cause of death.
And then, as a climax, he insisted on sending the contents of the
stomach in a jar, sealed with our respective seals, in charge of a
special messenger, to Professor Copland, for analysis and report. I
thought he was going to demand an examination for the tubercle bacillus,
but he didn't; which," concluded Dr. Burrows, suddenly becoming sourly
facetious, "was an oversight, for, after all, the fellow may have died
of consumption."

Thorndyke chuckled again, and I murmured that the precautions appeared
to have been somewhat excessive.

"Not at all," was the smiling response. "You are losing sight of our
function. We are the expert and impartial umpires, and it is our
business to ascertain, with scientific accuracy, the cause of death. The
_prima facie_ appearances in this case suggest that the deceased was
murdered by Draper, and that is the hypothesis advanced. But that is no
concern of ours. It is not our function to confirm an hypothesis
suggested by outside circumstances, but rather, on the contrary, to make
certain that no other explanation is possible. And that is my invariable
practice. No matter how glaringly obvious the appearances may be, I
refuse to take anything for granted."

Dr. Burrows received this statement with a grunt of dissent, but the
arrival of his dogcart put a stop to further discussion.

Thorndyke was not subpoenaed for the inquest. Dr. Burrows and the
sergeant having been present immediately after the finding of the body,
his evidence was not considered necessary, and, moreover, he was known
to be watching the case in the interests of the accused. Like myself,
therefore, he was present as a spectator, but as a highly interested
one, for he took very complete shorthand notes of the whole of the
evidence and the coroner's comments.

I shall not describe the proceedings in detail. The jury, having been
taken to view the body, trooped into the room on tiptoe, looking pale
and awe-stricken, and took their seats; and thereafter, from time to
time, directed glances of furtive curiosity at Draper as he stood,
pallid and haggard, confronting the court, with a burly rural constable
on either side.

The medical evidence was taken first. Dr. Burrows, having been sworn,
began, with sarcastic emphasis, to describe the condition of the lungs
and liver, until he was interrupted by the coroner.

"Is all this necessary?" the latter inquired. "I mean, is it material to
the subject of the inquiry?"

"I should say not," replied Dr. Burrows. "It appears to me to be quite
irrelevant, but Dr. Thorndyke, who is watching the case for the defence,
thought it necessary."

"I think," said the coroner, "you had better give us only the facts that
are material. The jury want you to tell them what you consider to have
been the cause of death. They don't want a lecture on pathology."

"The cause of death," said Dr. Burrows, "was a penetrating wound of the
chest, apparently inflicted with a large knife. The weapon entered
between the second and third ribs on the left side close to the sternum
or breast-bone. It wounded the left lung, and partially divided both the
pulmonary artery and the aorta--the two principal arteries of the body."

"Was this injury alone sufficient to cause death?" the coroner asked.

"Yes," was the reply; "and death from injury to these great vessels
would be practically instantaneous."

"Could the injury have been self-inflicted?"

"So far as the position and nature of the wound are concerned," replied
the witness, "self-infliction would be quite possible. But since death
would follow in a few seconds at the most, the weapon would be found
either in the wound, or grasped in the hand, or, at least, quite close
to the body. But in this case no weapon was found at all, and the wound
must therefore certainly have been homicidal."

"Did you see the body before it was moved?"

"Yes. It was lying on its back, with the arms extended and the legs
nearly straight; and the sand in the neighbourhood of the body was
trampled as if a furious struggle had taken place."

"Did you notice anything remarkable about the footprints in the sand?"

"I did," replied Dr. Burrows. "They were the footprints of two persons
only. One of these was evidently the deceased, whose footmarks could be
easily identified by the circular rubber heels. The other footprints
were those of a person--apparently a man--who wore shoes, or boots, the
soles of which were studded with nails; and these nails were arranged in
a very peculiar and unusual manner, for those on the soles formed a
lozenge or diamond shape, and those on the heel were set out in the form
of a cross."

"Have you ever seen shoes or boots with the nails arranged in this
manner?"

"Yes. I have seen a pair of shoes which I am informed belong to the
accused; the nails in them are arranged as I have described."

"Would you say that the footprints of which you have spoken were made
by those shoes?"

"No; I could not say that. I can only say that, to the best of my
belief, the pattern on the shoes is similar to that in the footprints."

This was the sum of Dr. Burrows' evidence, and to all of it Thorndyke
listened with an immovable countenance, though with the closest
attention. Equally attentive was the accused man, though not equally
impassive; indeed, so great was his agitation that presently one of the
constables asked permission to get him a chair.

The next witness was Arthur Jezzard. He testified that he had viewed the
body, and identified it as that of Charles Hearn; that he had been
acquainted with deceased for some years, but knew practically nothing of
his affairs. At the time of his death deceased was lodging in the
village.

"Why did he leave the yacht?" the coroner inquired. "Was there any kind
of disagreement!"

"Not in the least," replied Jezzard. "He grew tired of the confinement
of the yacht, and came to live ashore for a change. But we were the best
of friends, and he intended to come with us when we sailed."

"When did you see him last?"

"On the night before the body was found--that is, last Monday. He had
been dining on the yacht, and we put him ashore about midnight. He said
as we were rowing him ashore that he intended to walk home along the
sands as the tide was out. He went up the stone steps by the
watch-house, and turned at the top to wish us good-night. That was the
last time I saw him alive."

"Do you know anything of the relations between the accused and the
deceased?" the coroner asked.

"Very little," replied Jezzard. "Mr. Draper was introduced to us by the
deceased about a month ago. I believe they had been acquainted some
years, and they appeared to be on excellent terms. There was no
indication of any quarrel or disagreement between them."

"What time did the accused leave the yacht on the night of the murder?"

"About ten o'clock. He said that he wanted to get home early, as his
housekeeper was away and he did not like the house to be left with no
one in it."

This was the whole of Jezzard's evidence, and was confirmed by that of
Leach and Pitford. Then, when the fisherman had deposed to the discovery
of the body, the sergeant was called, and stepped forward, grasping a
carpet-bag, and looking as uncomfortable as if he had been the accused
instead of a witness. He described the circumstances under which he saw
the body, giving the exact time and place with official precision.

"You have heard Dr. Burrows' description of the footprints?" the coroner
inquired.

"Yes. There were two sets. One set were evidently made by deceased. They
showed that he entered St. Bridget's Bay from the direction of Port
Marston. He had been walking along the shore just about high-water mark,
sometimes above and sometimes below. Where he had walked below
high-water mark the footprints had of course been washed away by the
sea."

"How far back did you trace the footprints of deceased?"

"About two-thirds of the way to Sundersley Gap. Then they disappeared
below high-water mark. Later in the evening I walked from the Gap into
Port Marston, but could not find any further traces of deceased. He
must have walked between the tide-marks all the way from Port Marston to
beyond Sundersley. When these footprints entered St. Bridget's Bay they
became mixed up with the footprints of another man, and the shore was
trampled for a space of a dozen yards as if a furious struggle had taken
place. The strange man's tracks came down from the Shepherd's Path, and
went up it again; but, owing to the hardness of the ground from the dry
weather, the tracks disappeared a short distance up the path, and I
could not find them again."

"What were these strange footprints like?" inquired the coroner.

"They were very peculiar," replied the sergeant. "They were made by
shoes armed with smallish hob-nails, which were arranged in a
diamond-shaped pattern on the holes and in a cross on the heels. I
measured the footprints carefully, and made a drawing of each foot at
the time." Here the sergeant produced a long notebook of funereal
aspect, and, having opened it at a marked place, handed it to the
coroner, who examined it attentively, and then passed it on to the jury.
From the jury it was presently transferred to Thorndyke, and, looking
over his shoulder, I saw a very workmanlike sketch of a pair of
footprints with the principal dimensions inserted.

Thorndyke surveyed the drawing critically, jotted down a few brief
notes, and returned the sergeant's notebook to the coroner, who, as he
took it, turned once more to the officer.

"Have you any clue, sergeant, to the person who made these footprints?"
he asked.

By way of reply the sergeant opened his carpet-bag, and, extracting
therefrom a pair of smart but stoutly made shoes, laid them on the
table.

"Those shoes," he said, "are the property of the accused; he was wearing
them when I arrested him. They appear to correspond exactly to the
footprints of the murderer. The measurements are the same, and the nails
with which they are studded are arranged in a similar pattern."

[Illustration: The Sergeant's Sketch

Extreme length, 11\BE inches.
Width at A, 4\BD inches.
Length of heel, 3\BC inches
Width of heel at cross, 3 inches.]

"Would you swear that the footprints were made with these shoes?" asked
the coroner.

"No, sir, I would not," was the decided answer. "I would only swear to
the similarity of size and pattern."

"Had you ever seen these shoes before you made the drawing?"

"No, sir," replied the sergeant; and he then related the incident of the
footprints in the soft earth by the pond which led him to make the
arrest.

The coroner gazed reflectively at the shoes which he held in his hand,
and from them to the drawing; then, passing them to the foreman of the
jury, he remarked:

"Well, gentlemen, it is not for me to tell you whether these shoes
answer to the description given by Dr. Burrows and the sergeant, or
whether they resemble the drawing which, as you have heard, was made by
the officer on the spot and before he had seen the shoes; that is a
matter for you to decide. Meanwhile, there is another question that we
must consider." He turned to the sergeant and asked: "Have you made any
inquiries as to the movements of the accused on the night of the
murder?"

"I have," replied the sergeant, "and I find that, on that night, the
accused was alone in the house, his housekeeper having gone over to
Eastwich. Two men saw him in the town about ten o'clock, apparently
walking in the direction of Sundersley."

This concluded the sergeant's evidence, and when one or two more
witnesses had been examined without eliciting any fresh facts, the
coroner briefly recapitulated the evidence, and requested the jury to
consider their verdict. Thereupon a solemn hush fell upon the court,
broken only by the whispers of the jurymen, as they consulted together;
and the spectators gazed in awed expectancy from the accused to the
whispering jury. I glanced at Draper, sitting huddled in his chair, his
clammy face as pale as that of the corpse in the mortuary hard by, his
hands tremulous and restless; and, scoundrel as I believed him to be, I
could not but pity the abject misery that was written large all over
him, from his damp hair to his incessantly shifting feet.

The jury took but a short time to consider their verdict. At the end of
five minutes the foreman announced that they were agreed, and, in answer
to the coroner's formal inquiry, stood up and replied:

"We find that the deceased met his death by being stabbed in the chest
by the accused man, Alfred Draper."

"That is a verdict of wilful murder," said the coroner, and he entered
it accordingly in his notes. The Court now rose. The spectators
reluctantly trooped out, the jurymen stood up and stretched themselves,
and the two constables, under the guidance of the sergeant, carried the
wretched Draper in a fainting condition to a closed fly that was waiting
outside.

"I was not greatly impressed by the activity of the defence," I remarked
maliciously as we walked home.

Thorndyke smiled. "You surely did not expect me to cast my pearls of
forensic learning before a coroner's jury," said he.

"I expected that you would have something to say on behalf of your
client," I replied. "As it was, his accusers had it all their own way."

"And why not?" he asked. "Of what concern to us is the verdict of the
coroner's jury?"

"It would have seemed more decent to make some sort of defence," I
replied.

"My dear Jervis," he rejoined, "you do not seem to appreciate the great
virtue of what Lord Beaconsfield so felicitously called 'a policy of
masterly inactivity'; and yet that is one of the great lessons that a
medical training impresses on the student."

"That may be so," said I. "But the result, up to the present, of your
masterly policy is that a verdict of wilful murder stands against your
client, and I don't see what other verdict the jury could have found."

"Neither do I," said Thorndyke.

I had written to my principal, Dr. Cooper, describing the stirring
events that were taking place in the village, and had received a reply
from him instructing me to place the house at Thorndyke's disposal, and
to give him every facility for his work. In accordance with which edict
my colleague took possession of a well-lighted, disused stable-loft, and
announced his intention of moving his things into it. Now, as these
"things" included the mysterious contents of the hamper that the
housemaid had seen, I was possessed with a consuming desire to be
present at the "flitting," and I do not mind confessing that I purposely
lurked about the stairs in the hopes of thus picking up a few crumbs of
information.

But Thorndyke was one too many for me. A misbegotten infant in the
village having been seized with inopportune convulsions, I was
compelled, most reluctantly, to hasten to its relief; and I returned
only in time to find Thorndyke in the act of locking the door of the
loft.

"A nice light, roomy place to work in," he remarked, as he descended the
steps, slipping the key into his pocket.

"Yes," I replied, and added boldly: "What do you intend to do up there?"

"Work up the case for the defence," he replied, "and, as I have now
heard all that the prosecution have to say, I shall be able to forge
ahead."

This was vague enough, but I consoled myself with the reflection that
in a very few days I should, in common with the rest of the world, be in
possession of the results of his mysterious proceedings. For, in view of
the approaching assizes, preparations were being made to push the case
through the magistrate's court as quickly as possible in order to obtain
a committal in time for the ensuing sessions. Draper had, of course,
been already charged before a justice of the peace and evidence of
arrest taken, and it was expected that the adjourned hearing would
commence before the local magistrates on the fifth day after the
inquest.

The events of these five days kept me in a positive ferment of
curiosity. In the first place an inspector of the Criminal Investigation
Department came down and browsed about the place in company with the
sergeant. Then Mr. Bashfield, who was to conduct the prosecution, came
and took up his abode at the "Cat and Chicken." But the most surprising
visitor was Thorndyke's laboratory assistant, Polton, who appeared one
evening with a large trunk and a sailor's hammock, and announced that he
was going to take up his quarters in the loft.

As to Thorndyke himself, his proceedings were beyond speculation. From
time to time he made mysterious appearances at the windows of the loft,
usually arrayed in what looked suspiciously like a nightshirt. Sometimes
I would see him holding a negative up to the light, at others
manipulating a photographic printing-frame; and once I observed him with
a paintbrush and a large gallipot; on which I turned away in despair,
and nearly collided with the inspector.

"Dr. Thorndyke is staying with you, I hear," said the latter, gazing
earnestly at my colleague's back, which was presented for his inspection
at the window.

"Yes," I answered. "Those are his temporary premises."

"That is where he does his bedevilments, I suppose?" the officer
suggested.

"He conducts his experiments there," I corrected haughtily.

"That's what I mean," said the inspector; and, as Thorndyke at this
moment turned and opened the window, our visitor began to ascend the
steps.

"I've just called to ask if I could have a few words with you, Doctor,"
said the inspector, as he reached the door.

"Certainly," Thorndyke replied blandly. "If you will go down and wait
with Dr. Jervis, I will be with you in five minutes."

The officer came down the steps grinning, and I thought I heard him
murmur "Sold!" But this may have been an illusion. However, Thorndyke
presently emerged, and he and the officer strode away into the
shrubbery. What the inspector's business was, or whether he had any
business at all, I never learned; but the incident seemed to throw some
light on the presence of Polton and the sailor's hammock. And this
reference to Polton reminds me of a very singular change that took place
about this time in the habits of this usually staid and sedate little
man; who, abandoning the somewhat clerical style of dress that he
ordinarily affected, broke out into a semi-nautical costume, in which he
would sally forth every morning in the direction of Port Marston. And
there, on more than one occasion, I saw him leaning against a post by
the harbour, or lounging outside a waterside tavern in earnest and
amicable conversation with sundry nautical characters.

On the afternoon of the day before the opening of the proceedings we
had two new visitors. One of them, a grey-haired spectacled man, was a
stranger to me, and for some reason I failed to recall his name,
Copland, though I was sure I had heard it before. The other was Anstey,
the barrister who usually worked with Thorndyke in cases that went into
Court. I saw very little of either of them, however, for they retired
almost immediately to the loft, where, with short intervals for meals,
they remained for the rest of the day, and, I believe, far into the
night. Thorndyke requested me not to mention the names of his visitors
to anyone, and at the same time apologized for the secrecy of his
proceedings.

"But you are a doctor, Jervis," he concluded, "and you know what
professional confidences are; and you will understand how greatly it is
in our favour that we know exactly what the prosecution can do, while
they are absolutely in the dark as to our line of defence."

I assured him that I fully understood his position, and with this
assurance he retired, evidently relieved, to the council chamber.

The proceedings, which opened on the following day, and at which I was
present throughout, need not be described in detail. The evidence for
the prosecution was, of course, mainly a repetition of that given at the
inquest. Mr. Bashfield's opening statement, however, I shall give at
length, inasmuch as it summarized very clearly the whole of the case
against the prisoner.

"The case that is now before the Court," said the counsel, "involves a
charge of wilful murder against the prisoner Alfred Draper, and the
facts, in so far as they are known, are briefly these: On the night of
Monday, the 27th of September, the deceased, Charles Hearn, dined with
some friends on board the yacht _Otter_. About midnight he came ashore,
and proceeded to walk towards Sundersley along the beach. As he entered
St. Bridget's Bay, a man, who appears to have been lying in wait, and
who came down the Shepherd's Path, met him, and a deadly struggle seems
to have taken place. The deceased received a wound of a kind calculated
to cause almost instantaneous death, and apparently fell down dead.

"And now, what was the motive of this terrible crime? It was not
robbery, for nothing appears to have been taken from the corpse. Money
and valuables were found, as far as is known, intact. Nor, clearly, was
it a case of a casual affray. We are, consequently, driven to the
conclusion that the motive was a personal one, a motive of interest or
revenge, and with this view the time, the place, and the evident
deliberateness of the murder are in full agreement.

"So much for the motive. The next question is, Who was the perpetrator
of this shocking crime? And the answer to that question is given in a
very singular and dramatic circumstance, a circumstance that illustrates
once more the amazing lack of precaution shown by persons who commit
such crimes. The murderer was wearing a very remarkable pair of shoes,
and those shoes left very remarkable footprints in the smooth sand, and
those footprints were seen and examined by a very acute and painstaking
police-officer, Sergeant Payne, whose evidence you will hear presently.
The sergeant not only examined the footprints, he made careful drawings
of them on the spot--on the spot, mind you, not from memory--and he made
very exact measurements of them, which he duly noted down. And from
those drawings and those measurements, those tell-tale shoes have been
identified, and are here for your inspection.

"And now, who is the owner of those very singular, those almost unique
shoes? I have said that the motive of this murder must have been a
personal one, and, behold! the owner of those shoes happens to be the
one person in the whole of this district who could have had a motive for
compassing the murdered man's death. Those shoes belong to, and were
taken from the foot of, the prisoner, Alfred Draper, and the prisoner,
Alfred Draper, is the only person living in this neighbourhood who was
acquainted with the deceased.

"It has been stated in evidence at the inquest that the relations of
these two men, the prisoner and the deceased, were entirely friendly;
but I shall prove to you that they were not so friendly as has been
supposed. I shall prove to you, by the evidence of the prisoner's
housekeeper, that the deceased was often an unwelcome visitor at the
house, that the prisoner often denied himself when he was really at home
and disengaged, and, in short, that he appeared constantly to shun and
avoid the deceased.

"One more question and I have finished. Where was the prisoner on the
night of the murder? The answer is that he was in a house little more
than half a mile from the scene of the crime. And who was with him in
that house? Who was there to observe and testify to his going forth and
his coming home? No one. He was alone in the house. On that night, of
all nights, he was alone. Not a soul was there to rouse at the creak of
a door or the tread of a shoe--to tell as whether he slept or whether he
stole forth in the dead of the night.

"Such are the facts of this case. I believe that they are not disputed,
and I assert that, taken together, they are susceptible of only one
explanation, which is that the prisoner, Alfred Draper, is the man who
murdered the deceased, Charles Hearn."

Immediately on the conclusion of this address, the witnesses were
called, and the evidence given was identical with that at the inquest.
The only new witness for the prosecution was Draper's housekeeper, and
her evidence fully bore out Mr. Bashfield's statement. The sergeant's
account of the footprints was listened to with breathless interest, and
at its conclusion the presiding magistrate--a retired solicitor, once
well known in criminal practice--put a question which interested me as
showing how clearly Thorndyke had foreseen the course of events,
recalling, as it did, his remark on the night when we were caught in the
rain.

"Did you," the magistrate asked, "take these shoes down to the beach and
compare them with the actual footprints?"

"I obtained the shoes at night," replied the sergeant, "and I took them
down to the shore at daybreak the next morning. But, unfortunately,
there had been a storm in the night, and the footprints were almost
obliterated by the wind and rain."

When the sergeant had stepped down, Mr. Bashfield announced that that
was the case for the prosecution. He then resumed his seat, turning an
inquisitive eye on Anstey and Thorndyke.

The former immediately rose and opened the case for the defence with a
brief statement.

"The learned counsel for the prosecution," said he, "has told us that
the facts now in the possession of the Court admit of but one
explanation--that of the guilt of the accused. That may or may not be;
but I shall now proceed to lay before the Court certain fresh
facts--facts, I may say, of the most singular and startling character,
which will, I think, lead to a very different conclusion. I shall say no
more, but call the witnesses forthwith, and let the evidence speak for
itself."

The first witness for the defence was Thorndyke; and as he entered the
box I observed Polton take up a position close behind him with a large
wicker trunk. Having been sworn, and requested by Anstey to tell the
Court what he knew about the case, he commenced without preamble:

"About half-past four in the afternoon of the 28th of September I walked
down Sundersley Gap with Dr. Jervis. Our attention was attracted by
certain footprints in the sand, particularly those of a man who had
landed from a boat, had walked up the Gap, and presently returned,
apparently to the boat.

"As we were standing there Sergeant Payne and Dr. Burrows passed down
the Gap with two constables carrying a stretcher. We followed at a
distance, and as we walked along the shore we encountered another set of
footprints--those which the sergeant has described as the footprints of
the deceased. We examined these carefully, and endeavoured to frame a
description of the person by whom they had been made."

"And did your description agree with the characters of the deceased?"
the magistrate asked.

"Not in the least," replied Thorndyke, whereupon the magistrate, the
inspector, and Mr. Bashfield laughed long and heartily.

"When we turned into St. Bridget's Bay, I saw the body of deceased lying
on the sand close to the cliff. The sand all round was covered with
footprints, as if a prolonged, fierce struggle had taken place. There
were two sets of footprints, one set being apparently those of the
deceased and the other those of a man with nailed shoes of a very
peculiar and conspicuous pattern. The incredible folly that the wearing
of such shoes indicated caused me to look more closely at the
footprints, and then I made the surprising discovery that there had in
reality been no struggle; that, in fact, the two sets of footprints had
been made at different times."

"At different times!" the magistrate exclaimed in astonishment.

"Yes. The interval between them may have been one of hours or one only
of seconds, but the undoubted fact is that the two sets of footprints
were made, not simultaneously, but in succession."

"But how did you arrive at that fact?" the magistrate asked.

"It was very obvious when one looked," said Thorndyke. "The marks of the
deceased man's shoes showed that he repeatedly trod in his own
footprints; but never in a single instance did he tread in the
footprints of the other man, although they covered the same area. The
man with the nailed shoes, on the contrary, not only trod in his own
footprints, but with equal frequency in those of the deceased. Moreover,
when the body was removed, I observed that the footprints in the sand on
which it was lying were exclusively those of the deceased. There was not
a sign of any nail-marked footprint under the corpse, although there
were many close around it. It was evident, therefore, that the
footprints of the deceased were made first and those of the nailed shoes
afterwards."

As Thorndyke paused the magistrate rubbed his nose thoughtfully, and
the inspector gazed at the witness with a puzzled frown.

"The singularity of this fact," my colleague resumed, "made me look at
the footprints yet more critically, and then I made another discovery.
There was a double track of the nailed shoes, leading apparently from
and back to the Shepherd's Path. But on examining these tracks more
closely, I was astonished to find that the man who had made them had
been walking backwards; that, in fact, he had walked backwards from the
body to the Shepherd's Path, had ascended it for a short distance, had
turned round, and returned, still walking backwards, to the face of the
cliff near the corpse, and there the tracks vanished altogether. On the
sand at this spot were some small, inconspicuous marks which might have
been made by the end of a rope, and there were also a few small
fragments which had fallen from the cliff above. Observing these, I
examined the surface of the cliff, and at one spot, about six feet above
the beach, I found a freshly rubbed spot on which were parallel
scratches such as might have been made by the nailed sole of a boot. I
then ascended the Shepherd's Path, and examined the cliff from above,
and here I found on the extreme edge a rather deep indentation, such as
would be made by a taut rope, and, on lying down and looking over, I
could see, some five feet from the top, another rubbed spot with very
distinct parallel scratches."

"You appear to infer," said the chairman, "that this man performed these
astonishing evolutions and was then hauled up the cliff?"

"That is what the appearances suggested," replied Thorndyke.

The chairman pursed up his lips, raised his eyebrows, and glanced
doubtfully at his brother magistrates. Then, with a resigned air, he
bowed to the witness to indicate that he was listening.

"That same night," Thorndyke resumed, "I cycled down to the shore,
through the Gap, with a supply of plaster of Paris, and proceeded to
take plaster moulds of the more important of the footprints." (Here the
magistrates, the inspector, and Mr. Bashfield with one accord sat up at
attention; Sergeant Payne swore quite audibly; and I experienced a
sudden illumination respecting a certain basin and kitchen spoon which
had so puzzled me on the night of Thorndyke's arrival.) "As I thought
that liquid plaster might confuse or even obliterate the prints in sand,
I filled up the respective footprints with dry plaster, pressed it down
lightly, and then cautiously poured water on to it. The moulds, which
are excellent impressions, of course show the appearance of the boots
which made the footprints, and from these moulds I have prepared casts
which reproduce the footprints themselves.

"The first mould that I made was that of one of the tracks from the boat
up to the Gap, and of this I shall speak presently. I next made a mould
of one of the footprints which have been described as those of the
deceased."

"Have been described!" exclaimed the chairman. "The deceased was
certainly there, and there were no other footprints, so, if they were
not his, he must have flown to where he was found."

"I will call them the footprints of the deceased," replied Thorndyke
imperturbably. "I took a mould of one of them, and with it, on the same
mould, one of my own footprints. Here is the mould, and here is a cast
from it." (He turned and took them from the triumphant Polton, who had
tenderly lifted them out of the trunk in readiness.) "On looking at the
cast, it will be seen that the appearances are not such as would be
expected. The deceased was five feet nine inches high, but was very thin
and light, weighing only nine stone six pounds, as I ascertained by
weighing the body, whereas I am five feet eleven and weigh nearly
thirteen stone. But yet the footprint of the deceased is nearly twice as
deep as mine--that is to say, the lighter man has sunk into the sand
nearly twice as deeply as the heavier man."

The magistrates were now deeply attentive. They were no longer simply
listening to the despised utterances of a mere scientific expert. The
cast lay before them with the two footprints side by side; the evidence
appealed to their own senses and was proportionately convincing.

"This is very singular," said the chairman; "but perhaps you can explain
the discrepancy?"

"I think I can," replied Thorndyke; "but I should prefer to place all
the facts before you first."

"Undoubtedly that would be better," the chairman agreed. "Pray proceed."

"There was another remarkable peculiarity about these footprints,"
Thorndyke continued, "and that was their distance apart--the length of
the stride, in fact. I measured the steps carefully from heel to heel,
and found them only nineteen and a half inches. But a man of Hearn's
height would have an ordinary stride of about thirty-six inches--more if
he was walking fast. Walking with a stride of nineteen and a half inches
he would look as if his legs were tied together.

"I next proceeded to the Bay, and took two moulds from the footprints
of the man with the nailed shoes, a right and a left. Here is a cast
from the mould, and it shows very clearly that the man was walking
backwards."

"How does it show that?" asked the magistrate.

"There are several distinctive points. For instance, the absence of the
usual 'kick off' at the toe, the slight drag behind the heel, showing
the direction in which the foot was lifted, and the undisturbed
impression of the sole."

"You have spoken of moulds and casts. What is the difference between
them?"

"A mould is a direct, and therefore reversed, impression. A cast is the
impression of a mould, and therefore a facsimile of the object. If I
pour liquid plaster on a coin, when it sets I have a mould, a sunk
impression, of the coin. If I pour melted wax into the mould I obtain a
cast, a facsimile of the coin. A footprint is a mould of the foot. A
mould of the footprint is a cast of the foot, and a cast from the mould
reproduces the footprint."

"Thank you," said the magistrate. "Then your moulds from these two
footprints are really facsimiles of the murderer's shoes, and can be
compared with these shoes which have been put in evidence?"

"Yes, and when we compare them they demonstrate a very important fact."

"What is that?"

"It is that the prisoner's shoes were not the shoes that made those
footprints." A buzz of astonishment ran through the court, but Thorndyke
continued stolidly: "The prisoner's shoes were not in my possession, so
I went on to Barker's pond, on the clay margin of which I had seen
footprints actually made by the prisoner. I took moulds of those
footprints, and compared them with these from the sand. There are
several important differences, which you will see if you compare them.
To facilitate the comparison I have made transparent photographs of both
sets of moulds to the same scale. Now, if we put the photograph of the
mould of the prisoner's right shoe over that of the murderer's right
shoe, and hold the two superposed photographs up to the light, we cannot
make the two pictures coincide. They are exactly of the same length, but
the shoes are of different shape. Moreover, if we put one of the nails
in one photograph over the corresponding nail in the other photograph,
we cannot make the rest of the nails coincide. But the most conclusive
fact of all--from which there is no possible escape--is that the number
of nails in the two shoes is not the same. In the sole of the prisoner's
right shoe there are forty nails; in that of the murderer there are
forty-one. The murderer has one nail too many."

There was a deathly silence in the court as the magistrates and Mr.
Bashfield pored over the moulds and the prisoner's shoes, and examined
the photographs against the light. Then the chairman asked: "Are these
all the facts, or have you something more to tell us?" He was evidently
anxious to get the key to this riddle.

"There is more evidence, your Worship," said Anstey. "The witness
examined the body of deceased." Then, turning to Thorndyke, he asked:

"You were present at the _post-mortem_ examination?"

"I was."

"Did you form any opinion as to the cause of death?"

"Yes. I came to the conclusion that death was occasioned by an overdose
of morphia."

A universal gasp of amazement greeted this statement. Then the presiding
magistrate protested breathlessly:

"But there was a wound, which we have been told was capable of causing
instantaneous death. Was that not the case?"

"There was undoubtedly such a wound," replied Thorndyke. "But when that
wound was inflicted the deceased had already been dead from a quarter to
half an hour."

"This is incredible!" exclaimed the magistrate. "But, no doubt, you can
give us your reasons for this amazing conclusion?"

"My opinion," said Thorndyke, "was based on several facts. In the first
place, a wound inflicted on a living body gapes rather widely, owing to
the retraction of the living skin. The skin of a dead body does not
retract, and the wound, consequently, does not gape. This wound gaped
very slightly, showing that death was recent, I should say, within half
an hour. Then a wound on the living body becomes filled with blood, and
blood is shed freely on the clothing. But the wound on the deceased
contained only a little blood-clot. There was hardly any blood on the
clothing, and I had already noticed that there was none on the sand
where the body had lain."

"And you consider this quite conclusive?" the magistrate asked
doubtfully.

"I do," answered Thorndyke. "But there was other evidence which was
beyond all question. The weapon had partially divided both the aorta and
the pulmonary artery--the main arteries of the body. Now, during life,
these great vessels are full of blood at a high internal pressure,
whereas after death they become almost empty. It follows that, if this
wound had been inflicted during life, the cavity in which those vessels
lie would have become filled with blood. As a matter of fact, it
contained practically no blood, only the merest oozing from some small
veins, so that it is certain that the wound was inflicted after death.
The presence and nature of the poison I ascertained by analyzing certain
secretions from the body, and the analysis enabled me to judge that the
quantity of the poison was large; but the contents of the stomach were
sent to Professor Copland for more exact examination."

"Is the result of Professor Copland's analysis known?" the magistrate
asked Anstey.

"The professor is here, your Worship," replied Anstey, "and is prepared
to swear to having obtained over one grain of morphia from the contents
of the stomach; and as this, which is in itself a poisonous dose, is
only the unabsorbed residue of what was actually swallowed, the total
quantity taken must have been very large indeed."

"Thank you," said the magistrate. "And now, Dr. Thorndyke, if you have
given us all the facts, perhaps you will tell us what conclusions you
have drawn from them."

"The facts which I have stated," said Thorndyke, "appear to me to
indicate the following sequence of events. The deceased died about
midnight on September 27, from the effects of a poisonous dose of
morphia, how or by whom administered I offer no opinion. I think that
his body was conveyed in a boat to Sundersley Gap. The boat probably
contained three men, of whom one remained in charge of it, one walked
up the Gap and along the cliff towards St. Bridget's Bay, and the third,
having put on the shoes of the deceased, carried the body along the
shore to the Bay. This would account for the great depth and short
stride of the tracks that have been spoken of as those of the deceased.
Having reached the Bay, I believe that this man laid the corpse down on
his tracks, and then trampled the sand in the neighbourhood. He next
took off deceased's shoes and put them on the corpse; then he put on a
pair of boots or shoes which he had been carrying--perhaps hung round
his neck--and which had been prepared with nails to imitate Draper's
shoes. In these shoes he again trampled over the area near the corpse.
Then he walked backwards to the Shepherd's Path, and from it again,
still backwards, to the face of the cliff. Here his accomplice had
lowered a rope, by which he climbed up to the top. At the top he took
off the nailed shoes, and the two men walked back to the Gap, where the
man who had carried the rope took his confederate on his back, and
carried him down to the boat to avoid leaving the tracks of stockinged
feet. The tracks that I saw at the Gap certainly indicated that the man
was carrying something very heavy when he returned to the boat."

"But why should the man have climbed a rope up the cliff when he could
have walked up the Shepherd's Path?" the magistrate asked.

"Because," replied Thorndyke, "there would then have been a set of
tracks leading out of the Bay without a corresponding set leading into
it; and this would have instantly suggested to a smart
police-officer--such as Sergeant Payne--a landing from a boat."

"Your explanation is highly ingenious," said the magistrate, "and
appears to cover all the very remarkable facts. Have you anything more
to tell us?"

"No, your Worship," was the reply, "excepting" (here he took from Polton
the last pair of moulds and passed them up to the magistrate) "that you
will probably find these moulds of importance presently."

As Thorndyke stepped from the box--for there was no
cross-examination--the magistrates scrutinized the moulds with an air of
perplexity; but they were too discreet to make any remark.

When the evidence of Professor Copland (which showed that an
unquestionably lethal dose of morphia must have been swallowed) had been
taken, the clerk called out the--to me--unfamiliar name of Jacob Gummer.
Thereupon an enormous pair of brown dreadnought trousers, from the upper
end of which a smack-boy's head and shoulders protruded, walked into the
witness-box.

Jacob admitted at the outset that he was a smack-master's apprentice,
and that he had been "hired out" by his master to one Mr. Jezzard as
deck-hand and cabin-boy of the yacht _Otter_.

"Now, Gummer," said Anstey, "do you remember the prisoner coming on
board the yacht?"

"Yes. He has been on board twice. The first time was about a month ago.
He went for a sail with us then. The second time was on the night when
Mr. Hearn was murdered."

"Do you remember what sort of boots the prisoner was wearing the first
time he came?"

"Yes. They were shoes with a lot of nails in the soles. I remember them
because Mr. Jezzard made him take them off and put on a canvas pair."

"What was done with the nailed shoes?"

"Mr. Jezzard took 'em below to the cabin."

"And did Mr. Jezzard come up on deck again directly?"

"No. He stayed down in the cabin about ten minutes."

"Do you remember a parcel being delivered on board from a London
boot-maker?"

"Yes. The postman brought it about four or five days after Mr. Draper
had been on board. It was labelled 'Walker Bros., Boot and Shoe Makers,
London.' Mr. Jezzard took a pair of shoes from it, for I saw them on the
locker in the cabin the same day."

"Did you ever see him wear them?"

"No. I never see 'em again."

"Have you ever heard sounds of hammering on the yacht?"

"Yes. The night after the parcel came I was on the quay alongside, and I
heard someone a-hammering in the cabin."

"What did the hammering sound like?"

"It sounded like a cobbler a-hammering in nails."

"Have you over seen any boot-nails on the yacht?"

"Yes. When I was a-clearin' up the cabin the next mornin', I found a
hobnail on the floor in a corner by the locker."

"Were you on board on the night when Mr. Hearn died?"

"Yes. I'd been ashore, but I came aboard about half-past nine."

"Did you see Mr. Hearn go ashore?"

"I see him leave the yacht. I had turned into my bunk and gone to sleep,
when Mr. Jezzard calls down to me: 'We're putting Mr. Hearn ashore,'
says he; 'and then,' he says, 'we're a-going for an hour's fishing. You
needn't sit up,' he says, and with that he shuts the scuttle. Then I got
up and slid back the scuttle and put my head out, and I see Mr. Jezzard
and Mr. Leach a-helpin' Mr. Hearn acrost the deck. Mr. Hearn he looked
as if he was drunk. They got him into the boat--and a rare job they
had--and Mr. Pitford, what was in the boat already, he pushed off. And
then I popped my head in again, 'cause I didn't want them to see me."

"Did they row to the steps?"

"No. I put my head out again when they were gone, and I heard 'em row
round the yacht, and then pull out towards the mouth of the harbour. I
couldn't see the boat, 'cause it was a very dark night."

"Very well. Now I am going to ask you about another matter. Do you know
anyone of the name of Polton?"

"Yes," replied Gummer, turning a dusky red. "I've just found out his
real name. I thought he was called Simmons."

"Tell us what you know about him," said Anstey, with a mischievous
smile.

"Well," said the boy, with a ferocious scowl at the bland and smiling
Polton, "one day he come down to the yacht when the gentlemen had gone
ashore. I believe he'd seen 'em go. And he offers me ten shillin' to let
him see all the boots and shoes we'd got on board. I didn't see no harm,
so I turns out the whole lot in the cabin for him to look at. While he
was lookin' at 'em he asks me to fetch a pair of mine from the fo'c'sle,
so I fetches 'em. When I come back he was pitchin' the boots and shoes
back into the locker. Then, presently, he nips off, and when he was
gone I looked over the shoes, and then I found there was a pair missing.
They was an old pair of Mr. Jezzard's, and what made him nick 'em is
more than I can understand."

"Would you know those shoes if you saw them!"

"Yes, I should," replied the lad.

"Are these the pair?" Anstey handed the boy a pair of dilapidated canvas
shoes, which he seized eagerly.

"Yes, these is the ones what he stole!" he exclaimed.

Anstey took them back from the boy's reluctant hands, and passed them up
to the magistrate's desk. "I think," said he, "that if your Worship will
compare these shoes with the last pair of moulds, you will have no doubt
that these are the shoes which made the footprints from the sea to
Sundersley Gap and back again."

The magistrates together compared the shoes and the moulds amidst a
breathless silence. At length the chairman laid them down on the desk.

"It is impossible to doubt it," said he. "The broken heel and the tear
in the rubber sole, with the remains of the chequered pattern, make the
identity practically certain."

As the chairman made this statement I involuntarily glanced round to the
place where Jezzard was sitting. But he was not there; neither he, nor
Pitford, nor Leach. Taking advantage of the preoccupation of the Court,
they had quietly slipped out of the door. But I was not the only person
who had noted their absence. The inspector and the sergeant were already
in earnest consultation, and a minute later they, too, hurriedly
departed.

The proceedings now speedily came to an end. After a brief discussion
with his brother-magistrates, the chairman addressed the Court.

"The remarkable and I may say startling evidence, which has been heard
in this court to-day, if it has not fixed the guilt of this crime on any
individual, has, at any rate, made it clear to our satisfaction that the
prisoner is not the guilty person, and he is accordingly discharged. Mr.
Draper, I have great pleasure in informing you that you are at liberty
to leave the court, and that you do so entirely clear of all suspicion;
and I congratulate you very heartily on the skill and ingenuity of your
legal advisers, but for which the decision of the Court would, I am
afraid, have been very different."

That evening, lawyers, witnesses, and the jubilant and grateful client
gathered round a truly festive board to dine, and fight over again the
battle of the day. But we were scarcely halfway through our meal when,
to the indignation of the servants, Sergeant Payne burst breathlessly
into the room.

"They've gone, sir!" he exclaimed, addressing Thorndyke. "They've given
us the slip for good."

"Why, how can that be?" asked Thorndyke.

"They're dead, sir! All three of them!"

"Dead!" we all exclaimed.

"Yes. They made a burst for the yacht when they left the court, and they
got on board and put out to sea at once, hoping, no doubt, to get clear
as the light was just failing. But they were in such a hurry that they
did not see a steam trawler that was entering, and was hidden by the
pier. Then, just at the entrance, as the yacht was creeping out, the
trawler hit her amidships, and fairly cut her in two. The three men were
in the water in an instant, and were swept away in the eddy behind the
north pier; and before any boat could put out to them they had all gone
under. Jezzard's body came up on the beach just as I was coming away."

We were all silent and a little awed, but if any of us felt regret at
the catastrophe, it was at the thought that three such cold-blooded
villains should have made so easy an exit; and to one of us, at least,
the news came as a blessed relief.




II

THE STRANGER'S LATCHKEY


The contrariety of human nature is a subject that has given a surprising
amount of occupation to makers of proverbs and to those moral
philosophers who make it their province to discover and expound the
glaringly obvious; and especially have they been concerned to enlarge
upon that form of perverseness which engenders dislike of things offered
under compulsion, and arouses desire of them as soon as their attainment
becomes difficult or impossible. They assure us that a man who has had a
given thing within his reach and put it by, will, as soon as it is
beyond his reach, find it the one thing necessary and desirable; even as
the domestic cat which has turned disdainfully from the preferred
saucer, may presently be seen with her head jammed hard in the milk-jug,
or, secretly and with horrible relish, slaking her thirst at the
scullery sink.

To this peculiarity of the human mind was due, no doubt, the fact that
no sooner had I abandoned the clinical side of my profession in favour
of the legal, and taken up my abode in the chambers of my friend
Thorndyke, the famous medico-legal expert, to act as his assistant or
junior, than my former mode of life--that of a locum tenens, or minder
of other men's practices--which had, when I was following it, seemed
intolerably irksome, now appeared to possess many desirable features;
and I found myself occasionally hankering to sit once more by the
bedside, to puzzle out the perplexing train of symptoms, and to wield
that power--the greatest, after all, possessed by man--the power to
banish suffering and ward off the approach of death itself.

Hence it was that on a certain morning of the long vacation I found
myself installed at The Larches, Burling, in full charge of the practice
of my old friend Dr. Hanshaw, who was taking a fishing holiday in
Norway. I was not left desolate, however, for Mrs. Hanshaw remained at
her post, and the roomy, old-fashioned house accommodated three visitors
in addition. One of these was Dr. Hanshaw's sister, a Mrs. Haldean, the
widow of a wealthy Manchester cotton factor; the second was her niece by
marriage, Miss Lucy Haldean, a very handsome and charming girl of
twenty-three; while the third was no less a person than Master Fred, the
only child of Mrs. Haldean, and a strapping boy of six.

"It is quite like old times--and very pleasant old times, too--to see
you sitting at our breakfast-table, Dr. Jervis." With these gracious
words and a friendly smile, Mrs. Hanshaw handed me my tea-cup.

I bowed. "The highest pleasure of the altruist," I replied, "is in
contemplating the good fortune of others."

Mrs. Haldean laughed. "Thank you," she said. "You are quite unchanged, I
perceive. Still as suave and as--shall I say oleaginous?"

"No, please don't!" I exclaimed in a tone of alarm.

"Then I won't. But what does Dr. Thorndyke say to this backsliding on
your part? How does he regard this relapse from medical jurisprudence to
common general practice?"

"Thorndyke," said I, "is unmoved by any catastrophe; and he not only
regards the 'Decline and Fall-off of the Medical Jurist' with
philosophic calm, but he even favours the relapse, as you call it. He
thinks it may be useful to me to study the application of medico-legal
methods to general practice."

"That sounds rather unpleasant--for the patients, I mean," remarked Miss
Haldean.

"Very," agreed her aunt. "Most cold-blooded. What sort of man is Dr.
Thorndyke? I feel quite curious about him. Is he at all human, for
instance?"

"He is entirely human," I replied; "the accepted tests of humanity
being, as I understand, the habitual adoption of the erect posture in
locomotion, and the relative position of the end of the thumb--"

"I don't mean that," interrupted Mrs. Haldean. "I mean human in things
that matter."

"I think those things matter," I rejoined. "Consider, Mrs. Haldean, what
would happen if my learned colleague were to be seen in wig and gown,
walking towards the Law Courts in any posture other than the erect. It
would be a public scandal."

"Don't talk to him, Mabel," said Mrs. Hanshaw; "he is incorrigible. What
are you doing with yourself this morning, Lucy?"

Miss Haldean (who had hastily set down her cup to laugh at my imaginary
picture of Dr. Thorndyke in the character of a quadruped) considered a
moment.

"I think I shall sketch that group of birches at the edge of Bradham
Wood," she said.

"Then, in that case," said I, "I can carry your traps for you, for I
have to see a patient in Bradham."

"He is making the most of his time," remarked Mrs. Haldean maliciously
to my hostess. "He knows that when Mr. Winter arrives he will retire
into the extreme background."

Douglas Winter, whose arrival was expected in the course of the week,
was Miss Haldean's fianc\E9. Their engagement had been somewhat
protracted, and was likely to be more so, unless one of them received
some unexpected accession of means; for Douglas was a subaltern in the
Royal Engineers, living, with great difficulty, on his pay, while Lucy
Haldean subsisted on an almost invisible allowance left her by an uncle.

I was about to reply to Mrs. Haldean when a patient was announced, and,
as I had finished my breakfast, I made my excuses and left the table.

Half an hour later, when I started along the road to the village of
Bradham, I had two companions. Master Freddy had joined the party, and
he disputed with me the privilege of carrying the "traps," with the
result that a compromise was effected, by which he carried the
camp-stool, leaving me in possession of the easel, the bag, and a large
bound sketching-block.

"Where are you going to work this morning?" I asked, when we had trudged
on some distance.

"Just off the road to the left there, at the edge of the wood. Not very
far from the house of the mysterious stranger." She glanced at me
mischievously as she made this reply, and chuckled with delight when I
rose at the bait.

"What house do you mean?" I inquired.

"Ha!" she exclaimed, "the investigator of mysteries is aroused. He
saith, 'Ha! ha!' amidst the trumpets; he smelleth the battle afar off."

"Explain instantly," I commanded, "or I drop your sketch-block into the
very next puddle."

"You terrify me," said she. "But I will explain, only there isn't any
mystery except to the bucolic mind. The house is called Lavender
Cottage, and it stands alone in the fields behind the wood. A fortnight
ago it was let furnished to a stranger named Whitelock, who has taken it
for the purpose of studying the botany of the district; and the only
really mysterious thing about him is that no one has seen him. All
arrangements with the house-agent were made by letter, and, as far as I
can make out, none of the local tradespeople supply him, so he must get
his things from a distance--even his bread, which really is rather odd.
Now say I am an inquisitive, gossiping country bumpkin."

"I was going to," I answered, "but it is no use now."

She relieved me of her sketching appliances with pretended indignation,
and crossed into the meadow, leaving me to pursue my way alone; and when
I presently looked back, she was setting up her easel and stool, gravely
assisted by Freddy.

My "round," though not a long one, took up more time than I had
anticipated, and it was already past the luncheon hour when I passed the
place where I had left Miss Haldean. She was gone, as I had expected,
and I hurried homewards, anxious to be as nearly punctual as possible.
When I entered the dining-room, I found Mrs. Haldean and our hostess
seated at the table, and both looked up at me expectantly.

"Have you seen Lucy?" the former inquired.

"No," I answered. "Hasn't she come back? I expected to find her here.
She had left the wood when I passed just now."

Mrs. Haldean knitted her brows anxiously. "It is very strange," she
said, "and very thoughtless of her. Freddy will be famished."

I hurried over my lunch, for two fresh messages had come in from
outlying hamlets, effectually dispelling my visions of a quiet
afternoon; and as the minutes passed without bringing any signs of the
absentees, Mrs. Haldean became more and more restless and anxious. At
length her suspense became unbearable; she rose suddenly, announcing her
intention of cycling up the road to look for the defaulters, but as she
was moving towards the door, it burst open, and Lucy Haldean staggered
into the room.

Her appearance filled us with alarm. She was deadly pale, breathless,
and wild-eyed; her dress was draggled and torn, and she trembled from
head to foot.

"Good God, Lucy!" gasped Mrs. Haldean. "What has happened? And where is
Freddy?" she added in a sterner tone.

"He is lost!" replied Miss Haldean in a faint voice, and with a catch in
her breath. "He strayed away while I was painting. I have searched the
wood through, and called to him, and looked in all the meadows. Oh!
where can he have gone?" Her sketching "kit," with which she was loaded,
slipped from her grasp and rattled on to the floor, and she buried her
face in her hands and sobbed hysterically.

"And you have dared to come back without him?" exclaimed Mrs. Haldean.

"I was getting exhausted. I came back for help," was the faint reply.

"Of course she was exhausted," said Mrs. Hanshaw. "Come, Lucy: come,
Mabel; don't make mountains out of molehills. The little man is safe
enough. We shall find him presently, or he will come home by himself.
Come and have some food, Lucy."

Miss Haldean shook her head. "I can't, Mrs. Hanshaw--really I can't,"
she said; and, seeing that she was in a state of utter exhaustion, I
poured out a glass of wine and made her drink it.

Mrs. Haldean darted from the room, and returned immediately, putting on
her hat. "You have got to come with me and show me whore you lost him,"
she said.

"She can't do that, you know," I said rather brusquely. "She will have
to lie down for the present. But I know the place, and will cycle up
with you."

"Very well," replied Mrs. Haldean, "that will do. What time was it," she
asked, turning to her niece, "when you lost the child? and which way--"

She paused abruptly, and I looked at her in surprise. She had suddenly
turned ashen and ghastly; her face had set like a mask of stone, with
parted lips and staring eyes that were fixed in horror on her niece.

There was a deathly silence for a few seconds. Then, in a terrible
voice, she demanded: "What is that on your dress, Lucy?" And, after a
pause, her voice rose into a shriek. "What have you done to my boy?"

I glanced in astonishment at the dazed and terrified girl, and then I
saw what her aunt had seen--a good-sized blood-stain halfway down the
front of her skirt, and another smaller one on her right sleeve. The
girl herself looked down at the sinister patch of red and then up at her
aunt. "It looks like--like blood," she stammered. "Yes, it is--I
think--of course it is. He struck his nose--and it bled--"

"Come," interrupted Mrs. Haldean, "let us go," and she rushed from the
room, leaving me to follow.

I lifted Miss Haldean, who was half fainting with fatigue and agitation,
on to the sofa, and, whispering a few words of encouragement into her
ear, turned to Mrs. Hanshaw.

"I can't stay with Mrs. Haldean," I said. "There are two visits to be
made at Rebworth. Will you send the dogcart up the road with somebody to
take my place?"

"Yes," she answered. "I will send Giles, or come myself if Lucy is fit
to be left."

I ran to the stables for my bicycle, and as I pedalled out into the road
I could see Mrs. Haldean already far ahead, driving her machine at
frantic speed. I followed at a rapid pace, but it was not until we
approached the commencement of the wood, when she slowed down somewhat,
that I overtook her.

"This is the place," I said, as we reached the spot where I had parted
from Miss Haldean. We dismounted and wheeled our bicycles through the
gate, and laying them down beside the hedge, crossed the meadow and
entered the wood.

It was a terrible experience, and one that I shall never forget--the
white-faced, distracted woman, tramping in her flimsy house-shoes over
the rough ground, bursting through the bushes, regardless of the thorny
branches that dragged at skin and hair and dainty clothing, and sending
forth from time to time a tremulous cry, so dreadfully pathetic in its
mingling of terror and coaxing softness, that a lump rose in my throat,
and I could barely keep my self-control.

"Freddy! Freddy-boy! Mummy's here, darling!" The wailing cry sounded
through the leafy solitude; but no answer came save the whirr of wings
or the chatter of startled birds. But even more shocking than that
terrible cry--more disturbing and eloquent with dreadful suggestion--was
the way in which she peered, furtively, but with fearful expectation,
among the roots of the bushes, or halted to gaze upon every molehill and
hummock, every depression or disturbance of the ground.

So we stumbled on for a while, with never a word spoken, until we came
to a beaten track or footpath leading across the wood. Here I paused to
examine the footprints, of which several were visible in the soft earth,
though none seemed very recent; but, proceeding a little way down the
track, I perceived, crossing it, a set of fresh imprints, which I
recognized at once as Miss Haldean's. She was wearing, as I knew, a pair
of brown golf-boots, with rubber pads in the leather soles, and the
prints made by them were unmistakable.

"Miss Haldean crossed the path here," I said, pointing to the
footprints.

"Don't speak of her before me!" exclaimed Mrs. Haldean; but she gazed
eagerly at the footprints, nevertheless, and immediately plunged into
the wood to follow the tracks.

"You are very unjust to your niece, Mrs. Haldean," I ventured to
protest.

She halted, and faced me with an angry frown.

"You don't understand!" she exclaimed. "You don't know, perhaps, that
if my poor child is really dead, Lucy Haldean will be a rich woman, and
may marry to-morrow if she chooses?"

"I did not know that," I answered, "but if I had, I should have said the
same."

"Of course you would," she retorted bitterly. "A pretty face can muddle
any man's judgment."

She turned away abruptly to resume her pursuit, and I followed in
silence. The trail which we were following zigzagged through the
thickest part of the wood, but its devious windings eventually brought
us out on to an open space on the farther side. Here we at once
perceived traces of another kind. A litter of dirty rags, pieces of
paper, scraps of stale bread, bones and feathers, with hoof-marks, wheel
ruts, and the ashes of a large wood fire, pointed clearly to a gipsy
encampment recently broken up. I laid my hand on the heap of ashes, and
found it still warm, and on scattering it with my foot a layer of
glowing cinders appeared at the bottom.

"These people have only been gone an hour or two," I said. "It would be
well to have them followed without delay."

A gleam of hope shone on the drawn, white face as the bereaved mother
caught eagerly at my suggestion.

"Yes," she exclaimed breathlessly; "she may have bribed them to take him
away. Let us see which way they went."

We followed the wheel tracks down to the road, and found that they
turned towards London. At the same time I perceived the dogcart in the
distance, with Mrs. Hanshaw standing beside it; and, as the coachman
observed me, he whipped up his horse and approached.

"I shall have to go," I said, "but Mrs. Hanshaw will help you to
continue the search."

"And you will make inquiries about the gipsies, won't you?" she said.

I promised to do so, and as the dogcart now came up, I climbed to the
seat, and drove off briskly up the London Road.

The extent of a country doctor's round is always an unknown quantity. On
the present occasion I picked up three additional patients, and as one
of them was a case of incipient pleurisy, which required to have the
chest strapped, and another was a neglected dislocation of the shoulder,
a great deal of time was taken up. Moreover, the gipsies, whom I ran to
earth on Rebworth Common, delayed me considerably, though I had to leave
the rural constable to carry out the actual search, and, as a result,
the clock of Burling Church was striking six as I drove through the
village on my way home.

I got down at the front gate, leaving the coachman to take the dogcart
round, and walked up the drive; and my astonishment may be imagined
when, on turning the corner, I came suddenly upon the inspector of the
local police in earnest conversation with no less a person than John
Thorndyke.

"What on earth has brought you here?" I exclaimed, my surprise getting
the better of my manners.

"The ultimate motive-force," he replied, "was an impulsive lady named
Mrs. Haldean. She telegraphed for me--in your name."

"She oughtn't to have done that," I said.

"Perhaps not. But the ethics of an agitated woman are not worth
discussing, and she has done something much worse--she has applied to
the local J.P. (a retired Major-General), and our gallant and unlearned
friend has issued a warrant for the arrest of Lucy Haldean on the charge
of murder."

"But there has been no murder!" I exclaimed.

"That," said Thorndyke, "is a legal subtlety that he does not
appreciate. He has learned his law in the orderly-room, where the
qualifications to practise are an irritable temper and a loud voice.
However, the practical point is, inspector, that the warrant is
irregular. You can't arrest people for hypothetical crimes."

The officer drew a deep breath of relief. He knew all about the
irregularity, and now joyfully took refuge behind Thorndyke's great
reputation.

When he had departed--with a brief note from my colleague to the
General--Thorndyke slipped his arm through mine, and we strolled towards
the house.

"This is a grim business, Jervis," said he. "That boy has got to be
found for everybody's sake. Can you come with me when you have had some
food?"

"Of course I can. I have been saving myself all the afternoon with a
view to continuing the search."

"Good," said Thorndyke. "Then come in and feed."

A nondescript meal, half tea and half dinner, was already prepared, and
Mrs. Hanshaw, grave but self-possessed, presided at the table.

"Mabel is still out with Giles, searching for the boy," she said. "You
have heard what she has done!"

I nodded.

"It was dreadful of her," continued Mrs. Hanshaw, "but she is half mad,
poor thing. You might run up and say a few kind words to poor Lucy while
I make the tea."

I went up at once and knocked at Miss Haldean's door, and, being bidden
to enter, found her lying on the sofa, red-eyed and pale, the very ghost
of the merry, laughing girl who had gone out with me in the morning. I
drew up a chair, and sat down by her side, and as I took the hand she
held out to me, she said:

"It is good of you to come and see a miserable wretch like me. And Jane
has been so sweet to me, Dr. Jervis; but Aunt Mabel thinks I have killed
Freddy--you know she does--and it was really my fault that he was lost.
I shall never forgive myself!"

She burst into a passion of sobbing, and I proceeded to chide her
gently.

"You are a silly little woman," I said, "to take this nonsense to heart
as you are doing. Your aunt is not responsible just now, as you must
know; but when we bring the boy home she shall make you a handsome
apology. I will see to that."

She pressed my hand gratefully, and as the bell now rang for tea, I bade
her have courage and went downstairs.

"You need not trouble about the practice," said Mrs. Hanshaw, as I
concluded my lightning repast, and Thorndyke went off to get our
bicycles. "Dr. Symons has heard of our trouble, and has called to say
that he will take anything that turns up; so we shall expect you when we
see you."

"How do you like Thorndyke?" I asked.

"He is quite charming," she replied enthusiastically; "so tactful and
kind, and so handsome, too. You didn't tell us that. But here he is.
Good-bye, and good luck."

She pressed my hand, and I went out into the drive, where Thorndyke and
the coachman were standing with three bicycles.

"I see you have brought your outfit," I said as we turned into the road;
for Thorndyke's machine bore a large canvas-covered case strapped on to
a strong bracket.

"Yes; there are many things that we may want on a quest of this kind.
How did you find Miss Haldean?"

"Very miserable, poor girl. By the way, have you heard anything about
her pecuniary interest in the child's death?"

"Yes," said Thorndyke. "It appears that the late Mr. Haldean used up all
his brains on his business, and had none left for the making of his
will--as often happens. He left almost the whole of his property--about
eighty thousand pounds--to his son, the widow to have a life-interest in
it. He also left to his late brother's daughter, Lucy, fifty pounds a
year, and to his surviving brother Percy, who seems to have been a
good-for-nothing, a hundred a year for life. But--and here is the utter
folly of the thing--if the son should die, the property was to be
equally divided between the brother and the niece, with the exception of
five hundred a year for life to the widow. It was an insane
arrangement."

"Quite," I agreed, "and a very dangerous one for Lucy Haldean, as things
are at present."

"Very; especially if anything should have happened to the child."

"What are you going to do now?" I inquired, seeing that Thorndyke rode
on as if with a definite purpose.

"There is a footpath through the wood," he replied. "I want to examine
that. And there is a house behind the wood which I should like to see."

"The house of the mysterious stranger," I suggested.

"Precisely. Mysterious and solitary strangers invite inquiry."

We drew up at the entrance to the footpath, leaving Willett the coachman
in charge of the three machines, and proceeded up the narrow track. As
we went, Thorndyke looked back at the prints of our feet, and nodded
approvingly.

"This soft loam," he remarked, "yields beautifully clear impressions,
and yesterday's rain has made it perfect."

We had not gone far when we perceived a set of footprints which I
recognized, as did Thorndyke also, for he remarked: "Miss
Haldean--running, and alone." Presently we met them again, crossing in
the opposite direction, together with the prints of small shoes with
very high heels. "Mrs. Haldean on the track of her niece," was
Thorndyke's comment; and a minute later we encountered them both again,
accompanied by my own footprints.

"The boy does not seem to have crossed the path at all," I remarked as
we walked on, keeping off the track itself to avoid confusing the
footprints.

"We shall know when we have examined the whole length," replied
Thorndyke, plodding on with his eyes on the ground. "Ha! here is
something new," he added, stopping short and stooping down eagerly--"a
man with a thick stick--a smallish man, rather lame. Notice the
difference between the two feet, and the peculiar way in which he uses
his stick. Yes, Jervis, there is a great deal to interest us in these
footprints. Do you notice anything very suggestive about them?"

"Nothing but what you have mentioned," I replied. "What do you mean?"

"Well, first there is the very singular character of the prints
themselves, which we will consider presently. You observe that this man
came down the path, and at this point turned off into the wood; then he
returned from the wood and went up the path again. The imposition of the
prints makes that clear. But now look at the two sets of prints, and
compare them. Do you notice any difference?"

"The returning footprints seem more distinct--better impressions."

"Yes; they are noticeably deeper. But there is something else." He
produced a spring tape from his pocket, and took half a dozen
measurements. "You see," he said, "the first set of footprints have a
stride of twenty-one inches from heel to heel--a short stride; but he is
a smallish man, and lame; the returning ones have a stride of only
nineteen and a half inches; hence the returning footprints are deeper
than the others, and the steps are shorter. What do you make of that?"

"It would suggest that he was carrying a burden when he returned," I
replied.

"Yes; and a heavy one, to make that difference in the depth. I think I
will get you to go and fetch Willett and the bicycles."

I strode off down the path to the entrance, and, taking possession of
Thorndyke's machine, with its precious case of instruments, bade Willett
follow with the other two.

When I returned, my colleague was standing with his hands behind him,
gazing with intense preoccupation at the footprints. He looked up
sharply as we approached, and called out to us to keep off the path if
possible.

"Stay here with the machines, Willett," said he. "You and I, Jervis,
must go and see where our friend went to when he left the path, and what
was the burden that he picked up."

We struck off into the wood, where last year's dead leaves made the
footprints almost indistinguishable, and followed the faint double track
for a long distance between the dense clumps of bushes. Suddenly my eye
caught, beside the double trail, a third row of tracks, smaller in size
and closer together. Thorndyke had seen them, too, and already his
measuring-tape was in his hand.

"Eleven and a half inches to the stride," said he. "That will be the
boy, Jervis. But the light is getting weak. We must press on quickly, or
we shall lose it."

Some fifty yards farther on, the man's tracks ceased abruptly, but the
small ones continued alone; and we followed them as rapidly as we could
in the fading light.

"There can be no reasonable doubt that these are the child's tracks,"
said Thorndyke; "but I should like to find a definite footprint to make
the identification absolutely certain."

A few seconds later he halted with an exclamation, and stooped on one
knee. A little heap of fresh earth from the surface-burrow of a mole had
been thrown up over the dead leaves; and fairly planted on it was the
clean and sharp impression of a diminutive foot, with a rubber heel
showing a central star. Thorndyke drew from his pocket a tiny shoe, and
pressed it on the soft earth beside the footprint; and when he raised it
the second impression was identical with the first.

"The boy had two pairs of shoes exactly alike," he said, "so I borrowed
one of the duplicate pair."

He turned, and began to retrace his steps rapidly, following our own
fresh tracks, and stopping only once to point out the place where the
unknown man had picked the child up. When we regained the path we
proceeded without delay until we emerged from the wood within a hundred
yards of the cottage.

"I see Mrs. Haldean has been here with Giles," remarked Thorndyke, as he
pushed open the garden-gate. "I wonder if they saw anybody."

He advanced to the door, and having first rapped with his knuckles and
then kicked at it vigorously, tried the handle.

"Locked," he observed, "but I see the key is in the lock, so we can get
in if we want to. Let us try the back."

The back door was locked, too, but the key had been removed.

"He came out this way, evidently," said Thorndyke, "though he went in at
the front, as I suppose you noticed. Let us see where he went."

The back garden was a small, fenced patch of ground, with an earth path
leading down to the back gate. A little way beyond the gate was a small
barn or outhouse.

"We are in luck," Thorndyke remarked, with a glance at the path.
"Yesterday's rain has cleared away all old footprints, and prepared the
surface for new ones. You see there are three sets of excellent
impressions--two leading away from the house, and one set towards it.
Now, you notice that both of the sets leading _from_ the house are
characterized by deep impressions and short steps, while the set leading
_to_ the house has lighter impressions and longer steps. The obvious
inference is that he went down the path with a heavy burden, came back
empty-handed, and went down again--and finally--with another heavy
burden. You observe, too, that he walked with his stick on each
occasion."

By this time we had reached the bottom of the garden. Opening the gate,
we followed the tracks towards the outhouse, which stood beside a
cart-track; but as we came round the corner we both stopped short and
looked at one another. On the soft earth were the very distinct
impressions of the tyres of a motor-car leading from the wide door of
the outhouse. Finding that the door was unfastened, Thorndyke opened it,
and looked in, to satisfy himself that the place was empty. Then he fell
to studying the tracks.

"The course of events is pretty plain," he observed. "First the fellow
brought down his luggage, started the engine, and got the car out--you
can see where it stood, both by the little pool of oil, and by the
widening and blurring of the wheel-tracks from the vibration of the free
engine; then he went back and fetched the boy--carried him pick-a-back,
I should say, judging by the depth of the toe-marks in the last set of
footprints. That was a tactical mistake. He should have taken the boy
straight into the shed."

He pointed as he spoke to one of the footprints beside the wheel-tracks,
from the toe of which projected a small segment of the print of a little
rubber heel.

We now made our way back to the house, where we found Willett pensively
rapping at the front door with a cycle-spanner. Thorndyke took a last
glance, with his hand in his pocket, at an open window above, and then,
to the coachman's intense delight, brought forth what looked uncommonly
like a small bunch of skeleton keys. One of these he inserted into the
keyhole, and as he gave it a turn, the lock clicked, and the door stood
open.

The little sitting-room, which we now entered, was furnished with the
barest necessaries. Its centre was occupied by an oilcloth-covered
table, on which I observed with surprise a dismembered "Bee" clock (the
works of which had been taken apart with a tin-opener that lay beside
them) and a box-wood bird-call. At these objects Thorndyke glanced and
nodded, as though they fitted into some theory that he had formed;
examined carefully the oilcloth around the litter of wheels and pinions,
and then proceeded on a tour of inspection round the room, peering
inquisitively into the kitchen and store-cupboard.

"Nothing very distinctive or personal here," he remarked. "Let us go
upstairs."

There were three bedrooms on the upper floor, of which two were
evidently disused, though the windows were wide open. The third bedroom
showed manifest traces of occupation, though it was as bare as the
others, for the water still stood in the wash-hand basin, and the bed
was unmade. To the latter Thorndyke advanced, and, having turned back
the bedclothes, examined the interior attentively, especially at the
foot and the pillow. The latter was soiled--not to say grimy--though the
rest of the bed-linen was quite clean.

"Hair-dye," remarked Thorndyke, noting my glance at it; then he turned
and looked out of the open window. "Can you see the place where Miss
Haldean was sitting to sketch?" he asked.

"Yes," I replied; "there is the place well in view, and you can see
right up the road. I had no idea this house stood so high. From the
three upper windows you can see all over the country excepting through
the wood."

"Yes," Thorndyke rejoined, "and he has probably been in the habit of
keeping watch up here with a telescope or a pair of field-glasses. Well,
there is not much of interest in this room. He kept his effects in a
cabin trunk which stood there under the window. He shaved this morning.
He has a white beard, to judge by the stubble on the shaving-paper, and
that is all. Wait, though. There is a key hanging on that nail. He must
have overlooked that, for it evidently does not belong to this house. It
is an ordinary town latchkey."

He took the key down, and having laid a sheet of notepaper, from his
pocket, on the dressing-table, produced a pin, with which he began
carefully to probe the interior of the key-barrel. Presently there came
forth, with much coaxing, a large ball of grey fluff, which Thorndyke
folded up in the paper with infinite care.

"I suppose we mustn't take away the key," he said, "but I think we will
take a wax mould of it."

He hurried downstairs, and, unstrapping the case from his bicycle,
brought it in and placed it on the table. As it was now getting dark, he
detached the powerful acetylene lamp from his machine, and, having
lighted it, proceeded to open the mysterious case. First he took from it
a small insufflator, or powder-blower, with which he blew a cloud of
light yellow powder over the table around the remains of the clock. The
powder settled on the table in an even coating, but when he blew at it
smartly with his breath, it cleared off, leaving, however, a number of
smeary impressions which stood out in strong yellow against the black
oilcloth. To one of these impressions he pointed significantly. It was
the print of a child's hand.

He next produced a small, portable microscope and some glass slides and
cover-slips, and having opened the paper and tipped the ball of fluff
from the key-barrel on to a slide, set to work with a pair of mounted
needles to tease it out into its component parts. Then he turned the
light of the lamp on to the microscope mirror and proceeded to examine
the specimen.

"A curious and instructive assortment this, Jervis," he remarked, with
his eye at the microscope: "woollen fibres--no cotton or linen; he is
careful of his health to have woollen pockets--and two hairs; very
curious ones, too. Just look at them, and observe the root bulbs."

I applied my eye to the microscope, and saw, among other things, two
hairs--originally white, but encrusted with a black, opaque, glistening
stain. The root bulbs, I noticed, were shrivelled and atrophied.

"But how on earth," I exclaimed, "did the hairs get into his pocket?"

"I think the hairs themselves answer that question," he replied, "when
considered with the other curios. The stain is obviously lead sulphide;
but what else do you see?"

"I see some particles of metal--a white metal apparently--and a number
of fragments of woody fibre and starch granules, but I don't recognize
the starch. It is not wheat-starch, nor rice, nor potato. Do you make
out what it is?"

[Illustration: FLUFF FROM KEY-BARREL, MAGNIFIED 77 DIAMETERS.]

Thorndyke chuckled. "Experientia does it," said he. "You will have,
Jervis, to study the minute properties of dust and dirt. Their
evidential value is immense. Let us have another look at that starch; it
is all alike, I suppose."

It was; and Thorndyke had just ascertained the fact when the door burst
open and Mrs. Haldean entered the room, followed by Mrs. Hanshaw and the
police inspector. The former lady regarded my colleague with a glance of
extreme disfavour.

"We heard that you had come here, sir," said she, "and we supposed you
were engaged in searching for my poor child. But it seems we were
mistaken, since we find you here amusing yourselves fiddling with these
nonsensical instruments."

"Perhaps, Mabel," said Mrs. Hanshaw stiffly, "it would be wiser, and
infinitely more polite, to ask if Dr. Thorndyke has any news for us."

"That is undoubtedly so, madam," agreed the inspector, who had
apparently suffered also from Mrs. Haldean's impulsiveness.

"Then perhaps," the latter lady suggested, "you will inform us if you
have discovered anything."

"I will tell you." replied Thorndyke, "all that we know. The child was
abducted by the man who occupied this house, and who appears to have
watched him from an upper window, probably through a glass. This man
lured the child into the wood by blowing this bird-call; he met him in
the wood, and induced him--by some promises, no doubt--to come with him.
He picked the child up and carried him--on his back, I think--up to the
house, and brought him in through the front door, which he locked after
him. He gave the boy this clock and the bird-call to amuse him while he
went upstairs and packed his trunk. He took the trunk out through the
back door and down the garden to the shed there, in which he had a
motor-car. He got the car out and came back for the boy, whom he carried
down to the car, locking the back door after him. Then he drove away."

"You know he has gone," cried Mrs. Haldean, "and yet you stay here
playing with these ridiculous toys. Why are you not following him?"

"We have just finished ascertaining the facts," Thorndyke replied
calmly, "and should by now be on the road if you had not come."

Here the inspector interposed anxiously. "Of course, sir, you can't give
any description of the man. You have no clue to his identity, I
suppose?"

"We have only his footprints," Thorndyke answered, "and this fluff which
I raked out of the barrel of his latchkey, and have just been examining.
From these data I conclude that he is a rather short and thin man, and
somewhat lame. He walks with the aid of a thick stick, which has a knob,
not a crook, at the top, and which he carries in his left hand. I think
that his left leg has been amputated above the knee, and that he wears
an artificial limb. He is elderly, he shaves his beard, has white hair
dyed a greyish black, is partly bald, and probably combs a wisp of hair
over the bald place; he takes snuff, and carries a leaden comb in his
pocket."

As Thorndyke's description proceeded, the inspector's mouth gradually
opened wider and wider, until he appeared the very type and symbol of
astonishment. But its effect on Mrs. Haldean was much more remarkable.
Rising from her chair, she leaned on the table and stared at Thorndyke
with an expression of awe--even of terror; and as he finished she sank
back into her chair, with her hands clasped, and turned to Mrs. Hanshaw.

"Jane!" she gasped, "it is Percy--my brother-in-law! He has described
him exactly, even to his stick and his pocket-comb. But I thought he was
in Chicago."

"If that is so," said Thorndyke, hastily repacking his case, "we had
better start at once."

"We have the dogcart in the road," said Mrs. Hanshaw.

"Thank you," replied Thorndyke. "We will ride on our bicycles, and the
inspector can borrow Willett's. We go out at the back by the cart-track,
which joins the road farther on."

"Then we will follow in the dogcart," said Mrs. Haldean. "Come, Jane."

The two ladies departed down the path, while we made ready our bicycles
and lit our lamps.

"With your permission, inspector," said Thorndyke, "we will take the key
with us."

"It's hardly legal, sir," objected the officer. "We have no authority."

"It is quite illegal," answered Thorndyke; "but it is necessary; and
necessity--like your military J.P.--knows no law."

The inspector grinned and went out, regarding me with a quivering eyelid
as Thorndyke locked the door with his skeleton key. As we turned into
the road, I saw the light of the dogcart behind us, and we pushed
forward at a swift pace, picking up the trail easily on the soft, moist
road.

"What beats me," said the inspector confidentially, as we rode along,
"is how he knew the man was bald. Was it the footprints or the
latchkey? And that comb, too, that was a regular knock-out."

These points were, by now, pretty clear to me. I had seen the hairs with
their atrophied bulbs--such as one finds at the margin of a bald patch;
and the comb was used, evidently, for the double purpose of keeping the
bald patch covered and blackening the sulphur-charged hair. But the
knobbed stick and the artificial limb puzzled me so completely that I
presently overtook Thorndyke to demand an explanation.

"The stick," said he, "is perfectly simple. The ferrule of a knobbed
stick wears evenly all round; that of a crooked stick wears on one
side--the side opposite the crook. The impressions showed that the
ferrule of this one was evenly convex; therefore it had no crook. The
other matter is more complicated. To begin with, an artificial foot
makes a very characteristic impression, owing to its purely passive
elasticity, as I will show you to-morrow. But an artificial leg fitted
below the knee is quite secure, whereas one fitted above the knee--that
is, with an artificial knee-joint worked by a spring--is much less
reliable. Now, this man had an artificial foot, and he evidently
distrusted his knee-joint, as is shown by his steadying it with his
stick on the same side. If he had merely had a weak leg, he would have
used the stick with his right hand--with the natural swing of the arm,
in fact--unless he had been very lame, which he evidently was not.
Still, it was only a question of probability, though the probability was
very great. Of course, you understand that those particles of woody
fibre and starch granules were disintegrated snuff-grains."

This explanation, like the others, was quite simple when one had heard
it, though it gave me material for much thought as we pedalled on along
the dark road, with Thorndyke's light flickering in front, and the
dogcart pattering in our wake. But there was ample time for reflection;
for our pace rather precluded conversation, and we rode on, mile after
mile, until my legs ached with fatigue. On and on we went through
village after village, now losing the trail in some frequented street,
but picking it up again unfailingly as we emerged on to the country
road, until at last, in the paved High Street of the little town of
Horsefield, we lost it for good. We rode on through the town out on to
the country road; but although there were several tracks of motors,
Thorndyke shook his head at them all. "I have been studying those tyres
until I know them by heart," he said. "No; either he is in the town, or
he has left it by a side road."

There was nothing for it but to put up the horse and the machines at the
hotel, while we walked round to reconnoitre; and this we did, tramping
up one street and down another, with eyes bent on the ground,
fruitlessly searching for a trace of the missing car.

Suddenly, at the door of a blacksmith's shop, Thorndyke halted. The shop
had been kept open late for the shoeing of a carriage horse, which was
just being led away, and the smith had come to the door for a breath of
air. Thorndyke accosted him genially.

"Good-evening. You are just the man I wanted to see. I have mislaid the
address of a friend of mine, who, I think, called on you this
afternoon--a lame gentleman who walks with a stick. I expect he wanted
you to pick a lock or make him a key."

"Oh, I remember him!" said the man. "Yes, he had lost his latchkey, and
wanted the lock picked before he could get into his house. Had to leave
his motor-car outside while he came here. But I took some keys round
with me, and fitted one to his latch."

He then directed us to a house at the end of a street close by, and,
having thanked him, we went off in high spirits.

"How did you know he had been there?" I asked.

"I didn't; but there was the mark of a stick and part of a left foot on
the soft earth inside the doorway, and the thing was inherently
probable, so I risked a false shot."

The house stood alone at the far end of a straggling street, and was
enclosed by a high wall, in which, on the side facing the street, was a
door and a wide carriage-gate. Advancing to the former, Thorndyke took
from his pocket the purloined key, and tried it in the lock. It fitted
perfectly, and when he had turned it and pushed open the door, we
entered a small courtyard. Crossing this, we came to the front door of
the house, the latch of which fortunately fitted the same key; and this
having been opened by Thorndyke, we trooped into the hall. Immediately
we heard the sound of an opening door above, and a reedy, nasal voice
sang out:

"Hello, there! Who's that below?"

The voice was followed by the appearance of a head projecting over the
baluster rail.

"You are Mr. Percy Haldean, I think," said the inspector.

At the mention of this name, the head was withdrawn, and a quick tread
was heard, accompanied by the tapping of a stick on the floor. We
started to ascend the stairs, the inspector leading, as the authorized
official; but we had only gone up a few steps, when a fierce, wiry
little man danced out on to the landing, with a thick stick in one
hand and a very large revolver in the other.

"Move another step, either of you," he shouted, pointing the weapon at
the inspector, "and I let fly; and mind you, when I shoot I hit."

[Illustration: THE STRANGER IS RUN TO EARTH.]

He looked as if he meant it, and we accordingly halted with remarkable
suddenness, while the inspector proceeded to parley.

"Now, what's the good of this, Mr. Haldean?" said he. "The game's up,
and you know it."

"You clear out of my house, and clear out sharp," was the inhospitable
rejoinder, "or you'll give me the trouble of burying you in the garden."

I looked round to consult with Thorndyke, when, to my amazement, I found
that he had vanished--apparently through the open hall-door. I was
admiring his discretion when the inspector endeavoured to reopen
negotiations, but was cut short abruptly.

"I am going to count fifty," said Mr. Haldean, "and if you aren't gone
then, I shall shoot."

He began to count deliberately, and the inspector looked round at me in
complete bewilderment. The flight of stairs was a long one, and well
lighted by gas, so that to rush it was an impossibility. Suddenly my
heart gave a bound and I held my breath, for out of an open door behind
our quarry, a figure emerged slowly and noiselessly on to the landing.
It was Thorndyke, shoeless, and in his shirt-sleeves.

Slowly and with cat-like stealthiness, he crept across the landing until
he was within a yard of the unconscious fugitive, and still the nasal
voice droned on, monotonously counting out the allotted seconds.

"Forty-one, forty-two, forty-three--"

There was a lightning-like movement--a shout--a flash--a bang--a shower
of falling plaster, and then the revolver came clattering down the
stairs. The inspector and I rushed up, and in a moment the sharp click
of the handcuffs told Mr. Percy Haldean that the game was really up.

       *       *       *       *       *

Five minutes later Freddy-boy, half asleep, but wholly cheerful, was
borne on Thorndyke's shoulders into the private sitting-room of the
Black Horse Hotel. A shriek of joy saluted his entrance, and a shower of
maternal kisses brought him to the verge of suffocation. Finally, the
impulsive Mrs. Haldean, turning suddenly to Thorndyke, seized both his
hands, and for a moment I hoped that she was going to kiss him, too. But
he was spared, and I have not yet recovered from the disappointment.




III

THE ANTHROPOLOGIST AT LARGE


Thorndyke was not a newspaper reader. He viewed with extreme disfavour
all scrappy and miscellaneous forms of literature, which, by presenting
a disorderly series of unrelated items of information, tended, as he
considered, to destroy the habit of consecutive mental effort.

"It is most important," he once remarked to me, "habitually to pursue a
definite train of thought, and to pursue it to a finish, instead of
flitting indolently from one uncompleted topic to another, as the
newspaper reader is so apt to do. Still, there is no harm in a daily
paper--so long as you don't read it."

Accordingly, he patronized a morning paper, and his method of dealing
with it was characteristic. The paper was laid on the table after
breakfast, together with a blue pencil and a pair of office shears. A
preliminary glance through the sheets enabled him to mark with the
pencil those paragraphs that were to be read, and these were presently
cut out and looked through, after which they were either thrown away or
set aside to be pasted in an indexed book.

The whole proceeding occupied, on an average, a quarter of an hour.

On the morning of which I am now speaking he was thus engaged. The
pencil had done its work, and the snick of the shears announced the
final stage. Presently he paused with a newly-excised cutting between
his fingers, and, after glancing at it for a moment, he handed it to me.

"Another art robbery," he remarked. "Mysterious affairs, these--as to
motive, I mean. You can't melt down a picture or an ivory carving, and
you can't put them on the market as they stand. The very qualities that
give them their value make them totally unnegotiable."

"Yet I suppose," said I, "the really inveterate collector--the pottery
or stamp maniac, for instance--will buy these contraband goods even
though he dare not show them."

"Probably. No doubt the _cupiditas habendi_, the mere desire to possess,
is the motive force rather than any intelligent purpose--"

The discussion was at this point interrupted by a knock at the door, and
a moment later my colleague admitted two gentlemen. One of these I
recognized as a Mr. Marchmont, a solicitor, for whom we had occasionally
acted; the other was a stranger--a typical Hebrew of the blonde
type--good-looking, faultlessly dressed, carrying a bandbox, and
obviously in a state of the most extreme agitation.

"Good-morning to you, gentlemen," said Mr. Marchmont, shaking hands
cordially. "I have brought a client of mine to see you, and when I tell
you that his name is Solomon L\F6we, it will be unnecessary for me to say
what our business is."

"Oddly enough," replied Thorndyke, "we were, at the very moment when you
knocked, discussing the bearings of his case."

"It is a horrible affair!" burst in Mr. L\F6we. "I am distracted! I am
ruined! I am in despair!"

He banged the bandbox down on the table, and flinging himself into a
chair, buried his face in his hands.

"Come, come," remonstrated Marchmont, "we must be brave, we must be
composed. Tell Dr. Thorndyke your story, and let us hear what he thinks
of it."

He leaned back in his chair, and looked at his client with that air of
patient fortitude that comes to us all so easily when we contemplate the
misfortunes of other people.

"You must help us, sir," exclaimed L\F6we, starting up again--"you must,
indeed, or I shall go mad. But I shall tell you what has happened, and
then you must act at once. Spare no effort and no expense. Money is no
object--at least, not in reason," he added, with native caution. He sat
down once more, and in perfect English, though with a slight German
accent, proceeded volubly: "My brother Isaac is probably known to you by
name."

Thorndyke nodded.

"He is a great collector, and to some extent a dealer--that is to say,
he makes his hobby a profitable hobby."

"What does he collect?" asked Thorndyke.

"Everything," replied our visitor, flinging his hands apart with a
comprehensive gesture--"everything that is precious and
beautiful--pictures, ivories, jewels, watches, objects of art and
_vertu_--everything. He is a Jew, and he has that passion for things
that are rich and costly that has distinguished our race from the time
of my namesake Solomon onwards. His house in Howard Street, Piccadilly,
is at once a museum and an art gallery. The rooms are filled with cases
of gems, of antique jewellery, of coins and historic relics--some of
priceless value--and the walls are covered with paintings, every one of
which is a masterpiece. There is a fine collection of ancient weapons
and armour, both European and Oriental; rare books, manuscripts, papyri,
and valuable antiquities from Egypt, Assyria, Cyprus, and elsewhere. You
see, his taste is quite catholic, and his knowledge of rare and curious
things is probably greater than that of any other living man. He is
never mistaken. No forgery deceives him, and hence the great prices that
he obtains; for a work of art purchased from Isaac L\F6we is a work
certified as genuine beyond all cavil."

He paused to mop his face with a silk handkerchief, and then, with the
same plaintive volubility, continued:

"My brother is unmarried. He lives for his collection, and he lives with
it. The house is not a very large one, and the collection takes up most
of it; but he keeps a suite of rooms for his own occupation, and has two
servants--a man and wife--to look after him. The man, who is a retired
police sergeant, acts as caretaker and watchman; the woman as
housekeeper and cook, if required, but my brother lives largely at his
club. And now I come to this present catastrophe."

He ran his fingers through his hair, took a deep breath, and continued:

"Yesterday morning Isaac started for Florence by way of Paris, but his
route was not certain, and he intended to break his journey at various
points as circumstances determined. Before leaving, he put his
collection in my charge, and it was arranged that I should occupy his
rooms in his absence. Accordingly, I sent my things round and took
possession.

"Now, Dr. Thorndyke, I am closely connected with the drama, and it is my
custom to spend my evenings at my club, of which most of the members are
actors. Consequently, I am rather late in my habits; but last night I
was earlier than usual in leaving my club, for I started for my
brother's house before half-past twelve. I felt, as you may suppose, the
responsibility of the great charge I had undertaken; and you may,
therefore, imagine my horror, my consternation, my despair, when, on
letting myself in with my latchkey, I found a police-inspector, a
sergeant, and a constable in the hall. There had been a robbery, sir, in
my brief absence, and the account that the inspector gave of the affair
was briefly this:

"While taking the round of his district, he had noticed an empty hansom
proceeding in leisurely fashion along Howard Street. There was nothing
remarkable in this, but when, about ten minutes later, he was returning,
and met a hansom, which he believed to be the same, proceeding along the
same street in the same direction, and at the same easy pace, the
circumstance struck him as odd, and he made a note of the number of the
cab in his pocket-book. It was 72,863, and the time was 11.35.

"At 11.45 a constable coming up Howard Street noticed a hansom standing
opposite the door of my brother's house, and, while he was looking at
it, a man came out of the house carrying something, which he put in the
cab. On this the constable quickened his pace, and when the man returned
to the house and reappeared carrying what looked like a portmanteau, and
closing the door softly behind him, the policeman's suspicions were
aroused, and he hurried forward, hailing the cabman to stop.

"The man put his burden into the cab, and sprang in himself. The cabman
lashed his horse, which started off at a gallop, and the policeman broke
into a run, blowing his whistle and flashing his lantern on to the cab.
He followed it round the two turnings into Albemarle Street, and was
just in time to see it turn into Piccadilly, where, of course, it was
lost. However, he managed to note the number of the cab, which was
72,863, and he describes the man as short and thick-set, and thinks he
was not wearing any hat.

"As he was returning, he met the inspector and the sergeant, who had
heard the whistle, and on his report the three officers hurried to the
house, where they knocked and rang for some minutes without any result.
Being now more than suspicious, they went to the back of the house,
through the mews, where, with great difficulty, they managed to force a
window and effect an entrance into the house.

"Here their suspicions were soon changed to certainty, for, on reaching
the first-floor, they heard strange muffled groans proceeding from one
of the rooms, the door of which was locked, though the key had not been
removed. They opened the door, and found the caretaker and his wife
sitting on the floor, with their backs against the wall. Both were bound
hand and foot, and the head of each was enveloped in a green-baize bag;
and when the bags were taken off, each was found to be lightly but
effectively gagged.

"Each told the same story. The caretaker, fancying he heard a noise,
armed himself with a truncheon, and came downstairs to the first-floor,
where he found the door of one of the rooms open, and a light burning
inside. He stepped on tiptoe to the open door, and was peering in, when
he was seized from behind, half suffocated by a pad held over his mouth,
pinioned, gagged, and blindfolded with the bag.

"His assailant--whom he never saw--was amazingly strong and skilful, and
handled him with perfect ease, although he--the caretaker--is a powerful
man, and a good boxer and wrestler. The same thing happened to the wife,
who had come down to look for her husband. She walked into the same
trap, and was gagged, pinioned, and blindfolded without ever having seen
the robber. So the only description that we have of this villain is that
furnished by the constable."

"And the caretaker had no chance of using his truncheon?" said
Thorndyke.

"Well, he got in one backhanded blow over his right shoulder, which he
thinks caught the burglar in the face; but the fellow caught him by the
elbow, and gave his arm such a twist that he dropped the truncheon on
the floor."

"Is the robbery a very extensive one?"

"Ah!" exclaimed Mr. L\F6we, "that is just what we cannot say. But I fear
it is. It seems that my brother had quite recently drawn out of his bank
four thousand pounds in notes and gold. These little transactions are
often carried out in cash rather than by cheque"--here I caught a
twinkle in Thorndyke's eye--"and the caretaker says that a few days ago
Isaac brought home several parcels, which were put away temporarily in a
strong cupboard. He seemed to be very pleased with his new acquisitions,
and gave the caretaker to understand that they were of extraordinary
rarity and value.

"Now, this cupboard has been cleared out. Not a vestige is left in it
but the wrappings of the parcels, so, although nothing else has been
touched, it is pretty clear that goods to the value of four thousand
pounds have been taken; but when we consider what an excellent buyer my
brother is, it becomes highly probable that the actual value of those
things is two or three times that amount, or even more. It is a
dreadful, dreadful business, and Isaac will hold me responsible for it
all."

"Is there no further clue?" asked Thorndyke. "What about the cab, for
instance?"

"Oh, the cab," groaned L\F6we--"that clue failed. The police must have
mistaken the number. They telephoned immediately to all the police
stations, and a watch was set, with the result that number 72,863 was
stopped as it was going home for the night. But it then turned out that
the cab had not been off the rank since eleven o'clock, and the driver
had been in the shelter all the time with several other men. But there
is a clue; I have it here."

Mr. L\F6we's face brightened for once as he reached out for the bandbox.

"The houses in Howard Street," he explained, as he untied the fastening,
"have small balconies to the first-floor windows at the back. Now, the
thief entered by one of these windows, having climbed up a rain-water
pipe to the balcony. It was a gusty night, as you will remember, and
this morning, as I was leaving the house, the butler next door called to
me and gave me this; he had found it lying in the balcony of his house."

He opened the bandbox with a flourish, and brought forth a rather shabby
billycock hat.

"I understand," said he, "that by examining a hat it is possible to
deduce from it, not only the bodily characteristics of the wearer, but
also his mental and moral qualities, his state of health, his pecuniary
position, his past history, and even his domestic relations and the
peculiarities of his place of abode. Am I right in this supposition?"

The ghost of a smile flitted across Thorndyke's face as he laid the hat
upon the remains of the newspaper. "We must not expect too much," he
observed. "Hats, as you know, have a way of changing owners. Your own
hat, for instance" (a very spruce, hard felt), "is a new one, I think."

"Got it last week," said Mr. L\F6we.

"Exactly. It is an expensive hat, by Lincoln and Bennett, and I see you
have judiciously written your name in indelible marking-ink on the
lining. Now, a new hat suggests a discarded predecessor. What do you do
with your old hats?"

"My man has them, but they don't fit him. I suppose he sells them or
gives them away."

"Very well. Now, a good hat like yours has a long life, and remains
serviceable long after it has become shabby; and the probability is that
many of your hats pass from owner to owner; from you to the
shabby-genteel, and from them to the shabby ungenteel. And it is a fair
assumption that there are, at this moment, an appreciable number of
tramps and casuals wearing hats by Lincoln and Bennett, marked in
indelible ink with the name S. L\F6we; and anyone who should examine those
hats, as you suggest, might draw some very misleading deductions as to
the personal habits of S. L\F6we."

Mr. Marchmont chuckled audibly, and then, remembering the gravity of
the occasion, suddenly became portentously solemn.

"So you think that the hat is of no use, after all?" said Mr. L\F6we, in a
tone of deep disappointment.

"I won't say that," replied Thorndyke. "We may learn something from it.
Leave it with me, at any rate; but you must let the police know that I
have it. They will want to see it, of course."

"And you will try to get those things, won't you?" pleaded L\F6we.

"I will think over the case. But you understand, or Mr. Marchmont does,
that this is hardly in my province. I am a medical jurist, and this is
not a medico-legal case."

"Just what I told him," said Marchmont. "But you will do me a great
kindness if you will look into the matter. Make it a medico-legal case,"
he added persuasively.

Thorndyke repeated his promise, and the two men took their departure.

For some time after they had left, my colleague remained silent,
regarding the hat with a quizzical smile. "It is like a game of
forfeits," he remarked at length, "and we have to find the owner of
'this very pretty thing.'" He lifted it with a pair of forceps into a
better light, and began to look at it more closely.

"Perhaps," said he, "we have done Mr. L\F6we an injustice, after all. This
is certainly a very remarkable hat."

"It is as round as a basin," I exclaimed. "Why, the fellow's head must
have been turned in a lathe!"

Thorndyke laughed. "The point," said he, "is this. This is a hard hat,
and so must have fitted fairly, or it could not have been worn; and it
was a cheap hat, and so was not made to measure. But a man with a head
that shape has got to come to a clear understanding with his hat. No
ordinary hat would go on at all.

"Now, you see what he has done--no doubt on the advice of some friendly
hatter. He has bought a hat of a suitable size, and he has made it
hot--probably steamed it. Then he has jammed it, while still hot and
soft, on to his head, and allowed it to cool and set before removing it.
That is evident from the distortion of the brim. The important corollary
is, that this hat fits his head exactly--is, in fact, a perfect mould of
it; and this fact, together with the cheap quality of the hat, furnishes
the further corollary that it has probably only had a single owner.

"And now let us turn it over and look at the outside. You notice at once
the absence of old dust. Allowing for the circumstance that it had been
out all night, it is decidedly clean. Its owner has been in the habit of
brushing it, and is therefore presumably a decent, orderly man. But if
you look at it in a good light, you see a kind of bloom on the felt, and
through this lens you can make out particles of a fine white powder
which has worked into the surface."

He handed me his lens, through which I could distinctly see the
particles to which he referred.

"Then," he continued, "under the curl of the brim and in the folds of
the hatband, where the brush has not been able to reach it, the powder
has collected quite thickly, and we can see that it is a very fine
powder, and very white, like flour. What do you make of that?"

"I should say that it is connected with some industry. He may be
engaged in some factory or works, or, at any rate, may live near a
factory, and have to pass it frequently."

"Yes; and I think we can distinguish between the two possibilities. For,
if he only passes the factory, the dust will be on the outside of the
hat only; the inside will be protected by his head. But if he is engaged
in the works, the dust will be inside, too, as the hat will hang on a
peg in the dust-laden atmosphere, and his head will also be powdered,
and so convey the dust to the inside."

He turned the hat over once more, and as I brought the powerful lens to
bear upon the dark lining, I could clearly distinguish a number of white
particles in the interstices of the fabric.

"The powder is on the inside, too," I said.

He took the lens from me, and, having verified my statement, proceeded
with the examination. "You notice," he said, "that the leather
head-lining is stained with grease, and this staining is more pronounced
at the sides and back. His hair, therefore, is naturally greasy, or he
greases it artificially; for if the staining were caused by
perspiration, it would be most marked opposite the forehead."

He peered anxiously into the interior of the hat, and eventually turned
down the head-lining; and immediately there broke out upon his face a
gleam of satisfaction.

"Ha!" he exclaimed. "This is a stroke of luck. I was afraid our neat and
orderly friend had defeated us with his brush. Pass me the small
dissecting forceps, Jervis."

I handed him the instrument, and he proceeded to pick out daintily from
the space behind the head-lining some half a dozen short pieces of
hair, which he laid, with infinite tenderness, on a sheet of white
paper.

"There are several more on the other side," I said, pointing them out to
him.

"Yes, but we must leave some for the police," he answered, with a smile.
"They must have the same chance as ourselves, you know."

"But surely," I said, as I bent down over the paper, "these are pieces
of horsehair!"

"I think not," he replied; "but the microscope will show. At any rate,
this is the kind of hair I should expect to find with a head of that
shape."

"Well, it is extraordinarily coarse," said I, "and two of the hairs are
nearly white."

"Yes; black hairs beginning to turn grey. And now, as our preliminary
survey has given such encouraging results, we will proceed to more exact
methods; and we must waste no time, for we shall have the police here
presently to rob us of our treasure."

He folded up carefully the paper containing the hairs, and taking the
hat in both hands, as though it were some sacred vessel, ascended with
me to the laboratory on the next floor.

"Now, Polton," he said to his laboratory assistant, "we have here a
specimen for examination, and time is precious. First of all, we want
your patent dust-extractor."

The little man bustled to a cupboard and brought forth a singular
appliance, of his own manufacture, somewhat like a miniature vacuum
cleaner. It had been made from a bicycle foot-pump, by reversing the
piston-valve, and was fitted with a glass nozzle and a small detachable
glass receiver for collecting the dust, at the end of a flexible metal
tube.

"We will sample the dust from the outside first," said Thorndyke, laying
the hat upon the work-bench. "Are you ready, Polton?"

The assistant slipped his foot into the stirrup of the pump and worked
the handle vigorously, while Thorndyke drew the glass nozzle slowly
along the hat-brim under the curled edge. And as the nozzle passed
along, the white coating vanished as if by magic, leaving the felt
absolutely clean and black, and simultaneously the glass receiver became
clouded over with a white deposit.

"We will leave the other side for the police," said Thorndyke, and as
Polton ceased pumping he detached the receiver, and laid it on a sheet
of paper, on which he wrote in pencil, "Outside," and covered it with a
small bell-glass. A fresh receiver having been fitted on, the nozzle was
now drawn over the silk lining of the hat, and then through the space
behind the leather head-lining on one side; and now the dust that
collected in the receiver was much of the usual grey colour and fluffy
texture, and included two more hairs.

"And now," said Thorndyke, when the second receiver had been detached
and set aside, "we want a mould of the inside of the hat, and we must
make it by the quickest method; there is no time to make a paper mould.
It is a most astonishing head," he added, reaching down from a nail a
pair of large callipers, which he applied to the inside of the hat; "six
inches and nine-tenths long by six and six-tenths broad, which gives
us"--he made a rapid calculation on a scrap of paper--"the
extraordinarily high cephalic index of 95\B76."

Polton now took possession of the hat, and, having stuck a band of wet
tissue-paper round the inside, mixed a small bowl of plaster-of-Paris,
and very dexterously ran a stream of the thick liquid on to the
tissue-paper, where it quickly solidified. A second and third
application resulted in a broad ring of solid plaster an inch thick,
forming a perfect mould of the inside of the hat, and in a few minutes
the slight contraction of the plaster in setting rendered the mould
sufficiently loose to allow of its being slipped out on to a board to
dry.

We were none too soon, for even as Polton was removing the mould, the
electric bell, which I had switched on to the laboratory, announced a
visitor, and when I went down I found a police-sergeant waiting with a
note from Superintendent Miller, requesting the immediate transfer of
the hat.

"The next thing to be done," said Thorndyke, when the sergeant had
departed with the bandbox, "is to measure the thickness of the hairs,
and make a transverse section of one, and examine the dust. The section
we will leave to Polton--as time is an object, Polton, you had better
imbed the hair in thick gum and freeze it hard on the microtome, and be
very careful to cut the section at right angles to the length of the
hair--meanwhile, we will get to work with the microscope."

The hairs proved on measurement to have the surprisingly large diameter
of 1/135 of an inch--fully double that of ordinary hairs, although they
were unquestionably human. As to the white dust, it presented a problem
that even Thorndyke was unable to solve. The application of reagents
showed it to be carbonate of lime, but its source for a time remained a
mystery.

"The larger particles," said Thorndyke, with his eye applied to the
microscope, "appear to be transparent, crystalline, and distinctly
laminated in structure. It is not chalk, it is not whiting, it is not
any kind of cement. What can it be?"

"Could it be any kind of shell?" I suggested. "For instance--"

"Of course!" he exclaimed, starting up; "you have hit it, Jervis, as you
always do. It must be mother-of-pearl. Polton, give me a pearl
shirt-button out of your oddments box."

The button was duly produced by the thrifty Polton, dropped into an
agate mortar, and speedily reduced to powder, a tiny pinch of which
Thorndyke placed under the microscope.

"This powder," said he, "is, naturally, much coarser than our specimen,
but the identity of character is unmistakable. Jervis, you are a
treasure. Just look at it."

I glanced down the microscope, and then pulled out my watch. "Yes," I
said, "there is no doubt about it, I think; but I must be off. Anstey
urged me to be in court by 11.30 at the latest."

With infinite reluctance I collected my notes and papers and departed,
leaving Thorndyke diligently copying addresses out of the Post Office
Directory.

My business at the court detained me the whole of the day, and it was
near upon dinner-time when I reached our chambers. Thorndyke had not yet
come in, but he arrived half an hour later, tired and hungry, and not
very communicative.

"What have I done?" he repeated, in answer to my inquiries. "I have
walked miles of dirty pavement, and I have visited every pearl-shell
cutter's in London, with one exception, and I have not found what I
was looking for. The one mother-of-pearl factory that remains, however,
is the most likely, and I propose to look in there to-morrow morning.
Meanwhile, we have completed our data, with Polton's assistance. Here is
a tracing of our friend's skull taken from the mould; you see it is an
extreme type of brachycephalic skull, and markedly unsymmetrical. Here
is a transverse section of his hair, which is quite circular--unlike
yours or mine, which would be oval. We have the mother-of-pearl dust
from the outside of the hat, and from the inside similar dust mixed with
various fibres and a few granules of rice starch. Those are our data."

[Illustration: TRANSVERSE SECTIONS OF HUMAN HAIR: _A_, OF A NEGRO; _B_,
OF AN ENGLISHMAN; _C_, OF THE BURGLAR. ALL MAGNIFIED 600 DIAMETERS.]

"Supposing the hat should not be that of the burglar after all?" I
suggested.

"That would be annoying. But I think it is his, and I think I can guess
at the nature of the art treasures that were stolen."

"And you don't intend to enlighten me?"

"My dear fellow," he replied, "you have all the data. Enlighten yourself
by the exercise of your own brilliant faculties. Don't give way to
mental indolence."

I endeavoured, from the facts in my possession, to construct the
personality of the mysterious burglar, and failed utterly; nor was I
more successful in my endeavour to guess at the nature of the stolen
property; and it was not until the following morning, when we had set
out on our quest and were approaching Limehouse, that Thorndyke would
revert to the subject.

"We are now," he said, "going to the factory of Badcomb and Martin,
shell importers and cutters, in the West India Dock Road. If I don't
find my man there, I shall hand the facts over to the police, and waste
no more time over the case."

"What is your man like?" I asked.

"I am looking for an elderly Japanese, wearing a new hat or, more
probably, a cap, and having a bruise on his right cheek or temple. I am
also looking for a cab-yard; but here we are at the works, and as it is
now close on the dinner-hour, we will wait and see the hands come out
before making any inquiries."

We walked slowly past the tall, blank-faced building, and were just
turning to re-pass it when a steam whistle sounded, a wicket opened in
the main gate, and a stream of workmen--each powdered with white, like a
miller--emerged into the street. We halted to watch the men as they came
out, one by one, through the wicket, and turned to the right or left
towards their homes or some adjacent coffee-shop; but none of them
answered to the description that my friend had given.

The outcoming stream grew thinner, and at length ceased; the wicket was
shut with a bang, and once more Thorndyke's quest appeared to have
failed.

"Is that all of them, I wonder?" he said, with a shade of disappointment
in his tone; but even as he spoke the wicket opened again, and a leg
protruded. The leg was followed by a back and a curious globular head,
covered with iron-grey hair, and surmounted by a cloth cap, the whole
appertaining to a short, very thick-set man, who remained thus,
evidently talking to someone inside.

Suddenly he turned his head to look across the street; and immediately I
recognized, by the pallid yellow complexion and narrow eye-slits, the
physiognomy of a typical Japanese. The man remained talking for nearly
another minute; then, drawing out his other leg, he turned towards us;
and now I perceived that the right side of his face, over the prominent
cheekbone, was discoloured as though by a severe bruise.

"Ha!" said Thorndyke, turning round sharply as the man approached,
"either this is our man or it is an incredible coincidence." He walked
away at a moderate pace, allowing the Japanese to overtake us slowly,
and when the man had at length passed us, he increased his speed
somewhat, so as to maintain the distance.

Our friend stepped along briskly, and presently turned up a side street,
whither we followed at a respectful distance, Thorndyke holding open his
pocket-book, and appearing to engage me in an earnest discussion, but
keeping a sharp eye on his quarry.

"There he goes!" said my colleague, as the man suddenly
disappeared--"the house with the green window-sashes. That will be
number thirteen."

It was; and, having verified the fact, we passed on, and took the next
turning that would lead us back to the main road.

Some twenty minutes later, as we were strolling past the door of a
coffee-shop, a man came out, and began to fill his pipe with an air of
leisurely satisfaction. His hat and clothes were powdered with white
like those of the workmen whom we had seen come out of the factory.
Thorndyke accosted him.

"Is that a flour-mill up the road there?"

"No, sir; pearl-shell. I work there myself."

"Pearl-shell, eh?" said Thorndyke. "I suppose that will be an industry
that will tend to attract the aliens. Do you find it so?"

"No, sir; not at all. The work's too hard. We've only got one foreigner
in the place, and he ain't an alien--he's a Jap."

"A Jap!" exclaimed Thorndyke. "Really. Now, I wonder if that would
chance to be our old friend Kotei--you remember Kotei?" he added,
turning to me.

"No, sir; this man's name is Futashima. There was another Jap in the
works, a chap named Itu, a pal of Futashima's, but he's left."

"Ah! I don't know either of them. By the way, usen't there to be a
cab-yard just about here?"

"There's a yard up Rankin Street where they keep vans and one or two
cabs. That chap Itu works there now. Taken to horseflesh. Drives a van
sometimes. Queer start for a Jap."

"Very." Thorndyke thanked the man for his information, and we sauntered
on towards Rankin Street. The yard was at this time nearly deserted,
being occupied only by an ancient and crazy four-wheeler and a very
shabby hansom.

"Curious old houses, these that back on to the yard," said Thorndyke,
strolling into the enclosure. "That timber gable, now," pointing to a
house, from a window of which a man was watching us suspiciously, "is
quite an interesting survival."

"What's your business, mister?" demanded the man in a gruff tone.

"We are just having a look at these quaint old houses," replied
Thorndyke, edging towards the back of the hansom, and opening his
pocket-book, as though to make a sketch.

"Well, you can see 'em from outside," said the man.

[Illustration: THORNDYKE'S STRATEGY.]

"So we can," said Thorndyke suavely, "but not so well, you know."

At this moment the pocket-book slipped from his hand and fell,
scattering a number of loose papers about the ground under the hansom,
and our friend at the window laughed joyously.

"No hurry," murmured Thorndyke, as I stooped to help him to gather up
the papers--which he did in the most surprisingly slow and clumsy
manner. "It is fortunate that the ground is dry." He stood up with the
rescued papers in his hand, and, having scribbled down a brief note,
slipped the book in his pocket.

"Now you'd better mizzle," observed the man at the window.

"Thank you," replied Thorndyke, "I think we had;" and, with a pleasant
nod at the custodian, he proceeded to adopt the hospitable suggestion.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Mr. Marchmont has been here, sir, with Inspector Badger and another
gentleman," said Polton, as we entered our chambers. "They said they
would call again about five."

"Then," replied Thorndyke, "as it is now a quarter to five, there is
just time for us to have a wash while you get the tea ready. The
particles that float in the atmosphere of Limehouse are not all
mother-of-pearl."

Our visitors arrived punctually, the third gentleman being, as we had
supposed, Mr. Solomon L\F6we. Inspector Badger I had not seen before, and
he now impressed me as showing a tendency to invert the significance of
his own name by endeavouring to "draw" Thorndyke; in which, however, he
was not brilliantly successful.

"I hope you are not going to disappoint Mr. L\F6we, sir," he commenced
facetiously. "You have had a good look at that hat--we saw your marks on
it--and he expects that you will be able to point us out the man, name
and address all complete." He grinned patronizingly at our unfortunate
client, who was looking even more haggard and worn than he had been on
the previous morning.

"Have you--have you made any--discovery?" Mr L\F6we asked with pathetic
eagerness.

"We examined the hat very carefully, and I think we have established a
few facts of some interest."

"Did your examination of the hat furnish any information as to the
nature of the stolen property, sir?" inquired the humorous inspector.

Thorndyke turned to the officer with a face as expressionless as a
wooden mask.

"We thought it possible," said he, "that it might consist of works of
Japanese art, such as netsukes, paintings, and such like."

Mr. L\F6we uttered an exclamation of delighted astonishment, and the
facetiousness faded rather suddenly from the inspector's countenance.

"I don't know how you can have found out," said he. "We have only known
it half an hour ourselves, and the wire came direct from Florence to
Scotland Yard."

"Perhaps you can describe the thief to us," said Mr. L\F6we, in the same
eager tone.

"I dare say the inspector can do that," replied Thorndyke.

"Yes, I think so," replied the officer. "He is a short strong man, with
a dark complexion and hair turning grey. He has a very round head, and
he is probably a workman engaged at some whiting or cement works. That
is all we know; if you can tell us any more, sir, we shall be very glad
to hear it."

"I can only offer a few suggestions," said Thorndyke, "but perhaps you
may find them useful. For instance, at 13, Birket Street, Limehouse,
there is living a Japanese gentleman named Futashima, who works at
Badcomb and Martin's mother-of-pearl factory. I think that if you were
to call on him, and let him try on the hat that you have, it would
probably fit him."

The inspector scribbled ravenously in his notebook, and Mr.
Marchmont--an old admirer of Thorndyke's--leaned back in his chair,
chuckling softly and rubbing his hands.

"Then," continued my colleague, "there is in Rankin Street, Limehouse, a
cab-yard, where another Japanese gentleman named Itu is employed. You
might find out where Itu was the night before last; and if you should
chance to see a hansom cab there--number 22,481--have a good look at it.
In the frame of the number-plate you will find six small holes. Those
holes may have held brads, and the brads may have held a false number
card. At any rate, you might ascertain where that cab was at 11.30 the
night before last. That is all I have to suggest."

Mr. L\F6we leaped from his chair. "Let us go--now--at once--there is no
time to be lost. A thousand thanks to you, doctor--a thousand million
thanks. Come!"

He seized the inspector by the arm and forcibly dragged him towards the
door, and a few moments later we heard the footsteps of our visitors
clattering down the stairs.

"It was not worth while to enter into explanations with them," said
Thorndyke, as the footsteps died away--"nor perhaps with you?"

"On the contrary," I replied, "I am waiting to be fully enlightened."

"Well, then, my inferences in this case were perfectly simple ones,
drawn from well-known anthropological facts. The human race, as you
know, is roughly divided into three groups--the black, the white, and
the yellow races. But apart from the variable quality of colour, these
races have certain fixed characteristics associated especially with the
shape of the skull, of the eye-sockets, and the hair.

"Thus in the black races the skull is long and narrow, the eye-sockets
are long and narrow, and the hair is flat and ribbon-like, and usually
coiled up like a watch-spring. In the white races the skull is oval, the
eye-sockets are oval, and the hair is slightly flattened or oval in
section, and tends to be wavy; while in the yellow or Mongol races, the
skull is short and round, the eye-sockets are short and round, and the
hair is straight and circular in section. So that we have, in the black
races, long skull, long orbits, flat hair; in the white races, oval
skull, oval orbits, oval hair; and in the yellow races, round skull,
round orbits, round hair.

"Now, in this case we had to deal with a very short round skull. But you
cannot argue from races to individuals; there are many short-skulled
Englishmen. But when I found, associated with that skull, hairs which
were circular in section, it became practically certain that the
individual was a Mongol of some kind. The mother-of-pearl dust and the
granules of rice starch from the inside of the hat favoured this view,
for the pearl-shell industry is specially connected with China and
Japan, while starch granules from the hat of an Englishman would
probably be wheat starch.

"Then as to the hair: it was, as I mentioned to you, circular in
section, and of very large diameter. Now, I have examined many thousands
of hairs, and the thickest that I have ever seen came from the heads of
Japanese; but the hairs from this hat were as thick as any of them. But
the hypothesis that the burglar was a Japanese received confirmation in
various ways. Thus, he was short, though strong and active, and the
Japanese are the shortest of the Mongol races, and very strong and
active.

"Then his remarkable skill in handling the powerful caretaker--a retired
police-sergeant--suggested the Japanese art of ju-jitsu, while the
nature of the robbery was consistent with the value set by the Japanese
on works of art. Finally, the fact that only a particular collection was
taken, suggested a special, and probably national, character in the
things stolen, while their portability--you will remember that goods of
the value of from eight to twelve thousand pounds were taken away in two
hand-packages--was much more consistent with Japanese than Chinese
works, of which the latter tend rather to be bulky and ponderous. Still,
it was nothing but a bare hypothesis until we had seen Futashima--and,
indeed, is no more now. I may, after all, be entirely mistaken."

He was not, however; and at this moment there reposes in my drawing-room
an ancient netsuke, which came as a thank-offering from Mr. Isaac L\F6we
on the recovery of the booty from a back room in No. 13, Birket Street,
Limehouse. The treasure, of course, was given in the first place to
Thorndyke, but transferred by him to my wife on the pretence that but
for my suggestion of shell-dust the robber would never have been traced.
Which is, on the face of it, preposterous.




IV

THE BLUE SEQUIN


Thorndyke stood looking up and down the platform with anxiety that
increased as the time drew near for the departure of the train.

"This is very unfortunate," he said, reluctantly stepping into an empty
smoking compartment as the guard executed a flourish with his green
flag. "I am afraid we have missed our friend." He closed the door, and,
as the train began to move, thrust his head out of the window.

"Now I wonder if that will be he," he continued. "If so, he has caught
the train by the skin of his teeth, and is now in one of the rear
compartments."

The subject of Thorndyke's speculations was Mr. Edward Stopford, of the
firm of Stopford and Myers, of Portugal Street, solicitors, and his
connection with us at present arose out of a telegram that had reached
our chambers on the preceding evening. It was reply-paid, and ran thus:

     "Can you come here to-morrow to direct defence? Important case. All
     costs undertaken by us.--STOPFORD AND MYERS."

Thorndyke's reply had been in the affirmative, and early on this present
morning a further telegram--evidently posted overnight--had been
delivered:

     "Shall leave for Woldhurst by 8.25 from Charing Cross. Will call
     for you if possible.--EDWARD STOPFORD."

He had not called, however, and, since he was unknown personally to us
both, we could not judge whether or not he had been among the passengers
on the platform.

"It is most unfortunate," Thorndyke repeated, "for it deprives us of
that preliminary consideration of the case which is so invaluable." He
filled his pipe thoughtfully, and, having made a fruitless inspection of
the platform at London Bridge, took up the paper that he had bought at
the bookstall, and began to turn over the leaves, running his eye
quickly down the columns, unmindful of the journalistic baits in
paragraph or article.

"It is a great disadvantage," he observed, while still glancing through
the paper, "to come plump into an inquiry without preparation--to be
confronted with the details before one has a chance of considering the
case in general terms. For instance--"

He paused, leaving the sentence unfinished, and as I looked up
inquiringly I saw that he had turned over another page, and was now
reading attentively.

"This looks like our case, Jervis," he said presently, handing me the
paper and indicating a paragraph at the top of the page. It was quite
brief, and was headed "Terrible Murder in Kent," the account being as
follows:

"A shocking crime was discovered yesterday morning at the little town of
Woldhurst, which lies on the branch line from Halbury Junction. The
discovery was made by a porter who was inspecting the carriages of the
train which had just come in. On opening the door of a first-class
compartment, he was horrified to find the body of a fashionably-dressed
woman stretched upon the floor. Medical aid was immediately summoned,
and on the arrival of the divisional surgeon, Dr. Morton, it was
ascertained that the woman had not been dead more than a few minutes.

[Illustration: THE DISCOVERY.]

"The state of the corpse leaves no doubt that a murder of a most brutal
kind has been perpetrated, the cause of death being a penetrating wound
of the head, inflicted with some pointed implement, which must have been
used with terrible violence, since it has perforated the skull and
entered the brain. That robbery was not the motive of the crime is made
clear by the fact that an expensively fitted dressing-bag was found on
the rack, and that the dead woman's jewellery, including several
valuable diamond rings, was untouched. It is rumoured that an arrest has
been made by the local police."

"A gruesome affair," I remarked, as I handed back the paper, "but the
report does not give us much information."

"It does not," Thorndyke agreed, "and yet it gives us something to
consider. Here is a perforating wound of the skull, inflicted with some
pointed implement--that is, assuming that it is not a bullet wound. Now,
what kind of implement would be capable of inflicting such an injury?
How would such an implement be used in the confined space of a
railway-carriage, and what sort of person would be in possession of such
an implement? These are preliminary questions that are worth
considering, and I commend them to you, together with the further
problems of the possible motive--excluding robbery--and any
circumstances other than murder which might account for the injury."

"The choice of suitable implements is not very great," I observed.

"It is very limited, and most of them, such as a plasterer's pick or a
geological hammer, are associated with certain definite occupations. You
have a notebook?"

I had, and, accepting the hint, I produced it and pursued my further
reflections in silence, while my companion, with his notebook also on
his knee, gazed steadily out of the window. And thus he remained,
wrapped in thought, jotting down an entry now and again in his book,
until the train slowed down at Halbury Junction, where we had to change
on to a branch line.

As we stepped out, I noticed a well-dressed man hurrying up the platform
from the rear and eagerly scanning the faces of the few passengers who
had alighted. Soon he espied us, and, approaching quickly, asked, as he
looked from one of us to the other:

"Dr. Thorndyke?"

"Yes," replied my colleague, adding: "And you, I presume, are Mr. Edward
Stopford?"

The solicitor bowed. "This is a dreadful affair," he said, in an
agitated manner. "I see you have the paper. A most shocking affair. I am
immensely relieved to find you here. Nearly missed the train, and feared
I should miss you."

"There appears to have been an arrest," Thorndyke began.

"Yes--my brother. Terrible business. Let us walk up the platform; our
train won't start for a quarter of an hour yet."

We deposited our joint Gladstone and Thorndyke's travelling-case in an
empty first-class compartment, and then, with the solicitor between us,
strolled up to the unfrequented end of the platform.

"My brother's position," said Mr. Stopford, "fills me with dismay--but
let me give you the facts in order, and you shall judge for yourself.
This poor creature who has been murdered so brutally was a Miss Edith
Grant. She was formerly an artist's model, and as such was a good deal
employed by my brother, who is a painter--Harold Stopford, you know,
A.R.A. now--"

"I know his work very well, and charming work it is."

"I think so, too. Well, in those days he was quite a youngster--about
twenty--and he became very intimate with Miss Grant, in quite an
innocent way, though not very discreet; but she was a nice respectable
girl, as most English models are, and no one thought any harm. However,
a good many letters passed between them, and some little presents,
amongst which was a beaded chain carrying a locket, and in this he was
fool enough to put his portrait and the inscription, 'Edith, from
Harold.'

"Later on Miss Grant, who had a rather good voice, went on the stage, in
the comic opera line, and, in consequence, her habits and associates
changed somewhat; and, as Harold had meanwhile become engaged, he was
naturally anxious to get his letters back, and especially to exchange
the locket for some less compromising gift. The letters she eventually
sent him, but refused absolutely to part with the locket.

"Now, for the last month Harold has been staying at Halbury, making
sketching excursions into the surrounding country, and yesterday
morning he took the train to Shinglehurst, the third station from here,
and the one before Woldhurst.

"On the platform here he met Miss Grant, who had come down from London,
and was going on to Worthing. They entered the branch train together,
having a first-class compartment to themselves. It seems she was wearing
his locket at the time, and he made another appeal to her to make an
exchange, which she refused, as before. The discussion appears to have
become rather heated and angry on both sides, for the guard and a porter
at Munsden both noticed that they seemed to be quarrelling; but the
upshot of the affair was that the lady snapped the chain, and tossed it
together with the locket to my brother, and they parted quite amiably at
Shinglehurst, where Harold got out. He was then carrying his full
sketching kit, including a large holland umbrella, the lower joint of
which is an ash staff fitted with a powerful steel spike for driving
into the ground.

"It was about half-past ten when he got out at Shinglehurst; by eleven
he had reached his pitch and got to work, and he painted steadily for
three hours. Then he packed up his traps, and was just starting on his
way back to the station, when he was met by the police and arrested.

"And now, observe the accumulation of circumstantial evidence against
him. He was the last person seen in company with the murdered woman--for
no one seems to have seen her after they left Munsden; he appeared to be
quarrelling with her when she was last seen alive, he had a reason for
possibly wishing for her death, he was provided with an implement--a
spiked staff--capable of inflicting the injury which caused her death,
and, when he was searched, there was found in his possession the locket
and broken chain, apparently removed from her person with violence.

"Against all this is, of course, his known character--he is the gentlest
and most amiable of men--and his subsequent conduct--imbecile to the
last degree if he had been guilty; but, as a lawyer, I can't help seeing
that appearances are almost hopelessly against him."

"We won't say 'hopelessly,'" replied Thorndyke, as we took our places in
the carriage, "though I expect the police are pretty cocksure. When does
the inquest open?"

"To-day at four. I have obtained an order from the coroner for you to
examine the body and be present at the _post-mortem_."

"Do you happen to know the exact position of the wound?"

"Yes; it is a little above and behind the left ear--a horrible round
hole, with a ragged cut or tear running from it to the side of the
forehead."

"And how was the body lying?"

"Right along the floor, with the feet close to the off-side door."

"Was the wound on the head the only one?"

"No; there was a long cut or bruise on the right cheek--a contused wound
the police surgeon called it, which he believes to have been inflicted
with a heavy and rather blunt weapon. I have not heard of any other
wounds or bruises."

"Did anyone enter the train yesterday at Shinglehurst?" Thorndyke asked.

"No one entered the train after it left Halbury."

Thorndyke considered these statements in silence, and presently fell
into a brown study, from which he roused only as the train moved out of
Shinglehurst station.

"It would be about here that the murder was committed," said Mr.
Stopford; "at least, between here and Woldhurst."

Thorndyke nodded rather abstractedly, being engaged at the moment in
observing with great attention the objects that were visible from the
windows.

"I notice," he remarked presently, "a number of chips scattered about
between the rails, and some of the chair-wedges look new. Have there
been any platelayers at work lately?"

"Yes," answered Stopford, "they are on the line now, I believe--at
least, I saw a gang working near Woldhurst yesterday, and they are said
to have set a rick on fire; I saw it smoking when I came down."

"Indeed; and this middle line of rails is, I suppose, a sort of siding?"

"Yes; they shunt the goods trains and empty trucks on to it. There are
the remains of the rick--still smouldering, you see."

Thorndyke gazed absently at the blackened heap until an empty
cattle-truck on the middle track hid it from view. This was succeeded by
a line of goods-waggons, and these by a passenger coach, one compartment
of which--a first-class--was closed up and sealed. The train now began
to slow down rather suddenly, and a couple of minutes later we brought
up in Woldhurst station.

It was evident that rumours of Thorndyke's advent had preceded us, for
the entire staff--two porters, an inspector, and the
station-master--were waiting expectantly on the platform, and the latter
came forward, regardless of his dignity, to help us with our luggage.

"Do you think I could see the carriage?" Thorndyke asked the solicitor.

"Not the inside, sir," said the station-master, on being appealed to.
"The police have sealed it up. You would have to ask the inspector."

"Well, I can have a look at the outside, I suppose?" said Thorndyke, and
to this the station-master readily agreed, and offered to accompany us.

"What other first-class passengers were there?" Thorndyke asked.

"None, sir. There was only one first-class coach, and the deceased was
the only person in it. It has given us all a dreadful turn, this affair
has," he continued, as we set off up the line. "I was on the platform
when the train came in. We were watching a rick that was burning up the
line, and a rare blaze it made, too; and I was just saying that we
should have to move the cattle-truck that was on the mid-track, because,
you see, sir, the smoke and sparks were blowing across, and I thought it
would frighten the poor beasts. And Mr. Felton he don't like his beasts
handled roughly. He says it spoils the meat."

"No doubt he is right," said Thorndyke. "But now, tell me, do you think
it is possible for any person to board or leave the train on the
off-side unobserved? Could a man, for instance, enter a compartment on
the off-side at one station and drop off as the train was slowing down
at the next, without being seen?"

"I doubt it," replied the station-master. "Still, I wouldn't say it is
impossible."

"Thank you. Oh, and there's another question. You have a gang of men at
work on the line, I see. Now, do those men belong to the district?"

"No, sir; they are strangers, every one, and pretty rough diamonds some
of 'em are. But I shouldn't say there was any real harm in 'em. If you
was suspecting any of 'em of being mixed up in this--"

"I am not," interrupted Thorndyke rather shortly. "I suspect nobody; but
I wish to get all the facts of the case at the outset."

"Naturally, sir," replied the abashed official; and we pursued our way
in silence.

"Do you remember, by the way," said Thorndyke, as we approached the
empty coach, "whether the off-side door of the compartment was closed
and locked when the body was discovered?"

"It was closed, sir, but not locked. Why, sir, did you think--?"

"Nothing, nothing. The sealed compartment is the one, of course?"

Without waiting for a reply, he commenced his survey of the coach, while
I gently restrained our two companions from shadowing him, as they were
disposed to do. The off-side footboard occupied his attention specially,
and when he had scrutinized minutely the part opposite the fatal
compartment, he walked slowly from end to end with his eyes but a few
inches from its surface, as though he was searching for something.

Near what had been the rear end he stopped, and drew from his pocket a
piece of paper; then, with a moistened finger-tip he picked up from the
footboard some evidently minute object, which he carefully transferred
to the paper, folding the latter and placing it in his pocket-book.

He next mounted the footboard, and, having peered in through the window
of the sealed compartment, produced from his pocket a small insufflator
or powder-blower, with which he blew a stream of impalpable smoke-like
powder on to the edges of the middle window, bestowing the closest
attention on the irregular dusty patches in which it settled, and even
measuring one on the jamb of the window with a pocket-rule. At length he
stepped down, and, having carefully looked over the near-side footboard,
announced that he had finished for the present.

As we were returning down the line, we passed a working man, who seemed
to be viewing the chairs and sleepers with more than casual interest.

"That, I suppose, is one of the plate-layers?" Thorndyke suggested to
the station-master.

"Yes, the foreman of the gang," was the reply.

"I'll just step back and have a word with him, if you will walk on
slowly." And my colleague turned back briskly and overtook the man, with
whom he remained in conversation for some minutes.

"I think I see the police inspector on the platform," remarked
Thorndyke, as we approached the station.

"Yes, there he is," said our guide. "Come down to see what you are
after, sir, I expect." Which was doubtless the case, although the
officer professed to be there by the merest chance.

"You would like to see the weapon, sir, I suppose?" he remarked, when he
had introduced himself.

"The umbrella-spike," Thorndyke corrected. "Yes, if I may. We are going
to the mortuary now."

"Then you'll pass the station on the way; so, if you care to look in, I
will walk up with you."

This proposition being agreed to, we all proceeded to the
police-station, including the station-master, who was on the very tiptoe
of curiosity.

"There you are, sir," said the inspector, unlocking his office, and
ushering us in. "Don't say we haven't given every facility to the
defence. There are all the effects of the accused, including the very
weapon the deed was done with."

"Come, come," protested Thorndyke; "we mustn't be premature." He took
the stout ash staff from the officer, and, having examined the
formidable spike through a lens, drew from his pocket a steel
calliper-gauge, with which he carefully measured the diameter of the
spike, and the staff to which it was fixed. "And now," he said, when he
had made a note of the measurements in his book, "we will look at the
colour-box and the sketch. Ha! a very orderly man, your brother. Mr.
Stopford. Tubes all in their places, palette-knives wiped clean, palette
cleaned off and rubbed bright, brushes wiped--they ought to be washed
before they stiffen--all this is very significant." He unstrapped the
sketch from the blank canvas to which it was pinned, and, standing it on
a chair in a good light, stepped back to look at it.

"And you tell me that that is only three hours' work!" he exclaimed,
looking at the lawyer. "It is really a marvellous achievement."

"My brother is a very rapid worker," replied Stopford dejectedly.

"Yes, but this is not only amazingly rapid; it is in his very happiest
vein--full of spirit and feeling. But we mustn't stay to look at it
longer." He replaced the canvas on its pins, and having glanced at the
locket and some other articles that lay in a drawer, thanked the
inspector for his courtesy and withdrew.

"That sketch and the colour-box appear very suggestive to me," he
remarked, as we walked up the street.

"To me also," said Stopford gloomily, "for they are under lock and key,
like their owner, poor old fellow."

He sighed heavily, and we walked on in silence.

The mortuary-keeper had evidently heard of our arrival, for he was
waiting at the door with the key in his hand, and, on being shown the
coroner's order, unlocked the door, and we entered together; but, after
a momentary glance at the ghostly, shrouded figure lying upon the slate
table, Stopford turned pale and retreated, saying that he would wait for
us outside with the mortuary-keeper.

As soon as the door was closed and locked on the inside, Thorndyke
glanced curiously round the bare, whitewashed building. A stream of
sunlight poured in through the skylight, and fell upon the silent form
that lay so still under its covering-sheet, and one stray beam glanced
into a corner by the door, where, on a row of pegs and a deal table, the
dead woman's clothing was displayed.

"There is something unspeakably sad in these poor relics, Jervis," said
Thorndyke, as we stood before them. "To me they are more tragic, more
full of pathetic suggestion, than the corpse itself. See the smart,
jaunty hat, and the costly skirts hanging there, so desolate and
forlorn; the dainty _lingerie_ on the table, neatly folded--by the
mortuary-man's wife, I hope--the little French shoes and open-work silk
stockings. How pathetically eloquent they are of harmless, womanly
vanity, and the gay, careless life, snapped short in the twinkling of an
eye. But we must not give way to sentiment. There is another life
threatened, and it is in our keeping."

He lifted the hat from its peg, and turned it over in his hand. It was,
I think, what is called a "picture-hat"--a huge, flat, shapeless mass of
gauze and ribbon and feather, spangled over freely with dark-blue
sequins. In one part of the brim was a ragged hole, and from this the
glittering sequins dropped off in little showers when the hat was moved.

"This will have been worn tilted over on the left side," said Thorndyke,
"judging by the general shape and the position of the hole."

"Yes," I agreed. "Like that of the Duchess of Devonshire in
Gainsborough's portrait."

"Exactly."

He shook a few of the sequins into the palm of his hand, and, replacing
the hat on its peg, dropped the little discs into an envelope, on which
he wrote, "From the hat," and slipped it into his pocket. Then, stepping
over to the table, he drew back the sheet reverently and even tenderly
from the dead woman's face, and looked down at it with grave pity. It
was a comely face, white as marble, serene and peaceful in expression,
with half-closed eyes, and framed with a mass of brassy, yellow hair;
but its beauty was marred by a long linear wound, half cut, half bruise,
running down the right cheek from the eye to the chin.

"A handsome girl," Thorndyke commented--"a dark-haired blonde. What a
sin to have disfigured herself so with that horrible peroxide." He
smoothed the hair back from her forehead, and added: "She seems to have
applied the stuff last about ten days ago. There is about a quarter of
an inch of dark hair at the roots. What do you make of that wound on the
cheek?"

"It looks as if she had struck some sharp angle in falling, though, as
the seats are padded in first-class carriages, I don't see what she
could have struck."

"No. And now let us look at the other wound. Will you note down the
description?" He handed me his notebook, and I wrote down as he
dictated: "A clean-punched circular hole in skull, an inch behind and
above margin of left ear--diameter, an inch and seven-sixteenths;
starred fracture of parietal bone; membranes perforated, and brain
entered deeply; ragged scalp-wound, extending forward to margin of left
orbit; fragments of gauze and sequins in edges of wound. That will do
for the present. Dr. Morton will give us further details if we want
them."

He pocketed his callipers and rule, drew from the bruised scalp one or
two loose hairs, which he placed in the envelope with the sequins, and,
having looked over the body for other wounds or bruises (of which there
were none), replaced the sheet, and prepared to depart.

As we walked away from the mortuary, Thorndyke was silent and deeply
thoughtful, and I gathered that he was piecing together the facts that
he had acquired. At length Mr. Stopford, who had several times looked at
him curiously, said:

"The _post-mortem_ will take place at three, and it is now only
half-past eleven. What would you like to do next?"

Thorndyke, who, in spite of his mental preoccupation, had been looking
about him in his usual keen, attentive way, halted suddenly.

"Your reference to the _post-mortem_," said he, "reminds me that I
forgot to put the ox-gall into my case."

"Ox-gall!" I exclaimed, endeavouring vainly to connect this substance
with the technique of the pathologist. "What were you going to do
with--"

But here I broke off, remembering my friend's dislike of any discussion
of his methods before strangers.

"I suppose," he continued, "there would hardly be an artist's colourman
in a place of this size?"

"I should think not," said Stopford. "But couldn't you got the stuff
from a butcher? There's a shop just across the road."

"So there is," agreed Thorndyke, who had already observed the shop. "The
gall ought, of course, to be prepared, but we can filter it
ourselves--that is, if the butcher has any. We will try him, at any
rate."

He crossed the road towards the shop, over which the name "Felton"
appeared in gilt lettering, and, addressing himself to the proprietor,
who stood at the door, introduced himself and explained his wants.

"Ox-gall?" said the butcher. "No, sir, I haven't any just now; but I am
having a beast killed this afternoon, and I can let you have some then.
In fact," he added, after a pause, "as the matter is of importance, I
can have one killed at once if you wish it."

"That is very kind of you," said Thorndyke, "and it would greatly oblige
me. Is the beast perfectly healthy?"

"They're in splendid condition, sir. I picked them out of the herd
myself. But you shall see them--ay, and choose the one that you'd like
killed."

"You are really very good," said Thorndyke warmly. "I will just run into
the chemist's next door, and get a suitable bottle, and then I will
avail myself of your exceedingly kind offer."

He hurried into the chemist's shop, from which he presently emerged,
carrying a white paper parcel; and we then followed the butcher down a
narrow lane by the side of his shop. It led to an enclosure containing a
small pen, in which were confined three handsome steers, whose glossy,
black coats contrasted in a very striking manner with their long,
greyish-white, nearly straight horns.

"These are certainly very fine beasts, Mr. Felton," said Thorndyke, as
we drew up beside the pen, "and in excellent condition, too."

He leaned over the pen and examined the beasts critically, especially as
to their eyes and horns; then, approaching the nearest one, he raised
his stick and bestowed a smart tap on the under-side of the right horn,
following it by a similar tap on the left one, a proceeding that the
beast viewed with stolid surprise.

"The state of the horns," explained Thorndyke, as he moved on to the
next steer, "enables one to judge, to some extent, of the beast's
health."

"Lord bless you, sir," laughed Mr. Felton, "they haven't got no feeling
in their horns, else what good 'ud their horns be to 'em?"

Apparently he was right, for the second steer was as indifferent to a
sounding rap on either horn as the first. Nevertheless, when Thorndyke
approached the third steer, I unconsciously drew nearer to watch; and I
noticed that, as the stick struck the horn, the beast drew back in
evident alarm, and that when the blow was repeated, it became manifestly
uneasy.

"He don't seem to like that," said the butcher. "Seems as if--Hullo,
that's queer!"

Thorndyke had just brought his stick up against the left horn, and
immediately the beast had winced and started back, shaking his head and
moaning. There was not, however, room for him to back out of reach, and
Thorndyke, by leaning into the pen, was able to inspect the sensitive
horn, which he did with the closest attention, while the butcher looked
on with obvious perturbation.

"You don't think there's anything wrong with this beast, sir, I hope,"
said he.

"I can't say without a further examination," replied Thorndyke. "It may
be the horn only that is affected. If you will have it sawn off close to
the head, and sent up to me at the hotel, I will look at it and tell
you. And, by way of preventing any mistakes, I will mark it and cover it
up, to protect it from injury in the slaughter-house."

He opened his parcel and produced from it a wide-mouthed bottle labelled
"Ox-gall," a sheet of gutta-percha tissue, a roller bandage, and a stick
of sealing-wax. Handing the bottle to Mr. Felton, he encased the distal
half of the horn in a covering by means of the tissue and the bandage,
which he fixed securely with the sealing-wax.

"I'll saw the horn off and bring it up to the hotel myself, with the
ox-gall," said Mr. Felton. "You shall have them in half an hour."

He was as good as his word, for in half an hour Thorndyke was seated at
a small table by the window of our private sitting-room in the Black
Bull Hotel. The table was covered with newspaper, and on it lay the long
grey horn and Thorndyke's travelling-case, now open and displaying a
small microscope and its accessories. The butcher was seated solidly in
an armchair waiting, with a half-suspicious eye on Thorndyke for the
report; and I was endeavouring by cheerful talk to keep Mr. Stopford
from sinking into utter despondency, though I, too, kept a furtive
watch on my colleague's rather mysterious proceedings.

I saw him unwind the bandage and apply the horn to his ear, bending it
slightly to and fro. I watched him, as he scanned the surface closely
through a lens, and observed him as he scraped some substance from the
pointed end on to a glass slide, and, having applied a drop of some
reagent, began to tease out the scraping with a pair of mounted needles.
Presently he placed the slide under the microscope, and, having observed
it attentively for a minute or two, turned round sharply.

"Come and look at this, Jervis," said he.

I wanted no second bidding, being on tenterhooks of curiosity, but came
over and applied my eye to the instrument.

"Well, what is it?" he asked.

"A multipolar nerve corpuscle--very shrivelled, but unmistakable."

"And this?"

He moved the slide to a fresh spot.

"Two pyramidal nerve corpuscles and some portions of fibres."

"And what do you say the tissue is?"

"Cortical brain substance, I should say, without a doubt."

"I entirely agree with you. And that being so," he added, turning to Mr.
Stopford, "we may say that the case for the defence is practically
complete."

"What, in Heaven's name, do you mean?" exclaimed Stopford, starting up.

"I mean that we can now prove when and where and how Miss Grant met her
death. Come and sit down here, and I will explain. No, you needn't go
away, Mr. Felton. We shall have to subpoena you. Perhaps," he
continued, "we had better go over the facts and see what they suggest.
And first we note the position of the body, lying with the feet close to
the off-side door, showing that, when she fell, the deceased was
sitting, or more probably standing, close to that door. Next there is
this." He drew from his pocket a folded paper, which he opened,
displaying a tiny blue disc. "It is one of the sequins with which her
hat was trimmed, and I have in this envelope several more which I took
from the hat itself.

"This single sequin I picked up on the rear end of the off side
footboard, and its presence there makes it nearly certain that at some
time Miss Grant had put her head out of the window on that side.

"The next item of evidence I obtained by dusting the margins of the
off-side window with a light powder, which made visible a greasy
impression three and a quarter inches long on the sharp corner of the
right-hand jamb (right-hand from the inside, I mean).

"And now as to the evidence furnished by the body. The wound in the
skull is behind and above the left ear, is roughly circular, and
measures one inch and seven-sixteenths at most, and a ragged scalp-wound
runs from it towards the left eye. On the right cheek is a linear
contused wound three and a quarter inches long. There are no other
injuries.

"Our next facts are furnished by this." He took up the horn and tapped
it with his finger, while the solicitor and Mr. Felton stared at him in
speechless wonder. "You notice it is a left horn, and you remember that
it was highly sensitive. If you put your ear to it while I strain it,
you will hear the grating of a fracture in the bony core. Now look at
the pointed end, and you will see several deep scratches running
lengthwise, and where those scratches end the diameter of the horn is,
as you see by this calliper-gauge, one inch and seven-sixteenths.
Covering the scratches is a dry blood-stain, and at the extreme tip is a
small mass of a dried substance which Dr. Jervis and I have examined
with the microscope and are satisfied is brain tissue."

"Good God!" exclaimed Stopford eagerly. "Do you mean to say--"

"Let us finish with the facts, Mr. Stopford," Thorndyke interrupted.
"Now, if you look closely at that blood-stain, you will see a short
piece of hair stuck to the horn, and through this lens you can make out
the root-bulb. It is a golden hair, you notice, but near the root it is
black, and our calliper-gauge shows us that the black portion is
fourteen sixty-fourths of an inch long. Now, in this envelope are some
hairs that I removed from the dead woman's head. They also are golden
hairs, black at the roots, and when I measure the black portion I find
it to be fourteen sixty-fourths of an inch long. Then, finally, there is
this."

He turned the horn over, and pointed to a small patch of dried blood.
Embedded in it was a blue sequin.

Mr. Stopford and the butcher both gazed at the horn in silent amazement;
then the former drew a deep breath and looked up at Thorndyke.

"No doubt," said he, "you can explain this mystery, but for my part I am
utterly bewildered, though you are filling me with hope."

"And yet the matter is quite simple," returned Thorndyke, "even with
these few facts before us, which are only a selection from the body of
evidence in our possession. But I will state my theory, and you shall
judge." He rapidly sketched a rough plan on a sheet of paper, and
continued: "These were the conditions when the train was approaching
Woldhurst: Here was the passenger-coach, here was the burning rick, and
here was a cattle-truck. This steer was in that truck. Now my hypothesis
is that at that time Miss Grant was standing with her head out of the
off-side window, watching the burning rick. Her wide hat, worn on the
left side, hid from her view the cattle-truck which she was approaching,
and then this is what happened." He sketched another plan to a larger
scale. "One of the steers--this one--had thrust its long horn out
through the bars. The point of that horn struck the deceased's head,
driving her face violently against the corner of the window, and then,
in disengaging, ploughed its way through the scalp, and suffered a
fracture of its core from the violence of the wrench. This hypothesis is
inherently probable, it fits all the facts, and those facts admit of no
other explanation."

The solicitor sat for a moment as though dazed; then he rose impulsively
and seized Thorndyke's hands. "I don't know what to say to you," he
exclaimed huskily, "except that you have saved my brother's life, and
for that may God reward you!"

The butcher rose from his chair with a slow grin.

"It seems to me," said he, "as if that ox-gall was what you might call a
blind, eh, sir?"

And Thorndyke smiled an inscrutable smile.

       *       *       *       *       *

When we returned to town on the following day we were a party of four,
which included Mr. Harold Stopford. The verdict of "Death by
misadventure," promptly returned by the coroner's jury, had been
shortly followed by his release from custody, and he now sat with his
brother and me, listening with rapt attention to Thorndyke's analysis of
the case.

"So, you see," the latter concluded, "I had six possible theories of the
cause of death worked out before I reached Halbury, and it only remained
to select the one that fitted the facts. And when I had seen the
cattle-truck, had picked up that sequin, had heard the description of
the steers, and had seen the hat and the wounds, there was nothing left
to do but the filling in of details."

"And you never doubted my innocence?" asked Harold Stopford.

Thorndyke smiled at his quondam client.

"Not after I had seen your colour-box and your sketch," said he, "to say
nothing of the spike."




V

THE MOABITE CIPHER


A large and motley crowd lined the pavements of Oxford Street as
Thorndyke and I made our way leisurely eastward. Floral decorations and
drooping bunting announced one of those functions inaugurated from time
to time by a benevolent Government for the entertainment of fashionable
loungers and the relief of distressed pickpockets. For a Russian Grand
Duke, who had torn himself away, amidst valedictory explosions, from a
loving if too demonstrative people, was to pass anon on his way to the
Guildhall; and a British Prince, heroically indiscreet, was expected to
occupy a seat in the ducal carriage.

Near Rathbone Place Thorndyke halted and drew my attention to a
smart-looking man who stood lounging in a doorway, cigarette in hand.

"Our old friend Inspector Badger," said Thorndyke. "He seems mightily
interested in that gentleman in the light overcoat. How d'ye do,
Badger?" for at this moment the detective caught his eye and bowed. "Who
is your friend?"

"That's what I want to know, sir," replied the inspector. "I've been
shadowing him for the last half-hour, but I can't make him out, though I
believe I've seen him somewhere. He don't look like a foreigner, but he
has got something bulky in his pocket, so I must keep him in sight until
the Duke is safely past. I wish," he added gloomily, "these beastly
Russians would stop at home. They give us no end of trouble."

"Are you expecting any--occurrences, then?" asked Thorndyke.

"Bless you, sir," exclaimed Badger, "the whole route is lined with
plain-clothes men. You see, it is known that several desperate
characters followed the Duke to England, and there are a good many
exiles living here who would like to have a rap at him. Hallo! What's he
up to now?"

The man in the light overcoat had suddenly caught the inspector's too
inquiring eye, and forthwith dived into the crowd at the edge of the
pavement. In his haste he trod heavily on the foot of a big,
rough-looking man, by whom he was in a moment hustled out into the road
with such violence that he fell sprawling face downwards. It was an
unlucky moment. A mounted constable was just then backing in upon the
crowd, and before he could gather the meaning of the shout that arose
from the bystanders, his horse had set down one hind-hoof firmly on the
prostrate man's back.

The inspector signalled to a constable, who forthwith made a way for us
through the crowd; but even as we approached the injured man, he rose
stiffly and looked round with a pale, vacant face.

"Are you hurt?" Thorndyke asked gently, with an earnest look into the
frightened, wondering eyes.

"No, sir," was the reply; "only I feel queer--sinking--just here."

He laid a trembling hand on his chest, and Thorndyke, still eyeing him
anxiously, said in a low voice to the inspector: "Cab or ambulance, as
quickly as you can."

A cab was led round from Newman Street, and the injured man put into it.
Thorndyke, Badger, and I entered, and we drove off up Rathbone Place. As
we proceeded, our patient's face grew more and more ashen, drawn, and
anxious; his breathing was shallow and uneven, and his teeth chattered
slightly. The cab swung round into Goodge Street, and then--suddenly, in
the twinkling of an eye--there came a change. The eyelids and jaw
relaxed, the eyes became filmy, and the whole form subsided into the
corner in a shrunken heap, with the strange gelatinous limpness of a
body that is dead as a whole, while its tissues are still alive.

"God save us! The man's dead!" exclaimed the inspector in a shocked
voice--for even policemen have their feelings. He sat staring at the
corpse, as it nodded gently with the jolting of the cab, until we drew
up inside the courtyard of the Middlesex Hospital, when he got out
briskly, with suddenly renewed cheerfulness, to help the porter to place
the body on the wheeled couch.

"We shall know who he is now, at any rate," said he, as we followed the
couch to the casualty-room. Thorndyke nodded unsympathetically. The
medical instinct in him was for the moment stronger than the legal.

The house-surgeon leaned over the couch, and made a rapid examination as
he listened to our account of the accident. Then he straightened himself
up and looked at Thorndyke.

"Internal h\E6morrhage, I expect," said he. "At any rate, he's dead, poor
beggar!--as dead as Nebuchadnezzar. Ah! here comes a bobby; it's his
affair now."

A sergeant came into the room, breathing quickly, and looked in surprise
from the corpse to the inspector. But the latter, without loss of time,
proceeded to turn out the dead man's pockets, commencing with the bulky
object that had first attracted his attention; which proved to be a
brown-paper parcel tied up with red tape.

"Pork-pie, begad!" he exclaimed with a crestfallen air as he cut the
tape and opened the package. "You had better go through his other
pockets, sergeant."

The small heap of odds and ends that resulted from this process tended,
with a single exception, to throw little light on the man's identity;
the exception being a letter, sealed, but not stamped, addressed in an
exceedingly illiterate hand to Mr. Adolf Sch\F6nberg, 213, Greek Street,
Soho.

"He was going to leave it by hand, I expect," observed the inspector,
with a wistful glance at the sealed envelope. "I think I'll take it
round myself, and you had better come with me, sergeant."

He slipped the letter into his pocket, and, leaving the sergeant to take
possession of the other effects, made his way out of the building.

"I suppose, Doctor," said he, as we crossed into Berners Street, "you
are not coming our way! Don't want to see Mr. Sch\F6nberg, h'm?"

Thorndyke reflected for a moment. "Well, it isn't very far, and we may
as well see the end of the incident. Yes; let us go together."

No. 213, Greek Street, was one of those houses that irresistibly suggest
to the observer the idea of a church organ, either jamb of the doorway
being adorned with a row of brass bell-handles corresponding to the
stop-knobs.

These the sergeant examined with the air of an expert musician, and
having, as it were, gauged the capacity of the instrument, selected the
middle knob on the right-hand side and pulled it briskly; whereupon a
first-floor window was thrown up and a head protruded. But it afforded
us a momentary glimpse only, for, having caught the sergeant's upturned
eye, it retired with surprising precipitancy, and before we had time to
speculate on the apparition, the street-door was opened and a man
emerged. He was about to close the door after him when the inspector
interposed.

"Does Mr. Adolf Sch\F6nberg live here?"

The new-comer, a very typical Jew of the red-haired type, surveyed us
thoughtfully through his gold-rimmed spectacles as he repeated the name.

"Sch\F6nberg--Sch\F6nberg? Ah, yes! I know. He lives on the third-floor. I
saw him go up a short time ago. Third-floor back;" and indicating the
open door with a wave of the hand, he raised his hat and passed into the
street.

"I suppose we had better go up," said the inspector, with a dubious
glance at the row of bell-pulls. He accordingly started up the stairs,
and we all followed in his wake.

There were two doors at the back on the third-floor, but as the one was
open, displaying an unoccupied bedroom, the inspector rapped smartly on
the other. It flew open almost immediately, and a fierce-looking little
man confronted us with a hostile stare.

"Well?" said he.

"Mr. Adolf Sch\F6nberg?" inquired the inspector.

"Well? What about him?" snapped our new acquaintance.

"I wished to have a few words with him," said Badger.

"Then what the deuce do you come banging at _my_ door for?" demanded the
other.

"Why, doesn't he live here?"

"No. First-floor front," replied our friend, preparing to close the
door.

"Pardon me," said Thorndyke, "but what is Mr. Sch\F6nberg like? I mean--"

"Like?" interrupted the resident. "He's like a blooming Sheeny, with a
carroty beard and gold gig-lamps!" and, having presented this
impressionist sketch, he brought the interview to a definite close by
slamming the door and turning the key.

With a wrathful exclamation, the inspector turned towards the stairs,
down which the sergeant was already clattering in hot haste, and made
his way back to the ground-floor, followed, as before, by Thorndyke and
me. On the doorstep we found the sergeant breathlessly interrogating a
smartly-dressed youth, whom I had seen alight from a hansom as we
entered the house, and who now stood with a notebook tucked under his
arm, sharpening a pencil with deliberate care.

"Mr. James saw him come out, sir," said the sergeant. "He turned up
towards the Square."

"Did he seem to hurry?" asked the inspector.

"Rather," replied the reporter. "As soon as you were inside, he went off
like a lamplighter. You won't catch him now."

"We don't want to catch him," the detective rejoined gruffly; then,
backing out of earshot of the eager pressman, he said in a lower tone:
"That was Mr. Sch\F6nberg, beyond a doubt, and it is clear that he has
some reason for making himself scarce; so I shall consider myself
justified in opening that note."

He suited the action to the word, and, having cut the envelope open with
official neatness, drew out the enclosure.

"My hat!" he exclaimed, as his eye fell upon the contents. "What in
creation is this? It isn't shorthand, but what the deuce is it?"

He handed the document to Thorndyke, who, having held it up to the light
and felt the paper critically, proceeded to examine it with keen
interest. It consisted of a single half-sheet of thin notepaper, both
sides of which were covered with strange, crabbed characters, written
with a brownish-black ink in continuous lines, without any spaces to
indicate the divisions into words; and, but for the modern material
which bore the writing, it might have been a portion of some ancient
manuscript or forgotten codex.

"What do you make of it, Doctor?" inquired the inspector anxiously,
after a pause, during which Thorndyke had scrutinized the strange
writing with knitted brows.

"Not a great deal," replied Thorndyke. "The character is the Moabite or
Phoenician--primitive Semitic, in fact--and reads from right to left.
The language I take to be Hebrew. At any rate, I can find no Greek
words, and I see here a group of letters which _may_ form one of the few
Hebrew words that I know--the word _badim_, 'lies.' But you had better
get it deciphered by an expert."

"If it is Hebrew," said Badger, "we can manage it all right. There are
plenty of Jews at our disposal."

"You had much better take the paper to the British Museum," said
Thorndyke, "and submit it to the keeper of the Phoenician antiquities
for decipherment."

Inspector Badger smiled a foxy smile as he deposited the paper in his
pocket-book. "We'll see what we can make of it ourselves first," he
said; "but many thanks for your advice, all the same, Doctor. No, Mr.
James, I can't give you any information just at present; you had better
apply at the hospital."

"I suspect," said Thorndyke, as we took our way homewards, "that Mr.
James has collected enough material for his purpose already. He must
have followed us from the hospital, and I have no doubt that he has his
report, with 'full details,' mentally arranged at this moment. And I am
not sure that he didn't get a peep at the mysterious paper, in spite of
the inspector's precautions."

"By the way," I said, "what do you make of the document?"

"A cipher, most probably," he replied. "It is written in the primitive
Semitic alphabet, which, as you know, is practically identical with
primitive Greek. It is written from right to left, like the Phoenician,
Hebrew, and Moabite, as well as the earliest Greek, inscriptions. The
paper is common cream-laid notepaper, and the ink is ordinary indelible
Chinese ink, such as is used by draughtsmen. Those are the facts, and
without further study of the document itself, they don't carry us very
far."

"Why do you think it is a cipher rather than a document in
straightforward Hebrew?"

"Because it is obviously a secret message of some kind. Now, every
educated Jew knows more or less Hebrew, and, although he is able to read
and write only the modern square Hebrew character, it is so easy to
transpose one alphabet into another that the mere language would afford
no security. Therefore, I expect that, when the experts translate this
document, the translation or transliteration will be a mere farrago of
unintelligible nonsense. But we shall see, and meanwhile the facts that
we have offer several interesting suggestions which are well worth
consideration."

"As, for instance--?"

"Now, my dear Jervis," said Thorndyke, shaking an admonitory forefinger
at me, "don't, I pray you, give way to mental indolence. You have these
few facts that I have mentioned. Consider them separately and
collectively, and in their relation to the circumstances. Don't attempt
to suck my brain when you have an excellent brain of your own to suck."

On the following morning the papers fully justified my colleague's
opinion of Mr. James. All the events which had occurred, as well as a
number that had not, were given in the fullest and most vivid detail, a
lengthy reference being made to the paper "found on the person of the
dead anarchist," and "written in a private shorthand or cryptogram."

The report concluded with the gratifying--though untrue--statement that
"in this intricate and important case, the police have wisely secured
the assistance of Dr. John Thorndyke, to whose acute intellect and vast
experience the portentous cryptogram will doubtless soon deliver up its
secret."

"Very flattering," laughed Thorndyke, to whom I read the extract on his
return from the hospital, "but a little awkward if it should induce our
friends to deposit a few trifling mementoes in the form of
nitro-compounds on our main staircase or in the cellars. By the way, I
met Superintendent Miller on London Bridge. The 'cryptogram,' as Mr.
James calls it, has set Scotland Yard in a mighty ferment."

"Naturally. What have they done in the matter?"

"They adopted my suggestion, after all, finding that they could make
nothing of it themselves, and took it to the British Museum. The Museum
people referred them to Professor Poppelbaum, the great pal\E6ographer, to
whom they accordingly submitted it."

"Did he express any opinion about it?"

"Yes, provisionally. After a brief examination, he found it to consist
of a number of Hebrew words sandwiched between apparently meaningless
groups of letters. He furnished the Superintendent off-hand with a
translation of the words, and Miller forthwith struck off a number of
hectograph copies of it, which he has distributed among the senior
officials of his department; so that at present"--here Thorndyke gave
vent to a soft chuckle--"Scotland Yard is engaged in a sort of missing
word--or, rather, missing sense--competition. Miller invited me to join
in the sport, and to that end presented me with one of the hectograph
copies on which to exercise my wits, together with a photograph of the
document."

"And shall you?" I asked.

"Not I," he replied, laughing. "In the first place, I have not been
formally consulted, and consequently am a passive, though interested,
spectator. In the second place, I have a theory of my own which I shall
test if the occasion arises. But if you would like to take part in the
competition, I am authorized to show you the photograph and the
translation. I will pass them on to you, and I wish you joy of them."

He handed me the photograph and a sheet of paper that he had just taken
from his pocket-book, and watched me with grim amusement as I read out
the first few lines.

[Illustration: THE CIPHER.]

"Woe, city, lies, robbery, prey, noise, whip, rattling, wheel, horse,
chariot, day, darkness, gloominess, clouds, darkness, morning, mountain,
people, strong, fire, them, flame."

"It doesn't look very promising at first sight," I remarked. "What is
the Professor's theory?"

"His theory--provisionally, of course--is that the words form the
message, and the groups of letters represent mere filled-up spaces
between the words."

"But surely," I protested, "that would be a very transparent device."

Thorndyke laughed. "There is a childlike simplicity about it," said he,
"that is highly attractive--but discouraging. It is much more probable
that the words are dummies, and that the letters contain the message.
Or, again, the solution may lie in an entirely different direction. But
listen! Is that cab coming here?"

It was. It drew up opposite our chambers, and a few moments later a
brisk step ascending the stairs heralded a smart rat-tat at our door.
Flinging open the latter, I found myself confronted by a well-dressed
stranger, who, after a quick glance at me, peered inquisitively over my
shoulder into the room.

"I am relieved, Dr. Jervis," said he, "to find you and Dr. Thorndyke at
home, as I have come on somewhat urgent professional business. My name,"
he continued, entering in response to my invitation, "is Barton, but you
don't know me, though I know you both by sight. I have come to ask you
if one of you--or, better still, both--could come to-night and see my
brother."

"That," said Thorndyke, "depends on the circumstances and on the
whereabouts of your brother."

"The circumstances," said Mr. Barton, "are, in my opinion, highly
suspicious, and I will place them before you--of course, in strict
confidence."

Thorndyke nodded and indicated a chair.

"My brother," continued Mr. Barton, taking the profferred seat, "has
recently married for the second time. His age is fifty-five, and that of
his wife twenty-six, and I may say that the marriage has been--well, by
no means a success. Now, within the last fortnight, my brother has been
attacked by a mysterious and extremely painful affection of the stomach,
to which his doctor seems unable to give a name. It has resisted all
treatment hitherto. Day by day the pain and distress increase, and I
feel that, unless something decisive is done, the end cannot be far
off."

"Is the pain worse after taking food?" inquired Thorndyke.

"That's just it!" exclaimed our visitor. "I see what is in your mind,
and it has been in mine, too; so much so that I have tried repeatedly to
obtain samples of the food that he is taking. And this morning I
succeeded." Here he took from his pocket a wide-mouthed bottle, which,
disengaging from its paper wrappings, he laid on the table. "When I
called, he was taking his breakfast of arrowroot, which he complained
had a gritty taste, supposed by his wife to be due to the sugar. Now I
had provided myself with this bottle, and, during the absence of his
wife, I managed unobserved to convey a portion of the arrowroot that he
had left into it, and I should be greatly obliged if you would examine
it and tell me if this arrowroot contains anything that it should not."

He pushed the bottle across to Thorndyke, who carried it to the window,
and, extracting a small quantity of the contents with a glass rod,
examined the pasty mass with the aid of a lens; then, lifting the
bell-glass cover from the microscope, which stood on its table by the
window, he smeared a small quantity of the suspected matter on to a
glass slip, and placed it on the stage of the instrument.

"I observe a number of crystalline particles in this," he said, after a
brief inspection, "which have the appearance of arsenious acid."

"Ah!" ejaculated Mr. Barton, "just what I feared. But are you certain?"

"No," replied Thorndyke; "but the matter is easily tested."

He pressed the button of the bell that communicated with the laboratory,
a summons that brought the laboratory assistant from his lair with
characteristic promptitude.

"Will you please prepare a Marsh's apparatus, Polton," said Thorndyke.

"I have a couple ready, sir," replied Polton.

"Then pour the acid into one and bring it to me, with a tile."

As his familiar vanished silently, Thorndyke turned to Mr. Barton.

"Supposing we find arsenic in this arrowroot, as we probably shall, what
do you want us to do?"

"I want you to come and see my brother," replied our client.

"Why not take a note from me to his doctor?"

"No, no; I want you to come--I should like you both to come--and put a
stop at once to this dreadful business. Consider! It's a matter of life
and death. You won't refuse! I beg you not to refuse me your help in
these terrible circumstances."

"Well," said Thorndyke, as his assistant reappeared, "let us first see
what the test has to tell us."

Polton advanced to the table, on which he deposited a small flask, the
contents of which were in a state of brisk effervescence, a bottle
labelled "calcium hypochlorite," and a white porcelain tile. The flask
was fitted with a safety-funnel and a glass tube drawn out to a fine
jet, to which Polton cautiously applied a lighted match. Instantly there
sprang from the jet a tiny, pale violet flame. Thorndyke now took the
tile, and held it in the flame for a few seconds, when the appearance of
the surface remained unchanged save for a small circle of condensed
moisture. His next proceeding was to thin the arrowroot with distilled
water until it was quite fluid, and then pour a small quantity into the
funnel. It ran slowly down the tube into the flask, with the bubbling
contents of which it became speedily mixed. Almost immediately a change
began to appear in the character of the flame, which from a pale violet
turned gradually to a sickly blue, while above it hung a faint cloud of
white smoke. Once more Thorndyke held the tile above the jet, but this
time, no sooner had the pallid flame touched the cold surface of the
porcelain, than there appeared on the latter a glistening black stain.

"That is pretty conclusive," observed Thorndyke, lifting the stopper out
of the reagent bottle, "but we will apply the final test." He dropped a
few drops of the hypochlorite solution on to the tile, and immediately
the black stain faded away and vanished. "We can now answer your
question, Mr. Barton," said he, replacing the stopper as he turned to
our client. "The specimen that you brought us certainly contains
arsenic, and in very considerable quantities."

"Then," exclaimed Mr. Barton, starting from his chair, "you will come
and help me to rescue my brother from this dreadful peril. Don't refuse
me, Dr. Thorndyke, for mercy's sake, don't refuse."

Thorndyke reflected for a moment.

"Before we decide," said he, "we must see what engagements we have."

With a quick, significant glance at me, he walked into the office,
whither I followed in some bewilderment, for I knew that we had no
engagements for the evening.

"Now, Jervis," said Thorndyke, as he closed the office door, "what are
we to do?"

"We must go, I suppose," I replied. "It seems a pretty urgent case."

"It does," he agreed. "Of course, the man may be telling the truth,
after all."

"You don't think he is, then?"

"No. It is a plausible tale, but there is too much arsenic in that
arrowroot. Still, I think I ought to go. It is an ordinary professional
risk. But there is no reason why you should put your head into the
noose."

"Thank you," said I, somewhat huffily. "I don't see what risk there is,
but if any exists I claim the right to share it."

"Very well," he answered with a smile, "we will both go. I think we can
take care of ourselves."

He re-entered the sitting-room, and announced his decision to Mr.
Barton, whose relief and gratitude were quite pathetic.

"But," said Thorndyke, "you have not yet told us where your brother
lives."

"Rexford," was the reply--"Rexford, in Essex. It is an out-of-the-way
place, but if we catch the seven-fifteen train from Liverpool Street, we
shall be there in an hour and a half."

"And as to the return? You know the trains, I suppose?"

"Oh yes," replied our client; "I will see that you don't miss your
train back."

"Then I will be with you in a minute," said Thorndyke; and, taking the
still-bubbling flask, he retired to the laboratory, whence he returned
in a few minutes carrying his hat and overcoat.

The cab which had brought our client was still waiting, and we were soon
rattling through the streets towards the station, where we arrived in
time to furnish ourselves with dinner-baskets and select our compartment
at leisure.

During the early part of the journey our companion was in excellent
spirits. He despatched the cold fowl from the basket and quaffed the
rather indifferent claret with as much relish as if he had not had a
single relation in the world, and after dinner he became genial to the
verge of hilarity. But, as time went on, there crept into his manner a
certain anxious restlessness. He became silent and preoccupied, and
several times furtively consulted his watch.

"The train is confoundedly late!" he exclaimed irritably. "Seven minutes
behind time already!"

"A few minutes more or less are not of much consequence," said
Thorndyke.

"No, of course not; but still--Ah, thank Heaven, here we are!"

He thrust his head out of the off-side window, and gazed eagerly down
the line; then, leaping to his feet, he bustled out on to the platform
while the train was still moving.

Even as we alighted a warning bell rang furiously on the up-platform,
and as Mr. Barton hurried us through the empty booking-office to the
outside of the station, the rumble of the approaching train could be
heard above the noise made by our own train moving off.

"My carriage doesn't seem to have arrived yet," exclaimed Mr. Barton,
looking anxiously up the station approach. "If you will wait here a
moment, I will go and make inquiries."

He darted back into the booking-office and through it on to the
platform, just as the up-train roared into the station. Thorndyke
followed him with quick but stealthy steps, and, peering out of the
booking-office door, watched his proceedings; then he turned and
beckoned to me.

"There he goes," said he, pointing to an iron footbridge that spanned
the line; and, as I looked, I saw, clearly defined against the dim night
sky, a flying figure racing towards the "up" side.

It was hardly two-thirds across when the guard's whistle sang out its
shrill warning.

"Quick, Jervis," exclaimed Thorndyke; "she's off!"

He leaped down on to the line, whither I followed instantly, and,
crossing the rails, we clambered up together on to the foot-board
opposite an empty first-class compartment. Thorndyke's magazine knife,
containing, among other implements, a railway-key, was already in his
hand. The door was speedily unlocked, and, as we entered, Thorndyke ran
through and looked out on to the platform.

"Just in time!" he exclaimed. "He is in one of the forward
compartments."

He relocked the door, and, seating himself, proceeded to fill his pipe.

"And now," said I, as the train moved out of the station, "perhaps you
will explain this little comedy."

"With pleasure," he replied, "if it needs any explanation. But you can
hardly have forgotten Mr. James's flattering remarks in his report of
the Greek Street incident, clearly giving the impression that the
mysterious document was in my possession. When I read that, I knew I
must look out for some attempt to recover it, though I hardly expected
such promptness. Still, when Mr. Barton called without credentials or
appointment, I viewed him with some suspicion. That suspicion deepened
when he wanted us both to come. It deepened further when I found an
impossible quantity of arsenic in his sample, and it gave place to
certainty when, having allowed him to select the trains by which we were
to travel, I went up to the laboratory and examined the time-table; for
I then found that the last train for London left Rexford ten minutes
after we were due to arrive. Obviously this was a plan to get us both
safely out of the way while he and some of his friends ransacked our
chambers for the missing document."

"I see; and that accounts for his extraordinary anxiety at the lateness
of the train. But why did you come, if you knew it was a 'plant'?"

"My dear fellow," said Thorndyke, "I never miss an interesting
experience if I can help it. There are possibilities in this, too, don't
you see?"

"But supposing his friends have broken into our chambers already?"

"That contingency has been provided for; but I think they will wait for
Mr. Barton--and us."

Our train, being the last one up, stopped at every station, and crawled
slothfully in the intervals, so that it was past eleven o'clock when we
reached Liverpool Street. Here we got out cautiously, and, mingling with
the crowd, followed the unconscious Barton up the platform, through the
barrier, and out into the street. He seemed in no special hurry, for,
after pausing to light a cigar, he set off at an easy pace up New Broad
Street.

Thorndyke hailed a hansom, and, motioning me to enter, directed the
cabman to drive to Clifford's Inn Passage.

"Sit well back," said he, as we rattled away up New Broad Street. "We
shall be passing our gay deceiver presently--in fact, there he is, a
living, walking illustration of the folly of underrating the
intelligence of one's adversary."

At Clifford's Inn Passage we dismissed the cab, and, retiring into the
shadow of the dark, narrow alley, kept an eye on the gate of Inner
Temple Lane. In about twenty minutes we observed our friend approaching
on the south side of Fleet Street. He halted at the gate, plied the
knocker, and after a brief parley with the night-porter vanished through
the wicket. We waited yet five minutes more, and then, having given him
time to get clear of the entrance, we crossed the road.

The porter looked at us with some surprise.

"There's a gentleman just gone down to your chambers, sir," said he. "He
told me you were expecting him."

"Quite right," said Thorndyke, with a dry smile, "I was. Good-night."

We slunk down the lane, past the church, and through the gloomy
cloisters, giving a wide berth to all lamps and lighted entries, until,
emerging into Paper Buildings, we crossed at the darkest part to King's
Bench Walk, where Thorndyke made straight for the chambers of our friend
Anstey, which were two doors above our own.

"Why are we coming here?" I asked, as we ascended the stairs.

But the question needed no answer when we reached the landing, for
through the open door of our friend's chambers I could see in the
darkened room Anstey himself with two uniformed constables and a couple
of plain-clothes men.

"There has been no signal yet, sir," said one of the latter, whom I
recognized as a detective-sergeant of our division.

"No," said Thorndyke, "but the M.C. has arrived. He came in five minutes
before us."

"Then," exclaimed Anstey, "the ball will open shortly, ladies and gents.
The boards are waxed, the fiddlers are tuning up, and--"

"Not quite so loud, if you please, sir," said the sergeant. "I think
there is somebody coming up Crown Office Row."

The ball had, in fact, opened. As we peered cautiously out of the open
window, keeping well back in the darkened room, a stealthy figure crept
out of the shadow, crossed the road, and stole noiselessly into the
entry of Thorndyke's chambers. It was quickly followed by a second
figure, and then by a third, in which I recognized our elusive client.

"Now listen for the signal," said Thorndyke. "They won't waste time.
Confound that clock!"

The soft-voiced bell of the Inner Temple clock, mingling with the
harsher tones of St. Dunstan's and the Law Courts, slowly told out the
hour of midnight; and as the last reverberations were dying away, some
metallic object, apparently a coin, dropped with a sharp clink on to the
pavement under our window.

At the sound the watchers simultaneously sprang to their feet.

"You two go first," said the sergeant, addressing the uniformed men, who
thereupon stole noiselessly, in their rubber-soled boots, down the stone
stairs and along the pavement. The rest of us followed, with less
attention to silence, and as we ran up to Thorndyke's chambers, we were
aware of quick but stealthy footsteps on the stairs above.

"They've been at work, you see," whispered one of the constables,
flashing his lantern on to the iron-bound outer door of our
sitting-room, on which the marks of a large jemmy were plainly visible.

The sergeant nodded grimly, and, bidding the constables to remain on the
landing, led the way upwards.

As we ascended, faint rustlings continued to be audible from above, and
on the second-floor landing we met a man descending briskly, but without
hurry, from the third. It was Mr. Barton, and I could not but admire the
composure with which he passed the two detectives. But suddenly his
glance fell on Thorndyke, and his composure vanished. With a wild stare
of incredulous horror, he halted as if petrified; then he broke away and
raced furiously down the stairs, and a moment later a muffled shout and
the sound of a scuffle told us that he had received a check. On the next
flight we met two more men, who, more hurried and less self-possessed,
endeavoured to push past; but the sergeant barred the way.

"Why, bless me!" exclaimed the latter, "it's Moakey; and isn't that Tom
Harris?"

"It's all right, sergeant," said Moakey plaintively, striving to escape
from the officer's grip. "We've come to the wrong house, that's all."

The sergeant smiled indulgently. "I know," he replied. "But you're
always coming to the wrong house, Moakey; and now you're just coming
along with me to the right house."

He slipped his hand inside his captive's coat, and adroitly fished out a
large, folding jemmy; whereupon the discomforted burglar abandoned all
further protest.

On our return to the first-floor, we found Mr. Barton sulkily awaiting
us, handcuffed to one of the constables, and watched by Polton with
pensive disapproval.

"I needn't trouble you to-night, Doctor," said the sergeant, as he
marshalled his little troop of captors and captives. "You'll hear from
us in the morning. Good-night, sir."

The melancholy procession moved off down the stairs, and we retired into
our chambers with Anstey to smoke a last pipe.

"A capable man, that Barton," observed Thorndyke--"ready, plausible, and
ingenious, but spoilt by prolonged contact with fools. I wonder if the
police will perceive the significance of this little affair."

"They will be more acute than I am if they do," said I.

"Naturally," interposed Anstey, who loved to "cheek" his revered senior,
"because there isn't any. It's only Thorndyke's bounce. He is really in
a deuce of a fog himself."

However this may have been, the police were a good deal puzzled by the
incident, for, on the following morning, we received a visit from no
less a person than Superintendent Miller, of Scotland Yard.

"This is a queer business," said he, coming to the point at once--"this
burglary, I mean. Why should they want to crack your place, right here
in the Temple, too? You've got nothing of value here, have you? No
'hard stuff,' as they call it, for instance?"

"Not so much as a silver teaspoon," replied Thorndyke, who had a
conscientious objection to plate of all kinds.

"It's odd," said the superintendent, "deuced odd. When we got your note,
we thought these anarchist idiots had mixed you up with the case--you
saw the papers, I suppose--and wanted to go through your rooms for some
reason. We thought we had our hands on the gang, instead of which we
find a party of common crooks that we're sick of the sight of. I tell
you, sir, it's annoying when you think you've hooked a salmon, to bring
up a blooming eel."

"It must be a great disappointment," Thorndyke agreed, suppressing a
smile.

"It is," said the detective. "Not but what we're glad enough to get
these beggars, especially Halkett, or Barton, as he calls himself--a
mighty slippery customer is Halkett, and mischievous, too--but we're not
wanting any disappointments just now. There was that big jewel job in
Piccadilly, Taplin and Horne's; I don't mind telling you that we've not
got the ghost of a clue. Then there's this anarchist affair. We're all
in the dark there, too."

"But what about the cipher?" asked Thorndyke.

"Oh, hang the cipher!" exclaimed the detective irritably. "This
Professor Poppelbaum may be a very learned man, but he doesn't help _us_
much. He says the document is in Hebrew, and he has translated it into
Double Dutch. Just listen to this!" He dragged out of his pocket a
bundle of papers, and, dabbing down a photograph of the document before
Thorndyke, commenced to read the Professor's report. "'The document is
written in the characters of the well-known inscription of Mesha, King
of Moab' (who the devil's he? Never heard of him. Well known, indeed!)
'The language is Hebrew, and the words are separated by groups of
letters, which are meaningless, and obviously introduced to mislead and
confuse the reader. The words themselves are not strictly consecutive,
but, by the interpellation of certain other words, a series of
intelligible sentences is obtained, the meaning of which is not very
clear, but is no doubt allegorical. The method of decipherment is shown
in the accompanying tables, and the full rendering suggested on the
enclosed sheet. It is to be noted that the writer of this document was
apparently quite unacquainted with the Hebrew language, as appears from
the absence of any grammatical construction.' That's the Professor's
report, Doctor, and here are the tables showing how he worked it out. It
makes my head spin to look at 'em."

He handed to Thorndyke a bundle of ruled sheets, which my colleague
examined attentively for a while, and then passed on to me.

"This is very systematic and thorough," said he. "But now let us see the
final result at which he arrives."

"It may be all very systematic," growled the superintendent, sorting out
his papers, "but I tell you, sir, it's all BOSH!" The latter word he
jerked out viciously, as he slapped down on the table the final product
of the Professor's labours. "There," he continued, "that's what he calls
the 'full rendering,' and I reckon it'll make your hair curl. It might
be a message from Bedlam."

Thorndyke took up the first sheet, and as he compared the constructed
renderings with the literal translation, the ghost of a smile stole
across his usually immovable countenance.

"The meaning is certainly a little obscure," he observed, "though the
reconstruction is highly ingenious; and, moreover, I think the Professor
is probably right. That is to say, the words which he has supplied are
probably the omitted parts of the passages from which the words of the
cryptogram were taken. What do you think, Jervis?"

[Illustration: THE PROFESSOR'S ANALYSIS.

Handwritten: Analysis of the cipher with translation into modern square
Hebrew characters + a translation into English. N.B. The cipher reads
from right to left.]

He handed me the two papers, of which one gave the actual words of the
cryptogram, and the other a suggested reconstruction, with omitted words
supplied. The first read:

     "Woe     city     lies     robbery     prey     noise     whip
     rattling     wheel     horse      chariot     day     darkness
     gloominess     cloud     darkness     morning     mountain
     people     strong     fire     them     flame."

Turning to the second paper, I read out the suggested rendering:

"'Woe _to the bloody_ city! _It is full of_ lies _and_ robbery; _the_
prey _departeth not_. _The_ noise _of a_ whip, _and the noise of the_
rattling _of the_ wheel_s_, _and of the prancing_ horse_s_, _and of the
jumping_ chariot_s_.

"'_A_ day _of_ darkness _and of_ gloominess, _a day of_ cloud_s_, _and
of thick_ darkness, _as the_ morning _spread upon the_ mountain_s_, _a
great_ people _and a_ strong.

"'_A_ fire _devoureth before_ them, _and behind them a_ flame
_burneth_.'"

Here the first sheet ended, and, as I laid it down, Thorndyke looked at
me inquiringly.

"There is a good deal of reconstruction in proportion to the original
matter," I objected. "The Professor has 'supplied' more than
three-quarters of the final rendering."

"Exactly," burst in the superintendent; "it's all Professor and no
cryptogram."

"Still, I think the reading is correct," said Thorndyke. "As far as it
goes, that is."

"Good Lord!" exclaimed the dismayed detective. "Do you mean to tell me,
sir, that that balderdash is the real meaning of the thing?"

"I don't say that," replied Thorndyke. "I say it is correct as far as it
goes; but I doubt its being the solution of the cryptogram."

"Have you been studying that photograph that I gave you?" demanded
Miller, with sudden eagerness.

"I have looked at it," said Thorndyke evasively, "but I should like to
examine the original if you have it with you."

"I have," said the detective. "Professor Poppelbaum sent it back with
the solution. You can have a look at it, though I can't leave it with
you without special authority."

He drew the document from his pocket-book and handed it to Thorndyke,
who took it over to the window and scrutinized it closely. From the
window he drifted into the adjacent office, closing the door after him;
and presently the sound of a faint explosion told me that he had lighted
the gas-fire.

"Of course," said Miller, taking up the translation again, "this
gibberish is the sort of stuff you might expect from a parcel of
crack-brained anarchists; but it doesn't seem to mean anything."

"Not to us," I agreed; "but the phrases may have some pre-arranged
significance. And then there are the letters between the words. It is
possible that they may really form a cipher."

"I suggested that to the Professor," said Miller, "but he wouldn't hear
of it. He is sure they are only dummies."

"I think he is probably mistaken, and so, I fancy, does my colleague.
But we shall hear what he has to say presently."

"Oh, I know what he will say," growled Miller. "He will put the thing
under the microscope, and tell us who made the paper, and what the ink
is composed of, and then we shall be just where we were." The
superintendent was evidently deeply depressed.

We sat for some time pondering in silence on the vague sentences of the
Professor's translation, until, at length, Thorndyke reappeared, holding
the document in his hand. He laid it quietly on the table by the
officer, and then inquired:

"Is this an official consultation?"

"Certainly," replied Miller. "I was authorized to consult you respecting
the translation, but nothing was said about the original. Still, if you
want it for further study, I will get it for you."

"No, thank you," said Thorndyke. "I have finished with it. My theory
turned out to be correct."

"Your theory!" exclaimed the superintendent, eagerly. "Do you mean to
say--?"

"And, as you are consulting me officially, I may as well give you this."

He held out a sheet of paper, which the detective took from him and
began to read.

"What is this?" he asked, looking up at Thorndyke with a puzzled frown.
"Where did it come from?"

"It is the solution of the cryptogram," replied Thorndyke.

The detective re-read the contents of the paper, and, with the frown of
perplexity deepening, once more gazed at my colleague.

"This is a joke, sir; you are fooling me," he said sulkily.

"Nothing of the kind," answered Thorndyke. "That is the genuine
solution."

"But it's impossible!" exclaimed Miller. "Just look at it, Dr. Jervis."

I took the paper from his hand, and, as I glanced at it, I had no
difficulty in understanding his surprise. It bore a short inscription in
printed Roman capitals, thus:

"THE PICKERDILLEY STUF IS UP THE CHIMBLY 416 WARDOUR ST 2ND FLOUR BACK
IT WAS HID BECOS OF OLD MOAKEYS JOOD MOAKEY IS A BLITER."

"Then that fellow wasn't an anarchist at all?" I exclaimed.

"No," said Miller. "He was one of Moakey's gang. We suspected Moakey of
being mixed up with that job, but we couldn't fix it on him. By Jove!"
he added, slapping his thigh, "if this is right, and I can lay my hands
on the loot! Can you lend me a bag, doctor? I'm off to Wardour Street
this very moment."

We furnished him with an empty suit-case, and, from the window, watched
him making for Mitre Court at a smart double.

"I wonder if he will find the booty," said Thorndyke. "It just depends
on whether the hiding-place was known to more than one of the gang.
Well, it has been a quaint case, and instructive, too. I suspect our
friend Barton and the evasive Sch\F6nberg were the collaborators who
produced that curiosity of literature."

"May I ask how you deciphered the thing?" I said. "It didn't appear to
take long."

"It didn't. It was merely a matter of testing a hypothesis; and you
ought not to have to ask that question," he added, with mock severity,
"seeing that you had what turn out to have been all the necessary facts,
two days ago. But I will prepare a document and demonstrate to you
to-morrow morning."

       *       *       *       *       *

"So Miller was successful in his quest," said Thorndyke, as we smoked
our morning pipes after breakfast. "The 'entire swag,' as he calls it,
was 'up the chimbly,' undisturbed."

He handed me a note which had been left, with the empty suit-case, by a
messenger, shortly before, and I was about to read it when an agitated
knock was heard at our door. The visitor, whom I admitted, was a rather
haggard and dishevelled elderly gentleman, who, as he entered, peered
inquisitively through his concave spectacles from one of us to the
other.

"Allow me to introduce myself, gentlemen," said he. "I am Professor
Poppelbaum."

Thorndyke bowed and offered a chair.

"I called yesterday afternoon," our visitor continued, "at Scotland
Yard, where I heard of your remarkable decipherment and of the
convincing proof of its correctness. Thereupon I borrowed the
cryptogram, and have spent the entire night in studying it, but I cannot
connect your solution with any of the characters. I wonder if you would
do me the great favour of enlightening me as to your method of
decipherment, and so save me further sleepless nights? You may rely on
my discretion."

"Have you the document with you?" asked Thorndyke.

The Professor produced it from his pocket-book, and passed it to my
colleague.

"You observe, Professor," said the latter, "that this is a laid paper,
and has no water-mark?"

"Yes, I noticed that."

"And that the writing is in indelible Chinese ink?"

"Yes, yes," said the savant impatiently; "but it is the inscription that
interests me, not the paper and ink."

"Precisely," said Thorndyke. "Now, it was the ink that interested me
when I caught a glimpse of the document three days ago. 'Why,' I asked
myself, 'should anyone use this troublesome medium'--for this appears to
be stick ink--'when good writing ink is to be had?' What advantages has
Chinese ink over writing ink? It has several advantages as a drawing
ink, but for writing purposes it has only one: it is quite unaffected
by wet. The obvious inference, then, was that this document was, for
some reason, likely to be exposed to wet. But this inference instantly
suggested another, which I was yesterday able to put to the test--thus."

He filled a tumbler with water, and, rolling up the document, dropped it
in. Immediately there began to appear on it a new set of characters of a
curious grey colour. In a few seconds Thorndyke lifted out the wet
paper, and held it up to the light, and now there was plainly visible an
inscription in transparent lettering, like a very distinct water-mark.
It was in printed Roman capitals, written across the other writing, and
read:

"THE PICKERDILLEY STUF IS UP THE CHIMBLY 416 WARDOUR ST 2ND FLOUR BACK
IT WAS HID BECOS OF OLD MOAKEYS JOOD MOAKEY IS A BLITER."

The Professor regarded the inscription with profound disfavour.

"How do you suppose this was done?" he asked gloomily.

"I will show you," said Thorndyke. "I have prepared a piece of paper to
demonstrate the process to Dr. Jervis. It is exceedingly simple."

He fetched from the office a small plate of glass, and a photographic
dish in which a piece of thin notepaper was soaking in water.

"This paper," said Thorndyke, lifting it out and laying it on the glass,
"has been soaking all night, and is now quite pulpy."

He spread a dry sheet of paper over the wet one, and on the former wrote
heavily with a hard pencil, "Moakey is a bliter." On lifting the upper
sheet, the writing was seen to be transferred in a deep grey to the wet
paper, and when the latter was held up to the light the inscription
stood out clear and transparent as if written with oil.

"When this dries," said Thorndyke, "the writing will completely
disappear, but it will reappear whenever the paper is again wetted."

The Professor nodded.

"Very ingenious," said he--"a sort of artificial palimpsest, in fact.
But I do not understand how that illiterate man could have written in
the difficult Moabite script."

"He did not," said Thorndyke. "The 'cryptogram' was probably written by
one of the leaders of the gang, who, no doubt, supplied copies to the
other members to use instead of blank paper for secret communications.
The object of the Moabite writing was evidently to divert attention from
the paper itself, in case the communication fell into the wrong hands,
and I must say it seems to have answered its purpose very well."

The Professor started, stung by the sudden recollection of his labours.

"Yes," he snorted; "but I am a scholar, sir, not a policeman. Every man
to his trade."

He snatched up his hat, and with a curt "Good-morning," flung out of the
room in dudgeon.

Thorndyke laughed softly.

"Poor Professor!" he murmured. "Our playful friend Barton has much to
answer for."




VI

THE MANDARIN'S PEARL


Mr. Brodribb stretched out his toes on the kerb before the blazing fire
with the air of a man who is by no means insensible to physical comfort.

"You are really an extraordinarily polite fellow, Thorndyke," said he.

He was an elderly man, rosy-gilled, portly, and convivial, to whom a
mass of bushy, white hair, an expansive double chin, and a certain prim
sumptuousness of dress imparted an air of old-world distinction. Indeed,
as he dipped an amethystine nose into his wine-glass, and gazed
thoughtfully at the glowing end of his cigar, he looked the very type of
the well-to-do lawyer of an older generation.

"You are really an extraordinarily polite fellow, Thorndyke," said Mr.
Brodribb.

"I know," replied Thorndyke. "But why this reference to an admitted
fact?"

"The truth has just dawned on me," said the solicitor. "Here am I,
dropping in on you, uninvited and unannounced, sitting in your own
armchair before your fire, smoking your cigars, drinking your
Burgundy--and deuced good Burgundy, too, let me add--and you have not
dropped a single hint of curiosity as to what has brought me here."

"I take the gifts of the gods, you see, and ask no questions," said
Thorndyke.

"Devilish handsome of you, Thorndyke--unsociable beggar like you, too,"
rejoined Mr. Brodribb, a fan of wrinkles spreading out genially from the
corners of his eyes; "but the fact is I have come, in a sense, on
business--always glad of a pretext to look you up, as you know--but I
want to take your opinion on a rather queer case. It is about young
Calverley. You remember Horace Calverley? Well, this is his son. Horace
and I were schoolmates, you know, and after his death the boy, Fred,
hung on to me rather. We're near neighbours down at Weybridge, and very
good friends. I like Fred. He's a good fellow, though cranky, like all
his people."

"What has happened to Fred Calverley?" Thorndyke asked, as the solicitor
paused.

"Why, the fact is," said Mr. Brodribb, "just lately he seems to be going
a bit queer--not mad, mind you--at least, I think not--but undoubtedly
queer. Now, there is a good deal of property, and a good many highly
interested relatives, and, as a natural consequence, there is some talk
of getting him certified. They're afraid he may do something involving
the estate or develop homicidal tendencies, and they talk of possible
suicide--you remember his father's death--but I say that's all bunkum.
The fellow is just a bit cranky, and nothing more."

"What are his symptoms?" asked Thorndyke.

"Oh, he thinks he is being followed about and watched, and he has
delusions; sees himself in the glass with the wrong face, and that sort
of thing, you know."

"You are not highly circumstantial," Thorndyke remarked.

Mr. Brodribb looked at me with a genial smile.

"What a glutton for facts this fellow is, Jervis. But you're right,
Thorndyke; I'm vague. However, Fred will be here presently. We travel
down together, and I took the liberty of asking him to call for me.
We'll get him to tell you about his delusions, if you don't mind. He's
not shy about them. And meanwhile I'll give you a few preliminary facts.
The trouble began about a year ago. He was in a railway accident, and
that knocked him all to pieces. Then he went for a voyage to recruit,
and the ship broke her propeller-shaft in a storm and became helpless.
That didn't improve the state of his nerves. Then he went down the
Mediterranean, and after a month or two, back he came, no better than
when he started. But here he is, I expect."

He went over to the door and admitted a tall, frail young man whom
Thorndyke welcomed with quiet geniality, and settled in a chair by the
fire. I looked curiously at our visitor. He was a typical
neurotic--slender, fragile, eager. Wide-open blue eyes with broad
pupils, in which I could plainly see the characteristic "hippus"--that
incessant change of size that marks the unstable nervous
equilibrium--parted lips, and wandering taper fingers, were as the
stigmata of his disorder. He was of the stuff out of which prophets and
devotees, martyrs, reformers, and third-rate poets are made.

"I have been telling Dr. Thorndyke about these nervous troubles of
yours," said Mr. Brodribb presently. "I hope you don't mind. He is an
old friend, you know, and he is very much interested."

"It is very good of him," said Calverley. Then he flushed deeply, and
added: "But they are not really nervous, you know. They can't be merely
subjective."

"You think they can't be?" said Thorndyke.

"No, I am sure they are not." He flushed again like a girl, and looked
earnestly at Thorndyke with his big, dreamy eyes. "But you doctors," he
said, "are so dreadfully sceptical of all spiritual phenomena. You are
such materialists."

"Yes," said Mr. Brodribb; "the doctors are not hot on the supernatural,
and that's the fact."

"Supposing you tell us about your experiences," said Thorndyke
persuasively. "Give us a chance to believe, if we can't explain away."

Calverley reflected for a few moments; then, looking earnestly at
Thorndyke, he said:

"Very well; if it won't bore you, I will. It is a curious story."

"I have told Dr. Thorndyke about your voyage and your trip down the
Mediterranean," said Mr. Brodribb.

"Then," said Calverley, "I will begin with the events that are actually
connected with these strange visitations. The first of these occurred in
Marseilles. I was in a curio-shop there, looking over some Algerian and
Moorish tilings, when my attention was attracted by a sort of charm or
pendant that hung in a glass case. It was not particularly beautiful,
but its appearance was quaint and curious, and took my fancy. It
consisted of an oblong block of ebony in which was set a single
pear-shaped pearl more than three-quarters of an inch long. The sides of
the ebony block were lacquered--probably to conceal a joint--and bore a
number of Chinese characters, and at the top was a little gold image
with a hole through it, presumably for a string to suspend it by.
Excepting for the pearl, the whole thing was uncommonly like one of
those ornamental tablets of Chinese ink.

"Now, I had taken a fancy to the thing, and I can afford to indulge my
fancies in moderation. The man wanted five pounds for it; he assured me
that the pearl was a genuine one of fine quality, and obviously did not
believe it himself. To me, however, it looked like a real pearl, and I
determined to take the risk; so I paid the money, and he bowed me out
with a smile--I may almost say a grin--of satisfaction. He would not
have been so well pleased if he had followed me to a jeweller's to whom
I took it for an expert opinion; for the jeweller pronounced the pearl
to be undoubtedly genuine, and worth anything up to a thousand pounds.

"A day or two later, I happened to show my new purchase to some men whom
I knew, who had dropped in at Marseilles in their yacht. They were
highly amused at my having bought the thing, and when I told them what I
had paid for it, they positively howled with derision.

"'Why, you silly guffin,' said one of them, a man named Halliwell, 'I
could have had it ten days ago for half a sovereign, or probably five
shillings. I wish now I had bought it; then I could have sold it to
you.'

"It seemed that a sailor had been hawking the pendant round the harbour,
and had been on board the yacht with it.

"'Deuced anxious the beggar was to get rid of it, too,' said Halliwell,
grinning at the recollection. 'Swore it was a genuine pearl of priceless
value, and was willing to deprive himself of it for the trifling sum of
half a jimmy. But we'd heard that sort of thing before. However, the
curio-man seems to have speculated on the chance of meeting with a
greenhorn, and he seems to have pulled it off. Lucky curio man!'

"I listened patiently to their gibes, and when they had talked
themselves out I told them about the jeweller. They were most
frightfully sick; and when we had taken the pendant to a dealer in gems
who happened to be staying in the town, and he had offered me five
hundred pounds for it, their language wasn't fit for a divinity
students' debating club. Naturally the story got noised abroad, and when
I left, it was the talk of the place. The general opinion was that the
sailor, who was traced to a tea-ship that had put into the harbour, had
stolen it from some Chinese passenger; and no less than seventeen
different Chinamen came forward to claim it as their stolen property.

"Soon after this I returned to England, and, as my nerves were still in
a very shaky state, I came to live with my cousin Alfred, who has a
large house at Weybridge. At this time he had a friend staying with him,
a certain Captain Raggerton, and the two men appeared to be on very
intimate terms. I did not take to Raggerton at all. He was a
good-looking man, pleasant in his manners, and remarkably plausible. But
the fact is--I am speaking in strict confidence, of course--he was a bad
egg. He had been in the Guards, and I don't quite know why he left; but
I do know that he played bridge and baccarat pretty heavily at several
clubs, and that he had a reputation for being a rather uncomfortably
lucky player. He did a good deal at the race-meetings, too, and was in
general such an obvious undesirable that I could never understand my
cousin's intimacy with him, though I must say that Alfred's habits had
changed somewhat for the worse since I had left England.

"The fame of my purchase seems to have preceded me, for when, one day, I
produced the pendant to show them, I found that they knew all about it.
Raggerton had heard the story from a naval man, and I gathered vaguely
that he had heard something that I had not, and that he did not care to
tell me; for when my cousin and he talked about the pearl, which they
did pretty often, certain significant looks passed between them, and
certain veiled references were made which I could not fail to notice.

"One day I happened to be telling them of a curious incident that
occurred on my way home. I had travelled to England on one of Holt's big
China boats, not liking the crowd and bustle of the regular
passenger-lines. Now, one afternoon, when we had been at sea a couple of
days, I took a book down to my berth, intending to have a quiet read
till tea-time. Soon, however, I dropped off into a doze, and must have
remained asleep for over an hour. I awoke suddenly, and as I opened my
eyes, I perceived that the door of the state-room was half-open, and a
well-dressed Chinaman, in native costume, was looking in at me. He
closed the door immediately, and I remained for a few moments paralyzed
by the start that he had given me. Then I leaped from my bunk, opened
the door, and looked out. But the alley-way was empty. The Chinaman had
vanished as if by magic.

"This little occurrence made me quite nervous for a day or two, which
was very foolish of me; but my nerves were all on edge--and I am afraid
they are still."

"Yes," said Thorndyke. "There was nothing mysterious about the affair.
These boats carry a Chinese crew, and the man you saw was probably a
Serang, or whatever they call the gang-captains on these vessels. Or he
may have been a native passenger who had strayed into the wrong part of
the ship."

"Exactly," agreed our client. "But to return to Raggerton. He listened
with quite extraordinary interest as I was telling this story, and when
I had finished he looked very queerly at my cousin.

"'A deuced odd thing, this, Calverley,' said he. 'Of course, it may be
only a coincidence, but it really does look as if there was something,
after all, in that--'

"'Shut up, Raggerton,' said my cousin. 'We don't want any of that rot.'

"'What is he talking about?" I asked.

"'Oh, it's only a rotten, silly yarn that he has picked up somewhere.
You're not to tell him, Raggerton.'

"'I don't see why I am not to be told,' I said, rather sulkily. 'I'm not
a baby.'

"'No,' said Alfred, 'but you're an invalid. You don't want any horrors.'

"In effect, he refused to go into the matter any further, and I was left
on tenter-hooks of curiosity.

"However, the very next day I got Raggerton alone in the smoking-room,
and had a little talk with him. He had just dropped a hundred pounds on
a double event that hadn't come off, and I expected to find him pliable.
Nor was I disappointed, for, when we had negotiated a little loan, he
was entirely at my service, and willing to tell me everything, on my
promising not to give him away to Alfred.

"'Now, you understand,' he said, 'that this yarn about your pearl is
nothing but a damn silly fable that's been going the round in
Marseilles. I don't know where it came from, or what sort of demented
rotter invented it; I had it from a Johnnie in the Mediterranean
Squadron, and you can have a copy of his letter if you want it.'

"I said that I did want it. Accordingly, that same evening he handed me
a copy of the narrative extracted from his friend's letter, the
substance of which was this:

"About four months ago there was lying in Canton Harbour a large English
barque. Her name is not mentioned, but that is not material to the
story. She had got her cargo stowed and her crew signed on, and was only
waiting for certain official formalities to be completed before putting
to sea on her homeward voyage. Just ahead of her, at the same quay, was
a Danish ship that had been in collision outside, and was now laid up
pending the decision of the Admiralty Court. She had been unloaded, and
her crew paid off, with the exception of one elderly man, who remained
on board as ship-keeper. Now, a considerable part of the cargo of the
English barque was the property of a certain wealthy mandarin, and this
person had been about the vessel a good deal while she was taking in her
lading.

"One day, when the mandarin was on board the barque, it happened that
three of the seamen were sitting in the galley smoking and chatting with
the cook--an elderly Chinaman named Wo-li--and the latter, pointing out
the mandarin to the sailors, expatiated on his enormous wealth, assuring
them that he was commonly believed to carry on his person articles of
sufficient value to buy up the entire lading of a ship.

"Now, unfortunately for the mandarin, it chanced that these three
sailors were about the greatest rascals on board; which is saying a good
deal when one considers the ordinary moral standard that prevails in the
forecastle of a sailing-ship. Nor was Wo-li himself an angel; in fact,
he was a consummate villain, and seems to have been the actual
originator of the plot which was presently devised to rob the mandarin.

"This plot was as remarkable for its simplicity as for its cold-blooded
barbarity. On the evening before the barque sailed, the three seamen,
Nilsson, Foucault, and Parratt, proceeded to the Danish ship with a
supply of whisky, made the ship-keeper royally drunk, and locked him up
in an empty berth. Meanwhile Wo-li made a secret communication to the
mandarin to the effect that certain stolen property, believed to be his,
had been secreted in the hold of the empty ship. Thereupon the mandarin
came down hot-foot to the quay-side, and was received on board by the
three seamen, who had got the covers off the after-hatch in readiness.
Parratt now ran down the iron ladder to show the way, and the mandarin
followed; but when they reached the lower deck, and looked down the
hatch into the black darkness of the lower hold, he seems to have taken
fright, and begun to climb up again. Meanwhile Nilsson had made a
running bowline in the end of a loose halyard that was rove through a
block aloft, and had been used for hoisting out the cargo. As the
mandarin came up, he leaned over the coaming of the hatch, dropped the
noose over the Chinaman's head, jerked it tight, and then he and
Foucault hove on the fall of the rope. The unfortunate Chinaman was
dragged from the ladder, and, as he swung clear, the two rascals let go
the rope, allowing him to drop through the hatches into the lower hold.
Then they belayed the rope, and went down below. Parratt had already
lighted a slush-lamp, by the glimmer of which they could see the
mandarin swinging to and fro like a pendulum within a few feet of the
ballast, and still quivering and twitching in his death-throes. They
were now joined by Wo-li, who had watched the proceedings from the quay,
and the four villains proceeded, without loss of time, to rifle the body
as it hung. To their surprise and disgust, they found nothing of value
excepting an ebony pendant set with a single large pearl; but Wo-li,
though evidently disappointed at the nature of the booty, assured his
comrades that this alone was well worth the hazard, pointing out the
great size and exceptional beauty of the pearl. As to this, the seamen
know nothing about pearls, but the thing was done, and had to be made
the best of; so they made the rope fast to the lower deck-beams, cut off
the remainder and unrove it from the block, and went back to their ship.

"It was twenty-four hours before the ship-keeper was sufficiently sober
to break out of the berth in which he had been locked, by which time the
barque was well out to sea; and it was another three days before the
body of the mandarin was found. An active search was then made for the
murderers, but as they were strangers to the ship-keeper, no clues to
their whereabouts could be discovered.

"Meanwhile, the four murderers were a good deal exercised as to the
disposal of the booty. Since it could not be divided, it was evident
that it must be entrusted to the keeping of one of them. The choice in
the first place fell upon Wo-li, in whose chest the pendant was
deposited as soon as the party came on board, it being arranged that the
Chinaman should produce the jewel for inspection by his confederates
whenever called upon.

"For six weeks nothing out of the common occurred; but then a very
singular event befell. The four conspirators were sitting outside the
galley one evening, when suddenly the cook uttered a cry of amazement
and horror. The other three turned to see what it was that had so
disturbed their comrade, and then they, too, were struck dumb with
consternation; for, standing at the door of the companion-hatch--the
barque was a flush-decked vessel--was the mandarin whom they had left
for dead. He stood quietly regarding them for fully a minute, while they
stared at him transfixed with terror. Then he beckoned to them, and went
below.

"So petrified were they with astonishment and mortal fear that they
remained for a long time motionless and dumb. At last they plucked up
courage, and began to make furtive inquiries among the crew; but no
one--not even the steward--knew anything of any passengers, or, indeed,
of any Chinaman, on board the ship, excepting Wo-li.

"At day-break the next morning, when the cook's mate went to the galley
to fill the coppers, he found Wo-li hanging from a hook in the ceiling.
The cook's body was stiff and cold, and had evidently been hanging
several hours. The report of the tragedy quickly spread through the
ship, and the three conspirators hurried off to remove the pearl from
the dead man's chest before the officers should come to examine it. The
cheap lock was easily picked with a bent wire, and the jewel
abstracted; but now the question arose as to who should take charge of
it. The eagerness to be the actual custodian of the precious bauble,
which had been at first displayed, now gave place to equally strong
reluctance. But someone had to take charge of it, and after a long and
angry discussion Nilsson was prevailed upon to stow it in his chest.

"A fortnight passed. The three conspirators went about their duties
soberly, like men burdened with some secret anxiety, and in their
leisure moments they would sit and talk with bated breath of the
apparition at the companion-hatch, and the mysterious death of their
late comrade.

"At last the blow fell.

"It was at the end of the second dog-watch that the hands were gathered
on the forecastle, preparing to make sail after a spell of bad weather.
Suddenly Nilsson gave a husky shout, and rushed at Parratt, holding out
the key of his chest.

"'Here you, Parratt,' he exclaimed, 'go below and take that accursed
thing out of my chest.'

"'What for?' demanded Parratt; and then he and Foucault, who was
standing close by, looked aft to see what Nilsson was staring at.

"Instantly they both turned white as ghosts, and fell trembling so that
they could hardly stand; for there was the mandarin, standing calmly by
the companion, returning with a steady, impassive gaze their looks of
horror. And even as they looked he beckoned and went below.

"'D'ye hear, Parratt?' gasped Nilsson; 'take my key and do what I say,
or else--'

"But at this moment the order was given to go aloft and set all plain
sail; the three men went off to their respective posts, Nilsson going
up the fore-topmast rigging, and the other two to the main-top. Having
finished their work aloft, Foucault and Parratt who were both in the
port watch, came down on deck, and then, it being their watch below,
they went and turned in.

"When they turned out with their watch at midnight, they looked about
for Nilsson, who was in the starboard watch, but he was nowhere to be
seen. Thinking he might have slipped below unobserved, they made no
remark, though they were very uneasy about him; but when the starboard
watch came on deck at four o'clock, and Nilsson did not appear with his
mates, the two men became alarmed, and made inquiries about him. It was
now discovered that no one had seen him since eight o'clock on the
previous evening, and, this being reported to the officer of the watch,
the latter ordered all hands to be called. But still Nilsson did not
appear. A thorough search was now instituted, both below and aloft, and
as there was still no sign of the missing man, it was concluded that he
had fallen overboard.

"But at eight o'clock two men were sent aloft to shake out the
fore-royal. They reached the yard almost simultaneously, and were just
stepping on to the foot-ropes when one of them gave a shout; then the
pair came sliding down a backstay, with faces as white as tallow. As
soon as they reached the deck, they took the officer of the watch
forward, and, standing on the heel of the bowsprit, pointed aloft.
Several of the hands, including Foucault and Parratt, had followed, and
all looked up; and there they saw the body of Nilsson, hanging on the
front of the fore-topgallant sail. He was dangling at the end of a
gasket, and bouncing up and down on the taut belly of the sail as the
ship rose and fell to the send of the sea.

"The two survivors were now in some doubt about having anything further
to do with the pearl. But the great value of the jewel, and the
consideration that it was now to be divided between two instead of four,
tempted them. They abstracted it from Nilsson's chest, and then, as they
could not come to an agreement in any other way, they decided to settle
who should take charge of it by tossing a coin. The coin was accordingly
spun, and the pearl went to Foucault's chest.

"From this moment Foucault lived in a state of continual apprehension.
When on deck, his eyes were for ever wandering towards the companion
hatch, and during his watch below, when not asleep, he would sit moodily
on his chest, lost in gloomy reflection. But a fortnight passed, then
three weeks, and still nothing happened. Land was sighted, the Straits
of Gibraltar passed, and the end of the voyage was but a matter of days.
And still the dreaded mandarin made no sign.

"At length the ship was within twenty-four hours of Marseilles, to which
port a large part of the cargo was consigned. Active preparations were
being made for entering the port, and among other things the shore
tackle was being overhauled. A share in this latter work fell to
Foucault and Parratt, and about the middle of the second
dog-watch--seven o'clock in the evening--they were sitting on the deck
working an eye-splice in the end of a large rope. Suddenly Foucault, who
was facing forward, saw his companion turn pale and stare aft with an
expression of terror. He immediately turned and looked over his shoulder
to see what Parratt was staring at. It was the mandarin, standing by
the companion, gravely watching them; and as Foucault turned and met his
gaze, the Chinaman beckoned and went below.

"For the rest of that day Parratt kept close to his terrified comrade,
and during their watch below he endeavoured to remain awake, that he
might keep his friend in view. Nothing happened through the night, and
the following morning, when they came on deck for the forenoon watch,
their port was well in sight. The two men now separated for the first
time, Parratt going aft to take his trick at the wheel, and Foucault
being set to help in getting ready the ground tackle.

"Half an hour later Parratt saw the mate stand on the rail and lean
outboard, holding on to the mizzen-shrouds while he stared along the
ship's side. Then he jumped on to the deck and shouted angrily:
'Forward, there! What the deuce is that man up to under the starboard
cat-head?'

"The men on the forecastle rushed to the side and looked over; two of
them leaned over the rail with the bight of a rope between them, and a
third came running aft to the mate. 'It's Foucault, sir,' Parratt heard
him say. 'He's hanged hisself from the cat-head.'

"As soon as he was off duty, Parratt made his way to his dead comrade's
chest, and, opening it with his pick-lock, took out the pearl. It was
now his sole property, and, as the ship was within an hour or two of her
destination, he thought he had little to fear from its murdered owner.
As soon as the vessel was alongside the wharf, he would slip ashore and
get rid of the jewel, even if he sold it at a comparatively low price.
The thing looked perfectly simple.

"In actual practice, however, it turned out quite otherwise. He began
by accosting a well-dressed stranger and offering the pendant for fifty
pounds; but the only reply that he got was a knowing smile and a shake
of the head. When this experience had been repeated a dozen times or
more, and he had been followed up and down the streets for nearly an
hour by a suspicious gendarme, he began to grow anxious. He visited
quite a number of ships and yachts in the harbour, and at each refusal
the price of his treasure came down, until he was eager to sell it for a
few francs. But still no one would have it. Everyone took it for granted
that the pearl was a sham, and most of the persons whom he accosted
assumed that it had been stolen. The position was getting desperate.
Evening was approaching--the time of the dreaded dog-watches--and still
the pearl was in his possession. Gladly would he now have given it away
for nothing, but he dared not try, for this would lay him open to the
strongest suspicion.

"At last, in a by-street, he came upon the shop of a curio-dealer.
Putting on a careless and cheerful manner, he entered and offered the
pendant for ten francs. The dealer looked at it, shook his head, and
handed it back.

"'What will you give me for it?' demanded Parratt, breaking out into a
cold sweat at the prospect of a final refusal.

"The dealer felt in his pocket, drew out a couple of francs, and held
them out.

"'Very well,' said Parratt. He took the money as calmly as he could, and
marched out of the shop, with a gasp of relief, leaving the pendant in
the dealer's hand.

"The jewel was hung up in a glass case, and nothing more was thought
about it until some ten days later, when an English tourist, who came
into the shop, noticed it and took a liking to it. Thereupon the dealer
offered it to him for five pounds, assuring him that it was a genuine
pearl, a statement that, to his amazement, the stranger evidently
believed. He was then deeply afflicted at not having asked a higher
price, but the bargain had been struck, and the Englishman went off with
his purchase.

"This was the story told by Captain Raggerton's friend, and I have given
it to you in full detail, having read the manuscript over many times
since it was given to me. No doubt you will regard it as a mere
traveller's tale, and consider me a superstitious idiot for giving any
credence to it."

"It certainly seems more remarkable for picturesqueness than for
credibility," Thorndyke agreed. "May I ask," he continued, "whether
Captain Raggerton's friend gave any explanation as to how this singular
story came to his knowledge, or to that of anybody else?"

"Oh yes," replied Calverley; "I forgot to mention that the seaman,
Parratt, very shortly after he had sold the pearl, fell down the hatch
into the hold as the ship was unloading, and was very badly injured. He
was taken to the hospital, where he died on the following day; and it
was while he was lying there in a dying condition that he confessed to
the murder, and gave this circumstantial account of it."

"I see," said Thorndyke; "and I understand that you accept the story as
literally true?"

"Undoubtedly." Calverley flushed defiantly as he returned Thorndyke's
look, and continued: "You see, I am not a man of science: therefore my
beliefs are not limited to things that can be weighed and measured.
There are things, Dr. Thorndyke, which are outside the range of our puny
intellects; things that science, with its arrogant materialism, puts
aside and ignores with close-shut eyes. I prefer to believe in things
which obviously exist, even though I cannot explain them. It is the
humbler and, I think, the wiser attitude."

"But, my dear Fred," protested Mr. Brodribb, "this is a rank
fairy-tale."

Calverley turned upon the solicitor. "If you had seen what I have seen,
you would not only believe: you would _know_."

"Tell us what you have seen, then," said Mr. Brodribb.

"I will, if you wish to hear it," said Calverley. "I will continue the
strange history of the Mandarin's Pearl."

He lit a fresh cigarette and continued:

"The night I came to Beech-hurst--that is my cousin's house, you know--a
rather absurd thing happened, which I mention on account of its
connection with what has followed. I had gone to my room early, and sat
for some time writing letters before getting ready for bed. When I had
finished my letters, I started on a tour of inspection of my room. I was
then, you must remember, in a very nervous state, and it had become my
habit to examine the room in which I was to sleep before undressing,
looking under the bed, and in any cupboards and closets that there
happened to be. Now, on looking round my new room, I perceived that
there was a second door, and I at once proceeded to open it to see where
it led to. As soon as I opened the door, I got a terrible start. I
found myself looking into a narrow closet or passage, lined with pegs,
on which the servant had hung some of my clothes; at the farther end was
another door, and, as I stood looking into the closet, I observed, with
startled amazement, a man standing holding the door half-open, and
silently regarding me. I stood for a moment staring at him, with my
heart thumping and my limbs all of a tremble; then I slammed the door
and ran off to look for my cousin.

"He was in the billiard-room with Raggerton, and the pair looked up
sharply as I entered.

"'Alfred,' I said, 'where does that passage lead to out of my room?'

"'Lead to?' said he. 'Why, it doesn't lead anywhere. It used to open
into a cross corridor, but when the house was altered, the corridor was
done away with, and this passage closed up. It is only a cupboard now.'

"'Well, there's a man in it--or there was just now.'

"'Nonsense!' he exclaimed; 'impossible! Let us go and look at the
place.'

"He and Raggerton rose, and we went together to my room. As we flung
open the door of the closet and looked in, we all three burst into a
laugh. There were three men now looking at us from the open door at the
other end, and the mystery was solved. A large mirror had been placed at
the end of the closet to cover the partition which cut it off from the
cross corridor.

"This incident naturally exposed me to a good deal of chaff from my
cousin and Captain Raggerton; but I often wished that the mirror had not
been placed there, for it happened over and over again that, going to
the cupboard hurriedly, and not thinking of the mirror, I got quite a
bad shock on being confronted by a figure apparently coming straight at
me through an open door. In fact, it annoyed me so much, in my nervous
state, that I even thought of asking my cousin to give me a different
room; but, happening to refer to the matter when talking to Raggerton, I
found the Captain so scornful of my cowardice that my pride was touched,
and I let the affair drop.

[Illustration: THE APPARITION IN THE MIRROR]

"And now I come to a very strange occurrence, which I shall relate quite
frankly, although I know beforehand that you will set me down as a liar
or a lunatic. I had been away from home for a fortnight, and as I
returned rather late at night, I went straight to my room. Having partly
undressed, I took my clothes in one hand and a candle in the other, and
opened the cupboard door. I stood for a moment looking nervously at my
double, standing, candle in hand, looking at me through the open door at
the other end of the passage; then I entered, and, setting the candle on
a shelf, proceeded to hang up my clothes. I had hung them up, and had
just reached up for the candle, when my eye was caught by something
strange in the mirror. It no longer reflected the candle in my hand, but
instead of it, a large coloured paper lantern. I stood petrified with
astonishment, and gazed into the mirror; and then I saw that my own
reflection was changed, too; that, in place of my own figure, was that
of an elderly Chinaman, who stood regarding me with stony calm.

"I must have stood for near upon a minute, unable to move and scarce
able to breathe, face to face with that awful figure. At length I turned
to escape, and, as I turned, he turned also, and I could see him, over
my shoulder, hurrying away. As I reached the door, I halted for a
moment, looking back with the door in my hand, holding the candle above
my head; and even so _he_ halted, looking back at me, with his hand upon
the door and his lantern held above his head.

"I was so much upset that I could not go to bed for some hours, but
continued to pace the room, in spite of my fatigue. Now and again I was
impelled, irresistibly, to peer into the cupboard, but nothing was to be
seen in the mirror save my own figure, candle in hand, peeping in at me
through the half-open door. And each time that I looked into my own
white, horror-stricken face, I shut the door hastily and turned away
with a shudder; for the pegs, with the clothes hanging on them, seemed
to call to me. I went to bed at last, and before I fell asleep I formed
the resolution that, if I was spared until the next day, I would write
to the British Consul at Canton, and offer to restore the pearl to the
relatives of the murdered mandarin.

"On the following day I wrote and despatched the letter, after which I
felt more composed, though I was haunted continually by the recollection
of that stony, impassive figure; and from time to time I felt an
irresistible impulse to go and look in at the door of the closet, at the
mirror and the pegs with the clothes hanging from them. I told my cousin
of the visitation that I had received, but he merely laughed, and was
frankly incredulous; while the Captain bluntly advised me not to be a
superstitious donkey.

"For some days after this I was left in peace, and began to hope that my
letter had appeased the spirit of the murdered man; but on the fifth
day, about six o'clock in the evening, happening to want some papers
that I had left in the pocket of a coat which was hanging in the
closet, I went in to get them. I took in no candle, as it was not yet
dark, but left the door wide open to light me. The coat that I wanted
was near the end of the closet, not more than four paces from the
mirror, and as I went towards it I watched my reflection rather
nervously as it advanced to meet me. I found my coat, and as I felt for
the papers, I still kept a suspicious eye on my double. And, even as I
looked, a most strange phenomenon appeared: the mirror seemed for an
instant to darken or cloud over, and then, as it cleared again, I saw,
standing dark against the light of the open door behind him, the figure
of the mandarin. After a single glance, I ran out of the closet, shaking
with agitation; but as I turned to shut the door, I noticed that it was
my own figure that was reflected in the glass. The Chinaman had vanished
in an instant.

"It now became evident that my letter had not served its purpose, and I
was plunged in despair; the more so since, on this day, I felt again the
dreadful impulse to go and look at the pegs on the walls of the closet.
There was no mistaking the meaning of that impulse, and each time that I
went, I dragged myself away reluctantly, though shivering with horror.
One circumstance, indeed, encouraged me a little; the mandarin had not,
on either occasion, beckoned to me as he had done to the sailors, so
that perhaps some way of escape yet lay open to me.

"During the next few days I considered very earnestly what measures I
could take to avert the doom that seemed to be hanging over me. The
simplest plan, that of passing the pearl on to some other person, was
out of the question; it would be nothing short of murder. On the other
hand, I could not wait for an answer to my letter; for even if I
remained alive, I felt that my reason would have given way long before
the reply reached me. But while I was debating what I should do, the
mandarin appeared to me again; and then, after an interval of only two
days, he came to me once more. That was last night. I remained gazing at
him, fascinated, with my flesh creeping, as he stood, lantern in hand,
looking steadily in my face. At last he held out his hand to me, as if
asking me to give him the pearl; then the mirror darkened, and he
vanished in a flash; and in the place where he had stood there was my
own reflection looking at me out of the glass.

"That last visitation decided me. When I left home this morning the
pearl was in my pocket, and as I came over Waterloo Bridge, I leaned
over the parapet and flung the thing into the water. After that I felt
quite relieved for a time; I had shaken the accursed thing off without
involving anyone in the curse that it carried. But presently I began to
feel fresh misgivings, and the conviction has been growing upon me all
day that I have done the wrong thing. I have only placed it for ever
beyond the reach of its owner, whereas I ought to have burnt it, after
the Chinese fashion, so that its non-material essence could have joined
the spiritual body of him to whom it had belonged when both were clothed
with material substance.

"But it can't be altered now. For good or for evil, the thing is done,
and God alone knows what the end of it will be."

As he concluded, Calverley uttered a deep sigh, and covered his face
with his slender, delicate hands. For a space we were all silent and, I
think, deeply moved; for, grotesquely unreal as the whole thing was,
there was a pathos, and even a tragedy, in it that we all felt to be
very real indeed.

Suddenly Mr. Brodribb started and looked at his watch.

"Good gracious, Calverley, we shall lose our train."

The young man pulled himself together and stood up. "We shall just do it
if we go at once," said he. "Good-bye," he added, shaking Thorndyke's
hand and mine. "You have been very patient, and I have been rather
prosy, I am afraid. Come along, Mr. Brodribb."

Thorndyke and I followed them out on to the landing, and I heard my
colleague say to the solicitor in a low tone, but very earnestly: "Get
him away from that house, Brodribb, and don't let him out of your sight
for a moment."

I did not catch the solicitor's reply, if he made any, but when we were
back in our room I noticed that Thorndyke was more agitated than I had
ever seen him.

"I ought not to have let them go," he exclaimed. "Confound me! If I had
had a grain of wit, I should have made them lose their train."

He lit his pipe and fell to pacing the room with long strides, his eyes
bent on the floor with an expression sternly reflective. At last,
finding him hopelessly taciturn, I knocked out my pipe and went to bed.

       *       *       *       *       *

As I was dressing on the following morning, Thorndyke entered my room.
His face was grave even to sternness, and he held a telegram in his
hand.

"I am going to Weybridge this morning," he said shortly, holding the
"flimsy" out to me. "Shall you come?"

I took the paper from him, and read:

     "Come, for God's sake! F. C. is dead. You will
     understand.--BRODRIBB."

I handed him back the telegram, too much shocked for a moment to speak.
The whole dreadful tragedy summed up in that curt message rose before me
in an instant, and a wave of deep pity swept over me at this miserable
end to the sad, empty life.

"What an awful thing, Thorndyke!" I exclaimed at length. "To be killed
by a mere grotesque delusion."

"Do you think so?" he asked dryly. "Well, we shall see; but you will
come?"

"Yes," I replied; and as he retired, I proceeded hurriedly to finish
dressing.

Half an hour later, as we rose from a rapid breakfast, Polton came into
the room, carrying a small roll-up case of tools and a bunch of skeleton
keys.

"Will you have them in a bag, sir?" he asked.

"No," replied Thorndyke; "in my overcoat pocket. Oh, and here is a note,
Polton, which I want you to take round to Scotland Yard. It is to the
Assistant Commissioner, and you are to make sure that it is in the right
hands before you leave. And here is a telegram to Mr. Brodribb."

He dropped the keys and the tool-case into his pocket, and we went down
together to the waiting hansom.

At Weybridge Station we found Mr. Brodribb pacing the platform in a
state of extreme dejection. He brightened up somewhat when he saw us,
and wrung our hands with emotional heartiness.

"It was very good of you both to come at a moment's notice," he said
warmly, "and I feel your kindness very much. You understood, of course,
Thorndyke?"

"Yes," Thorndyke replied. "I suppose the mandarin beckoned to him."

Mr. Brodribb turned with a look of surprise. "How did you guess that?"
he asked; and then, without waiting for a reply, he took from his pocket
a note, which he handed to my colleague. "The poor old fellow left this
for me," he said. "The servant found it on his dressing-table."

Thorndyke glanced through the note and passed it to me. It consisted of
but a few words, hurriedly written in a tremulous hand.

     "He has beckoned to me, and I must go. Good-bye, dear old friend."

"How does his cousin take the matter?" asked Thorndyke.

"He doesn't know of it yet," replied the lawyer. "Alfred and Raggerton
went out after an early breakfast, to cycle over to Guildford on some
business or other, and they have not returned yet. The catastrophe was
discovered soon after they left. The maid went to his room with a cup of
tea, and was astonished to find that his bed had not been slept in. She
ran down in alarm and reported to the butler, who went up at once and
searched the room; but he could find no trace of the missing one, except
my note, until it occurred to him to look in the cupboard. As he opened
the door he got rather a start from his own reflection in the mirror;
and then he saw poor Fred hanging from one of the pegs near the end of
the closet, close to the glass. It's a melancholy affair--but here is
the house, and here is the butler waiting for us. Mr. Alfred is not back
yet, then, Stevens?"

"No, sir." The white-faced, frightened-looking man had evidently been
waiting at the gate from distaste of the house, and he now walked back
with manifest relief at our arrival. When we entered the house, he
ushered us without remark up on to the first-floor, and, preceding us
along a corridor, halted near the end. "That's the room, sir," said he;
and without another word he turned and went down the stairs.

We entered the room, and Mr. Brodribb followed on tiptoe, looking about
him fearfully, and casting awe-struck glances at the shrouded form on
the bed. To the latter Thorndyke advanced, and gently drew back the
sheet.

"You'd better not look, Brodribb," said he, as he bent over the corpse.
He felt the limbs and examined the cord, which still remained round the
neck, its raggedly-severed end testifying to the terror of the servants
who had cut down the body. Then he replaced the sheet and looked at his
watch. "It happened at about three o'clock in the morning," said he. "He
must have struggled with the impulse for some time, poor fellow! Now let
us look at the cupboard."

We went together to a door in the corner of the room, and, as we opened
it, we were confronted by three figures, apparently looking in at us
through an open door at the other end.

"It is really rather startling," said the lawyer, in a subdued voice,
looking almost apprehensively at the three figures that advanced to meet
us. "The poor lad ought never to have been here."

It was certainly an eerie place, and I could not but feel, as we walked
down the dark, narrow passage, with those other three dimly-seen figures
silently coming towards us, and mimicking our every gesture, that it was
no place for a nervous, superstitious man like poor Fred Calverley.
Close to the end of the long row of pegs was one from which hung an end
of stout box-cord, and to this Mr. Brodribb pointed with an awe-struck
gesture. But Thorndyke gave it only a brief glance, and then walked up
to the mirror, which he proceeded to examine minutely. It was a very
large glass, nearly seven feet high, extending the full width of the
closet, and reaching to within a foot of the floor; and it seemed to
have been let into the partition from behind, for, both above and below,
the woodwork was in front of it. While I was making these observations,
I watched Thorndyke with no little curiosity. First he rapped his
knuckles on the glass; then he lighted a wax match, and, holding it
close to the mirror, carefully watched the reflection of the flame.
Finally, laying his cheek on the glass, he held the match at arm's
length, still close to the mirror, and looked at the reflection along
the surface. Then he blew out the match and walked back into the room,
shutting the cupboard door as we emerged.

"I think," said he, "that as we shall all undoubtedly be subpoenaed by
the coroner, it would be well to put together a few notes of the facts.
I see there is a writing-table by the window, and I would propose that
you, Brodribb, just jot down a _pr\E9cis_ of the statement that you heard
last night, while Jervis notes down the exact condition of the body.
While you are doing this, I will take a look round."

"We might find a more cheerful place to write in," grumbled Mr.
Brodribb; "however--"

Without finishing the sentence, he sat down at the table, and, having
found some sermon paper, dipped a pen in the ink by way of encouraging
his thoughts. At this moment Thorndyke quietly slipped out of the room,
and I proceeded to make a detailed examination of the body: in which
occupation I was interrupted at intervals by requests from the lawyer
that I should refresh his memory.

We had been occupied thus for about a quarter of an hour, when a quick
step was heard outside, the door was opened abruptly, and a man burst
into the room. Brodribb rose and held out his hand.

"This is a sad home-coming for you, Alfred," said he.

"Yes, my God!" the newcomer exclaimed. "It's awful."

He looked askance at the corpse on the bed, and wiped his forehead with
his handkerchief. Alfred Calverley was not extremely prepossessing. Like
his cousin, he was obviously neurotic, but there were signs of
dissipation in his face, which, just now, was pale and ghastly, and wore
an expression of abject fear. Moreover, his entrance was accompanied by
that of a perceptible odour of brandy.

He had walked over, without noticing me, to the writing-table, and as he
stood there, talking in subdued tones with the lawyer, I suddenly found
Thorndyke at my side. He had stolen in noiselessly through the door that
Calverley had left open.

"Show him Brodribb's note," he whispered, "and then make him go in and
look at the peg."

With this mysterious request, he slipped out of the room as silently as
he had come, unperceived either by Calverley or the lawyer.

"Has Captain Raggerton returned with you?" Brodribb was inquiring.

"No, he has gone into the town," was the reply; "but he won't be long.
This will be a frightful shock to him."

At this point I stepped forward. "Have you shown Mr. Calverley the
extraordinary letter that the deceased left for you?" I asked.

"What letter was that?" demanded Calverley, with a start.

Mr. Brodribb drew forth the note and handed it to him. As he read it
through, Calverley turned white to the lips, and the paper trembled in
his hand.

"'He has beckoned to me, and I must go,'" he read. Then, with a furtive
glance at the lawyer: "Who had beckoned? What did he mean?"

Mr. Brodribb briefly explained the meaning of the allusion, adding: "I
thought you knew all about it."

"Yes, yes," said Calverley, with some confusion; "I remember the matter
now you mention it. But it's all so dreadful and bewildering."

At this point I again interposed. "There is a question," I said, "that
may be of some importance. It refers to the cord with which the poor
fellow hanged himself. Can you identify that cord, Mr. Calverley?"

"I!" he exclaimed, staring at me, and wiping the sweat from his white
face; "how should I? Where is the cord?"

"Part of it is still hanging from the peg in the closet. Would you mind
looking at it?"

"If you would very kindly fetch it--you know I--er--naturally--have a--"

"It must not be disturbed before the inquest," said I; "but surely you
are not afraid--"

"I didn't say I was afraid," he retorted angrily. "Why should I be?"

With a strange, tremulous swagger, he strode across to the closet, flung
open the door, and plunged in.

A moment later we heard a shout of horror, and he rushed out, livid and
gasping.

"What is it, Calverley?" exclaimed Mr. Brodribb, starting up in alarm.

But Calverley was incapable of speech. Dropping limply into a chair, he
gazed at us for a while in silent terror; then he fell back uttering a
wild shriek of laughter.

Mr. Brodribb looked at him in amazement. "What is it, Calverley?" he
asked again.

As no answer was forthcoming, he stepped across to the open door of the
closet and entered, peering curiously before him. Then he, too, uttered
a startled exclamation, and backed out hurriedly, looking pale and
flurried.

"Bless my soul!" he ejaculated. "Is the place bewitched?"

He sat down heavily and stared at Calverley, who was still shaking with
hysteric laughter; while I, now consumed with curiosity, walked over to
the closet to discover the cause of their singular behaviour. As I flung
open the door, which the lawyer had closed, I must confess to being very
considerably startled; for though the reflection of the open door was
plain enough in the mirror, my own reflection was replaced by that of a
Chinaman. After a momentary pause of astonishment, I entered the closet
and walked towards the mirror; and simultaneously the figure of the
Chinaman entered and walked towards me. I had advanced more than halfway
down the closet when suddenly the mirror darkened; there was a whirling
flash, the Chinaman vanished in an instant, and, as I reached the glass,
my own reflection faced me.

I turned back into the room pretty completely enlightened, and looked at
Calverley with a new-born distaste. He still sat facing the bewildered
lawyer, one moment sobbing convulsively, the next yelping with hysteric
laughter. He was not an agreeable spectacle, and when, a few moments
later, Thorndyke entered the room, and halted by the door with a stare
of disgust, I was moved to join him. But at this juncture a man pushed
past Thorndyke, and, striding up to Calverley, shook him roughly by the
arm.

"Stop that row!" he exclaimed furiously. "Do you hear? Stop it!"

"I can't help it, Raggerton," gasped Calverley. "He gave me such a
turn--the mandarin, you know."

"What!" ejaculated Raggerton.

He dashed across to the closet, looked in, and turned upon Calverley
with a snarl. Then he walked out of the room.

"Brodribb," said Thorndyke, "I should like to have a word with you and
Jervis outside." Then, as we followed him out on to the landing, he
continued: "I have something rather interesting to show you. It is in
here."

He softly opened an adjoining door, and we looked into a small
unfurnished room. A projecting closet occupied one side of it, and at
the door of the closet stood Captain Raggerton, with his hand upon the
key. He turned upon us fiercely, though with a look of alarm, and
demanded:

"What is the meaning of this intrusion? and who the deuce are you? Do
you know that this is my private room?"

"I suspected that it was," Thorndyke replied quietly. "Those will be
your properties in the closet, then?"

Raggerton turned pale, but continued to bluster. "Do I understand that
you have dared to break into my private closet?" he demanded.

"I have inspected it," replied Thorndyke, "and I may remark that it is
useless to wrench at that key, because I have hampered the lock."

"The devil you have!" shouted Raggerton.

"Yes; you see, I am expecting a police-officer with a search warrant, so
I wished to keep everything intact."

Raggerton turned livid with mingled fear and rage. He stalked up to
Thorndyke with a threatening air, but, suddenly altering his mind,
exclaimed, "I must see to this!" and flung out of the room.

Thorndyke took a key from his pocket, and, having locked the door,
turned to the closet. Having taken out the key to unhamper the lock with
a stout wire, he reinserted it and unlocked the door. As we entered, we
found ourselves in a narrow closet, similar to the one in the other
room, but darker, owing to the absence of a mirror. A few clothes hung
from the pegs, and when Thorndyke had lit a candle that stood on a
shelf, we could see more of the details.

"Here are some of the properties," said Thorndyke. He pointed to a peg
from which hung a long, blue silk gown of Chinese make, a mandarin's
cap, with a pigtail attached to it, and a beautifully-made papier-m\E0ch\E9
mask. "Observe," said Thorndyke, taking the latter down and exhibiting a
label on the inside, marked "Renouard \E0 Paris," "no trouble has been
spared."

He took off his coat, slipped on the gown, the mask, and the cap, and
was, in a moment, in that dim light, transformed into the perfect
semblance of a Chinaman.

"By taking a little more time," he remarked, pointing to a pair of
Chinese shoes and a large paper lantern, "the make-up could be rendered
more complete; but this seems to have answered for our friend Alfred."

"But," said Mr. Brodribb, as Thorndyke shed the disguise, "still, I
don't understand--"

"I will make it clear to you in a moment," said Thorndyke. He walked to
the end of the closet, and, tapping the right-hand wall, said: "This is
the back of the mirror. You see that it is hung on massive well-oiled
hinges, and is supported on this large, rubber-tyred castor, which
evidently has ball bearings. You observe three black cords running along
the wall, and passing through those pulleys above. Now, when I pull this
cord, notice what happens."

He pulled one cord firmly, and immediately the mirror swung noiselessly
inwards on its great castor, until it stood diagonally across the
closet, where it was stopped by a rubber buffer.

"Bless my soul!" exclaimed Mr. Brodribb. "What an extraordinary thing!"

The effect was certainly very strange, for, the mirror being now exactly
diagonal to the two closets they appeared to be a single, continuous
passage, with a door at either end. On going up to the mirror, we found
that the opening which it had occupied was filled by a sheet of plain
glass, evidently placed there as a precaution to prevent any person from
walking through from one closet into the other, and so discovering the
trick.

"It's all very puzzling," said Mr. Brodribb; "I don't clearly understand
it now."

"Let us finish here," replied Thorndyke, "and then I will explain.
Notice this black curtain. When I pull the second cord, it slides across
the closet and cuts off the light. The mirror now reflects nothing into
the other closet; it simply appears dark. And now I pull the third
cord."

He did so, and the mirror swung noiselessly back into its place.

"There is only one other thing to observe before we go out," said
Thorndyke, "and that is this other mirror standing with its face to the
wall. This, of course, is the one that Fred Calverley originally saw at
the end of the closet; it has since been removed, and the larger
swinging glass put in its place. And now," he continued, when we came
out into the room, "let me explain the mechanism in detail. It was
obvious to me, when I heard poor Fred Calverley's story, that the mirror
was 'faked,' and I drew a diagram of the probable arrangement, which
turns out to be correct. Here it is." He took a sheet of paper from his
pocket and handed it to the lawyer. "There are two sketches. Sketch 1
shows the mirror in its ordinary position, closing the end of the
closet. A person standing at A, of course, sees his reflection facing
him at, apparently, A 1. Sketch 2 shows the mirror swung across. Now a
person standing at A does not see his own reflection at all; but if some
other person is standing in the other closet at B, A sees the reflection
of B apparently at B 1--that is, in the identical position that his own
reflection occupied when the mirror was straight across."

"I see now," said Brodribb; "but who set up this apparatus, and why was
it done?"

"Let me ask you a question," said Thorndyke. "Is Alfred Calverley the
next-of-kin?"

"No; there is Fred's younger brother. But I may say that Fred has made
a will quite recently very much in Alfred's favour."

"There is the explanation, then," said Thorndyke. "These two scoundrels
have conspired to drive the poor fellow to suicide, and Raggerton was
clearly the leading spirit. He was evidently concocting some story with
which to work on poor Fred's superstitions when the mention of the
Chinaman on the steamer gave him his cue. He then invented the very
picturesque story of the murdered mandarin and the stolen pearl. You
remember that these 'visitations' did not begin until after that story
had been told, and Fred had been absent from the house on a visit.
Evidently, during his absence, Raggerton took down the original mirror,
and substituted this swinging arrangement; and at the same time procured
the Chinaman's dress and mask from the theatrical property dealers. No
doubt he reckoned on being able quietly to remove the swinging glass and
other properties and replace the original mirror before the inquest."

"By God!" exclaimed Mr. Brodribb, "it's the most infamous, cowardly plot
I have ever heard of. They shall go to gaol for it, the villains, as
sure as I am alive."

But in this Mr. Brodribb was mistaken; for immediately on finding
themselves detected, the two conspirators had left the house, and by
nightfall were safely across the Channel; and the only satisfaction that
the lawyer obtained was the setting aside of the will on facts disclosed
at the inquest.

As to Thorndyke, he has never to this day forgiven himself for having
allowed Fred Calverley to go home to his death.




VII

THE ALUMINIUM DAGGER


The "urgent call"--the instant, peremptory summons to professional
duty--is an experience that appertains to the medical rather than the
legal practitioner, and I had supposed, when I abandoned the clinical
side of my profession in favour of the forensic, that henceforth I
should know it no more; that the interrupted meal, the broken leisure,
and the jangle of the night-bell, were things of the past; but in
practice it was otherwise. The medical jurist is, so to speak, on the
borderland of the two professions, and exposed to the vicissitudes of
each calling, and so it happened from time to time that the professional
services of my colleague or myself were demanded at a moment's notice.
And thus it was in the case that I am about to relate.

The sacred rite of the "tub" had been duly performed, and the
freshly-dried person of the present narrator was about to be insinuated
into the first instalment of clothing, when a hurried step was heard
upon the stair, and the voice of our laboratory assistant, Polton, arose
at my colleague's door.

"There's a gentleman downstairs, sir, who says he must see you instantly
on most urgent business. He seems to be in a rare twitter, sir--"

Polton was proceeding to descriptive particulars, when a second and
more hurried step became audible, and a strange voice addressed
Thorndyke.

"I have come to beg your immediate assistance, sir; a most dreadful
thing has happened. A horrible murder has been committed. Can you come
with me now?"

"I will be with you almost immediately," said Thorndyke. "Is the victim
quite dead?"

"Quite. Cold and stiff. The police think--"

"Do the police know that you have come for me?" interrupted Thorndyke.

"Yes. Nothing is to be done until you arrive."

"Very well. I will be ready in a few minutes."

"And if you would wait downstairs, sir," Polton added persuasively, "I
could help the doctor to get ready."

With this crafty appeal, he lured the intruder back to the sitting-room,
and shortly after stole softly up the stairs with a small breakfast
tray, the contents of which he deposited firmly in our respective rooms,
with a few timely words on the folly of "undertaking murders on an empty
stomach." Thorndyke and I had meanwhile clothed ourselves with a
celerity known only to medical practitioners and quick-change artists,
and in a few minutes descended the stairs together, calling in at the
laboratory for a few appliances that Thorndyke usually took with him on
a visit of investigation.

As we entered the sitting-room, our visitor, who was feverishly pacing
up and down, seized his hat with a gasp of relief. "You are ready to
come?" he asked. "My carriage is at the door;" and, without waiting for
an answer, he hurried out, and rapidly preceded us down the stairs.

The carriage was a roomy brougham, which fortunately accommodated the
three of us, and as soon as we had entered and shut the door, the
coachman whipped up his horse and drove off at a smart trot.

"I had better give you some account of the circumstances, as we go,"
said our agitated friend. "In the first place, my name is Curtis, Henry
Curtis; here is my card. Ah! and here is another card, which I should
have given you before. My solicitor, Mr. Marchmont, was with me when I
made this dreadful discovery, and he sent me to you. He remained in the
rooms to see that nothing is disturbed until you arrive."

"That was wise of him," said Thorndyke. "But now tell us exactly what
has occurred."

"I will," said Mr. Curtis. "The murdered man was my brother-in-law,
Alfred Hartridge, and I am sorry to say he was--well, he was a bad man.
It grieves me to speak of him thus--_de mortuis_, you know--but, still,
we must deal with the facts, even though they be painful."

"Undoubtedly," agreed Thorndyke.

"I have had a great deal of very unpleasant correspondence with
him--Marchmont will tell you about that--and yesterday I left a note for
him, asking for an interview, to settle the business, naming eight
o'clock this morning as the hour, because I had to leave town before
noon. He replied, in a very singular letter, that he would see me at
that hour, and Mr. Marchmont very kindly consented to accompany me.
Accordingly, we went to his chambers together this morning, arriving
punctually at eight o'clock. We rang the bell several times, and knocked
loudly at the door, but as there was no response, we went down and
spoke to the hall-porter. This man, it seems, had already noticed, from
the courtyard, that the electric lights were full on in Mr. Hartridge's
sitting-room, as they had been all night, according to the statement of
the night-porter; so now, suspecting that something was wrong, he came
up with us, and rang the bell and battered at the door. Then, as there
was still no sign of life within, he inserted his duplicate key and
tried to open the door--unsuccessfully, however, as it proved to be
bolted on the inside. Thereupon the porter fetched a constable, and,
after a consultation, we decided that we were justified in breaking open
the door; the porter produced a crowbar, and by our unified efforts the
door was eventually burst open. We entered, and--my God! Dr. Thorndyke,
what a terrible sight it was that met our eyes! My brother-in-law was
lying dead on the floor of the sitting-room. He had been
stabbed--stabbed to death; and the dagger had not even been withdrawn.
It was still sticking out of his back."

He mopped his face with his handkerchief, and was about to continue his
account of the catastrophe when the carriage entered a quiet side-street
between Westminster and Victoria, and drew up before a block of tall,
new, red-brick buildings. A flurried hall-porter ran out to open the
door, and we alighted opposite the main entrance.

"My brother-in-law's chambers are on the second-floor," said Mr. Curtis.
"We can go up in the lift."

The porter had hurried before us, and already stood with his hand upon
the rope. We entered the lift, and in a few seconds were discharged on
to the second floor, the porter, with furtive curiosity, following us
down the corridor. At the end of the passage was a half-open door,
considerably battered and bruised. Above the door, painted in white
lettering, was the inscription, "Mr. Hartridge"; and through the doorway
protruded the rather foxy countenance of Inspector Badger.

"I am glad you have come, sir," said he, as he recognized my colleague.
"Mr. Marchmont is sitting inside like a watch-dog, and he growls if any
of us even walks across the room."

The words formed a complaint, but there was a certain geniality in the
speaker's manner which made me suspect that Inspector Badger was already
navigating his craft on a lee shore.

We entered a small lobby or hall, and from thence passed into the
sitting-room, where we found Mr. Marchmont keeping his vigil, in company
with a constable and a uniformed inspector. The three rose softly as we
entered, and greeted us in a whisper; and then, with one accord, we all
looked towards the other end of the room, and so remained for a time
without speaking.

There was, in the entire aspect of the room, something very grim and
dreadful. An atmosphere of tragic mystery enveloped the most commonplace
objects; and sinister suggestions lurked in the most familiar
appearances. Especially impressive was the air of suspense--of ordinary,
every-day life suddenly arrested--cut short in the twinkling of an eye.
The electric lamps, still burning dim and red, though the summer
sunshine streamed in through the windows; the half-emptied tumbler and
open book by the empty chair, had each its whispered message of swift
and sudden disaster, as had the hushed voices and stealthy movements of
the waiting men, and, above all, an awesome shape that was but a few
hours since a living man, and that now sprawled, prone and motionless,
on the floor.

"This is a mysterious affair," observed Inspector Badger, breaking the
silence at length, "though it is clear enough up to a certain point. The
body tells its own story."

We stepped across and looked down at the corpse. It was that of a
somewhat elderly man, and lay, on an open space of floor before the
fireplace, face downwards, with the arms extended. The slender hilt of a
dagger projected from the back below the left shoulder, and, with the
exception of a trace of blood upon the lips, this was the only
indication of the mode of death. A little way from the body a clock-key
lay on the carpet, and, glancing up at the clock on the mantelpiece, I
perceived that the glass front was open.

"You see," pursued the inspector, noting my glance, "he was standing in
front of the fireplace, winding the clock. Then the murderer stole up
behind him--the noise of the turning key must have covered his
movements--and stabbed him. And you see, from the position of the dagger
on the left side of the back, that the murderer must have been
left-handed. That is all clear enough. What is not clear is how he got
in, and how he got out again."

"The body has not been moved, I suppose," said Thorndyke.

"No. We sent for Dr. Egerton, the police-surgeon, and he certified that
the man was dead. He will be back presently to see you and arrange about
the post-mortem."

"Then," said Thorndyke, "we will not disturb the body till he comes,
except to take the temperature and dust the dagger-hilt."

He took from his bag a long, registering chemical thermometer and an
insufflator or powder-blower. The former he introduced under the dead
man's clothing against the abdomen, and with the latter blew a stream of
fine yellow powder on to the black leather handle of the dagger.
Inspector Badger stooped eagerly to examine the handle, as Thorndyke
blew away the powder that had settled evenly on the surface.

"No finger-prints," said he, in a disappointed tone. "He must have worn
gloves. But that inscription gives a pretty broad hint."

He pointed, as he spoke, to the metal guard of the dagger, on which was
engraved, in clumsy lettering, the single word, "TRADITORE."

"That's the Italian for 'traitor,'" continued the inspector, "and I got
some information from the porter that fits in with that suggestion.
We'll have him in presently, and you shall hear."

"Meanwhile," said Thorndyke, "as the position of the body may be of
importance in the inquiry, I will take one or two photographs and make a
rough plan to scale. Nothing has been moved, you say? Who opened the
windows?"

"They were open when we came in," said Mr. Marchmont. "Last night was
very hot, you remember. Nothing whatever has been moved."

Thorndyke produced from his bag a small folding camera, a telescopic
tripod, a surveyor's measuring-tape, a boxwood scale, and a
sketch-block. He set up the camera in a corner, and exposed a plate,
taking a general view of the room, and including the corpse. Then he
moved to the door and made a second exposure.

"Will you stand in front of the clock, Jervis," he said, "and raise
your hand as if winding it? Thanks; keep like that while I expose a
plate."

I remained thus, in the position that the dead man was assumed to have
occupied at the moment of the murder, while the plate was exposed, and
then, before I moved, Thorndyke marked the position of my feet with a
blackboard chalk. He next set up the tripod over the chalk marks, and
took two photographs from that position, and finally photographed the
body itself.

The photographic operations being concluded, he next proceeded, with
remarkable skill and rapidity, to lay out on the sketch-block a
ground-plan of the room, showing the exact position of the various
objects, on a scale of a quarter of an inch to the foot--a process that
the inspector was inclined to view with some impatience.

"You don't spare trouble, Doctor," he remarked; "nor time either," he
added, with a significant glance at his watch.

"No," answered Thorndyke, as he detached the finished sketch from the
block; "I try to collect all the facts that may bear on a case. They may
prove worthless, or they may turn out of vital importance; one never
knows beforehand, so I collect them all. But here, I think, is Dr.
Egerton."

The police-surgeon greeted Thorndyke with respectful cordiality, and we
proceeded at once to the examination of the body. Drawing out the
thermometer, my colleague noted the reading, and passed the instrument
to Dr. Egerton.

"Dead about ten hours," remarked the latter, after a glance at it. "This
was a very determined and mysterious murder."

"Very," said Thorndyke. "Feel that dagger, Jervis."

I touched the hilt, and felt the characteristic grating of bone.

"It is through the edge of a rib!" I exclaimed.

"Yes; it must have been used with extraordinary force. And you notice
that the clothing is screwed up slightly, as if the blade had been
rotated as it was driven in. That is a very peculiar feature, especially
when taken together with the violence of the blow."

"It is singular, certainly," said Dr. Egerton, "though I don't know that
it helps us much. Shall we withdraw the dagger before moving the body?"

"Certainly," replied Thorndyke, "or the movement may produce fresh
injuries. But wait." He took a piece of string from his pocket, and,
having drawn the dagger out a couple of inches, stretched the string in
a line parallel to the flat of the blade. Then, giving me the ends to
hold, he drew the weapon out completely. As the blade emerged, the twist
in the clothing disappeared. "Observe," said he, "that the string gives
the direction of the wound, and that the cut in the clothing no longer
coincides with it. There is quite a considerable angle, which is the
measure of the rotation of the blade."

"Yes, it is odd," said Dr. Egerton, "though, as I said, I doubt that it
helps us."

"At present," Thorndyke rejoined dryly, "we are noting the facts."

"Quite so," agreed the other, reddening slightly; "and perhaps we had
better move the body to the bedroom, and make a preliminary inspection
of the wound."

We carried the corpse into the bedroom, and, having examined the wound
without eliciting anything new, covered the remains with a sheet, and
returned to the sitting-room.

"Well, gentlemen," said the inspector, "you have examined the body and
the wound, and you have measured the floor and the furniture, and taken
photographs, and made a plan, but we don't seem much more forward.
Here's a man murdered in his rooms. There is only one entrance to the
flat, and that was bolted on the inside at the time of the murder. The
windows are some forty feet from the ground; there is no rain-pipe near
any of them; they are set flush in the wall, and there isn't a foothold
for a fly on any part of that wall. The grates are modern, and there
isn't room for a good-sized cat to crawl up any of the chimneys. Now,
the question is, How did the murderer get in, and how did he get out
again?"

"Still," said Mr. Marchmont, "the fact is that he did get in, and that
he is not here now; and therefore he must have got out; and therefore it
must have been possible for him to get out. And, further, it must be
possible to discover how he got out."

The inspector smiled sourly, but made no reply.

"The circumstances," said Thorndyke, "appear to have been these: The
deceased seems to have been alone; there is no trace of a second
occupant of the room, and only one half-emptied tumbler on the table. He
was sitting reading when apparently he noticed that the clock had
stopped--at ten minutes to twelve; he laid his book, face downwards, on
the table, and rose to wind the clock, and as he was winding it he met
his death."

"By a stab dealt by a left-handed man, who crept up behind him on
tiptoe," added the inspector.

Thorndyke nodded. "That would seem to be so," he said. "But now let us
call in the porter, and hear what he has to tell us."

The custodian was not difficult to find, being, in fact, engaged at that
moment in a survey of the premises through the slit of the letter-box.

"Do you know what persons visited these rooms last night?" Thorndyke
asked him, when he entered looking somewhat sheepish.

"A good many were in and out of the building," was the answer, "but I
can't say if any of them came to this flat. I saw Miss Curtis pass in
about nine."

"My daughter!" exclaimed Mr. Curtis, with a start. "I didn't know that."

"She left about nine-thirty," the porter added.

"Do you know what she came about?" asked the inspector.

"I can guess," replied Mr. Curtis.

"Then don't say," interrupted Mr. Marchmont. "Answer no questions."

"You're very close, Mr. Marchmont," said the inspector; "we are not
suspecting the young lady. We don't ask, for instance, if she is
left-handed."

He glanced craftily at Mr. Curtis as he made this remark, and I noticed
that our client suddenly turned deathly pale, whereupon the inspector
looked away again quickly, as though he had not observed the change.

"Tell us about those Italians again," he said, addressing the porter.
"When did the first of them come here?"

"About a week ago," was the reply. "He was a common-looking man--looked
like an organ-grinder--and he brought a note to my lodge. It was in a
dirty envelope, and was addressed 'Mr. Hartridge, Esq., Brackenhurst
Mansions,' in a very bad handwriting. The man gave me the note and asked
me to give it to Mr. Hartridge; then he went away, and I took the note
up and dropped it into the letter-box."

"What happened next?"

"Why, the very next day an old hag of an Italian woman--one of them
fortune-telling swines with a cage of birds on a stand--came and set up
just by the main doorway. I soon sent her packing, but, bless you! she
was back again in ten minutes, birds and all. I sent her off again--I
kept on sending her off, and she kept on coming back, until I was
reg'lar wore to a thread."

"You seem to have picked up a bit since then," remarked the inspector
with a grin and a glance at the sufferer's very pronounced bow-window.

"Perhaps I have," the custodian replied haughtily. "Well, the next day
there was a ice-cream man--a reg'lar waster, _he_ was. Stuck outside as
if he was froze to the pavement. Kept giving the errand-boys tasters,
and when I tried to move him on, he told me not to obstruct his
business. Business, indeed! Well, there them boys stuck, one after the
other, wiping their tongues round the bottoms of them glasses, until I
was fit to bust with aggravation. And _he_ kept me going all day.

"Then, the day after that there was a barrel-organ, with a mangy-looking
monkey on it. He was the worst of all. Profane, too, _he_ was. Kept
mixing up sacred tunes and comic songs: 'Rock of Ages,' 'Bill Bailey,'
'Cujus Animal,' and 'Over the Garden Wall.' And when I tried to move him
on, that little blighter of a monkey made a run at my leg; and then the
man grinned and started playing, 'Wait till the Clouds roll by.' I tell
you, it was fair sickening."

He wiped his brow at the recollection, and the inspector smiled
appreciatively.

"And that was the last of them?" said the latter; and as the porter
nodded sulkily, he asked: "Should you recognize the note that the
Italian gave you?"

"I should," answered the porter with frosty dignity.

The inspector bustled out of the room, and returned a minute later with
a letter-case in his hand.

"This was in his breast-pocket," said he, laying the bulging case on the
table, and drawing up a chair. "Now, here are three letters tied
together. Ah! this will be the one." He untied the tape, and held out a
dirty envelope addressed in a sprawling, illiterate hand to "Mr.
Hartridge, Esq." "Is that the note the Italian gave you?"

The porter examined it critically. "Yes," said he; "that is the one."

The inspector drew the letter out of the envelope, and, as he opened it,
his eyebrows went up.

"What do you make of that, Doctor?" he said, handing the sheet to
Thorndyke.

Thorndyke regarded it for a while in silence, with deep attention. Then
he carried it to the window, and, taking his lens from his pocket,
examined the paper closely, first with the low power, and then with the
highly magnifying Coddington attachment.

"I should have thought you could see that with the naked eye," said the
inspector, with a sly grin at me. "It's a pretty bold design."

"Yes," replied Thorndyke; "a very interesting production. What do you
say, Mr. Marchmont?"

The solicitor took the note, and I looked over his shoulder. It was
certainly a curious production. Written in red ink, on the commonest
notepaper, and in the same sprawling hand as the address, was the
following message: "You are given six days to do what is just. By the
sign above, know what to expect if you fail." The sign referred to was a
skull and crossbones, very neatly, but rather unskilfully, drawn at the
top of the paper.

"This," said Mr. Marchmont, handing the document to Mr. Curtis,
"explains the singular letter that he wrote yesterday. You have it with
you, I think?"

"Yes," replied Mr. Curtis; "here it is."

He produced a letter from his pocket, and read aloud:

     "'Yes: come if you like, though it is an ungodly hour. Your
     threatening letters have caused me great amusement. They are worthy
     of Sadler's Wells in its prime.

     "'ALFRED HARTRIDGE.'"

"Was Mr. Hartridge ever in Italy?" asked Inspector Badger.

"Oh yes," replied Mr. Curtis. "He stayed at Capri nearly the whole of
last year."

"Why, then, that gives us our clue. Look here. Here are these two other
letters; E.C. postmark--Saffron Hill is E.C. And just look at that!"

He spread out the last of the mysterious letters, and we saw that,
besides the _memento mori_, it contained only three words: "Beware!
Remember Capri!"

"If you have finished, Doctor, I'll be off and have a look round Little
Italy. Those four Italians oughtn't to be difficult to find, and we've
got the porter here to identify them."

"Before you go," said Thorndyke, "there are two little matters that I
should like to settle. One is the dagger: it is in your pocket, I think.
May I have a look at it?"

The inspector rather reluctantly produced the dagger and handed it to my
colleague.

"A very singular weapon, this," said Thorndyke, regarding the dagger
thoughtfully, and turning it about to view its different parts.
"Singular both in shape and material. I have never seen an aluminium
hilt before, and bookbinder's morocco is a little unusual."

"The aluminium was for lightness," explained the inspector, "and it was
made narrow to carry up the sleeve, I expect."

"Perhaps so," said Thorndyke.

He continued his examination, and presently, to the inspector's delight,
brought forth his pocket lens.

"I never saw such a man!" exclaimed the jocose detective. "His motto
ought to be, 'We magnify thee.' I suppose he'll measure it next."

The inspector was not mistaken. Having made a rough sketch of the weapon
on his block, Thorndyke produced from his bag a folding rule and a
delicate calliper-gauge. With these instruments he proceeded, with
extraordinary care and precision, to take the dimensions of the various
parts of the dagger, entering each measurement in its place on the
sketch, with a few brief, descriptive details.

"The other matter," said he at length, handing the dagger back to the
inspector, "refers to the houses opposite."

He walked to the window, and looked out at the backs of a row of tall
buildings similar to the one we were in. They were about thirty yards
distant, and were separated from us by a piece of ground, planted with
shrubs and intersected by gravel paths.

"If any of those rooms were occupied last night," continued Thorndyke,
"we might obtain an actual eyewitness of the crime. This room was
brilliantly lighted, and all the blinds were up, so that an observer at
any of those windows could see right into the room, and very distinctly,
too. It might be worth inquiring into."

"Yes, that's true," said the inspector; "though I expect, if any of them
have seen anything, they will come forward quick enough when they read
the report in the papers. But I must be off now, and I shall have to
lock you out of the rooms."

As we went down the stairs, Mr. Marchmont announced his intention of
calling on us in the evening, "unless," he added, "you want any
information from me now."

"I do," said Thorndyke. "I want to know who is interested in this man's
death."

"That," replied Marchmont, "is rather a queer story. Let us take a turn
in that garden that we saw from the window. We shall be quite private
there."

He beckoned to Mr. Curtis, and, when the inspector had departed with the
police-surgeon, we induced the porter to let us into the garden.

"The question that you asked," Mr. Marchmont began, looking up curiously
at the tall houses opposite, "is very simply answered. The only person
immediately interested in the death of Alfred Hartridge is his executor
and sole legatee, a man named Leonard Wolfe. He is no relation of the
deceased, merely a friend, but he inherits the entire estate--about
twenty thousand pounds. The circumstances are these: Alfred Hartridge
was the elder of two brothers, of whom the younger, Charles, died before
his father, leaving a widow and three children. Fifteen years ago the
father died, leaving the whole of his property to Alfred, with the
understanding that he should support his brother's family and make the
children his heirs."

"Was there no will?" asked Thorndyke.

"Under great pressure from the friends of his son's widow, the old man
made a will shortly before he died; but he was then very old and rather
childish, so the will was contested by Alfred, on the grounds of undue
influence, and was ultimately set aside. Since then Alfred Hartridge has
not paid a penny towards the support of his brother's family. If it had
not been for my client, Mr. Curtis, they might have starved; the whole
burden of the support of the widow and the education of the children has
fallen upon him.

"Well, just lately the matter has assumed an acute form, for two
reasons. The first is that Charles's eldest son, Edmund, has come of
age. Mr. Curtis had him articled to a solicitor, and, as he is now fully
qualified, and a most advantageous proposal for a partnership has been
made, we have been putting pressure on Alfred to supply the necessary
capital in accordance with his father's wishes. This he had refused to
do, and it was with reference to this matter that we were calling on him
this morning. The second reason involves a curious and disgraceful
story. There is a certain Leonard Wolfe, who has been an intimate friend
of the deceased. He is, I may say, a man of bad character, and their
association has been of a kind creditable to neither. There is also a
certain woman named Hester Greene, who had certain claims upon the
deceased, which we need not go into at present. Now, Leonard Wolfe and
the deceased, Alfred Hartridge, entered into an agreement, the terms of
which were these: (1) Wolfe was to marry Hester Greene, and in
consideration of this service (2) Alfred Hartridge was to assign to
Wolfe the whole of his property, absolutely, the actual transfer to take
place on the death of Hartridge."

"And has this transaction been completed?" asked Thorndyke.

"Yes, it has, unfortunately. But we wished to see if anything could be
done for the widow and the children during Hartridge's lifetime. No
doubt, my client's daughter, Miss Curtis, called last night on a similar
mission--very indiscreetly, since the matter was in our hands; but, you
know, she is engaged to Edmund Hartridge--and I expect the interview was
a pretty stormy one."

Thorndyke remained silent for a while, pacing slowly along the gravel
path, with his eyes bent on the ground: not abstractedly, however, but
with a searching, attentive glance that roved amongst the shrubs and
bushes, as though he were looking for something.

"What sort of man," he asked presently, "is this Leonard Wolfe?
Obviously he is a low scoundrel, but what is he like in other respects?
Is he a fool, for instance?"

"Not at all, I should say," said Mr. Curtis. "He was formerly an
engineer, and, I believe, a very capable mechanician. Latterly he has
lived on some property that came to him, and has spent both his time and
his money in gambling and dissipation. Consequently, I expect he is
pretty short of funds at present."

"And in appearance?"

"I only saw him once," replied Mr. Curtis, "and all I can remember of
him is that he is rather short, fair, thin, and clean-shaven, and that
he has lost the middle finger of his left hand."

"And he lives at?"

"Eltham, in Kent. Morton Grange, Eltham," said Mr. Marchmont. "And now,
if you have all the information that you require, I must really be off,
and so must Mr. Curtis."

The two men shook our hands and hurried away, leaving Thorndyke gazing
meditatively at the dingy flower-beds.

"A strange and interesting case, this, Jervis," said he, stooping to
peer under a laurel-bush. "The inspector is on a hot scent--a most
palpable red herring on a most obvious string; but that is his business.
Ah, here comes the porter, intent, no doubt, on pumping us, whereas--"
He smiled genially at the approaching custodian, and asked: "Where did
you say those houses fronted?"

"Cotman Street, sir," answered the porter. "They are nearly all
offices."

"And the numbers? That open second-floor window, for instance?"

"That is number six; but the house opposite Mr. Hartridge's rooms is
number eight."

"Thank you."

Thorndyke was moving away, but suddenly turned again to the porter.

"By the way," said he, "I dropped something out of the window just
now--a small flat piece of metal, like this." He made on the back of his
visiting card a neat sketch of a circular disc, with a hexagonal hole
through it, and handed the card to the porter. "I can't say where it
fell," he continued; "these flat things scale about so; but you might
ask the gardener to look for it. I will give him a sovereign if he
brings it to my chambers, for, although it is of no value to anyone
else, it is of considerable value to me."

The porter touched his hat briskly, and as we turned out at the gate, I
looked back and saw him already wading among the shrubs.

The object of the porter's quest gave me considerable mental occupation.
I had not seen Thorndyke drop any thing, and it was not his way to
finger carelessly any object of value. I was about to question him on
the subject, when, turning sharply round into Cotman Street, he drew up
at the doorway of number six, and began attentively to read the names of
the occupants.

"'Third-floor,'" he read out, "'Mr. Thomas Barlow, Commission Agent.'
Hum! I think we will look in on Mr. Barlow."

He stepped quickly up the stone stairs, and I followed, until we
arrived, somewhat out of breath, on the third-floor. Outside the
Commission Agent's door he paused for a moment, and we both listened
curiously to an irregular sound of shuffling feet from within. Then he
softly opened the door and looked into the room. After remaining thus
for nearly a minute, he looked round at me with a broad smile, and
noiselessly set the door wide open. Inside, a lanky youth of fourteen
was practising, with no mean skill, the manipulation of an appliance
known by the appropriate name of diabolo; and so absorbed was he in his
occupation that we entered and shut the door without being observed. At
length the shuttle missed the string and flew into a large waste-paper
basket; the boy turned and confronted us, and was instantly covered
with confusion.

"Allow me," said Thorndyke, rooting rather unnecessarily in the
waste-paper basket, and handing the toy to its owner. "I need not ask if
Mr. Barlow is in," he added, "nor if he is likely to return shortly."

"He won't be back to-day," said the boy, perspiring with embarrassment;
"he left before I came. I was rather late."

"I see," said Thorndyke. "The early bird catches the worm, but the late
bird catches the diabolo. How did you know he would not be back?"

"He left a note. Here it is."

He exhibited the document, which was neatly written in red ink.
Thorndyke examined it attentively, and then asked:

"Did you break the inkstand yesterday?"

The boy stared at him in amazement. "Yes, I did," he answered. "How did
you know?"

"I didn't, or I should not have asked. But I see that he has used his
stylo to write this note."

The boy regarded Thorndyke distrustfully, as he continued:

"I really called to see if your Mr. Barlow was a gentleman whom I used
to know; but I expect you can tell me. My friend was tall and thin,
dark, and clean-shaved."

"This ain't him, then," said the boy. "He's thin, but he ain't tall or
dark. He's got a sandy beard, and he wears spectacles and a wig. I know
a wig when I see one," he added cunningly, "'cause my father wears one.
He puts it on a peg to comb it, and he swears at me when I larf."

"My friend had injured his left hand," pursued Thorndyke.

"I dunno about that," said the youth. "Mr. Barlow nearly always wears
gloves; he always wears one on his left hand, anyhow."

"Ah well! I'll just write him a note on the chance, if you will give me
a piece of notepaper. Have you any ink?"

"There's some in the bottle. I'll dip the pen in for you."

He produced, from the cupboard, an opened packet of cheap notepaper and
a packet of similar envelopes, and, having dipped the pen to the bottom
of the ink-bottle, handed it to Thorndyke, who sat down and hastily
scribbled a short note. He had folded the paper, and was about to
address the envelope, when he appeared suddenly to alter his mind.

"I don't think I will leave it, after all," he said, slipping the folded
paper into his pocket. "No. Tell him I called--Mr. Horace Budge--and say
I will look in again in a day or two."

The youth watched our exit with an air of perplexity, and he even came
out on to the landing, the better to observe us over the balusters;
until, unexpectedly catching Thorndyke's eye, he withdrew his head with
remarkable suddenness, and retired in disorder.

To tell the truth, I was now little less perplexed than the office-boy
by Thorndyke's proceedings; in which I could discover no relevancy to
the investigation that I presumed he was engaged upon: and the last
straw was laid upon the burden of my curiosity when he stopped at a
staircase window, drew the note out of his pocket, examined it with his
lens, held it up to the light, and chuckled aloud.

"Luck," he observed, "though no substitute for care and intelligence, is
a very pleasant addition. Really, my learned brother, we are doing
uncommonly well."

When we reached the hall, Thorndyke stopped at the housekeeper's box,
and looked in with a genial nod.

"I have just been up to see Mr. Barlow," said he. "He seems to have left
quite early."

"Yes, sir," the man replied. "He went away about half-past eight."

"That was very early; and presumably he came earlier still?"

"I suppose so," the man assented, with a grin; "but I had only just come
on when he left."

"Had he any luggage with him?"

"Yes, sir. There was two cases, a square one and a long, narrow one,
about five foot long. I helped him to carry them down to the cab."

"Which was a four-wheeler, I suppose?"

"Yes, sir."

"Mr. Barlow hasn't been here very long, has he?" Thorndyke inquired.

"No. He only came in last quarter-day--about six weeks ago."

"Ah well! I must call another day. Good-morning;" and Thorndyke strode
out of the building, and made directly for the cab-rank in the adjoining
street. Here he stopped for a minute or two to parley with the driver of
a four-wheeled cab, whom he finally commissioned to convey us to a shop
in New Oxford Street. Having dismissed the cabman with his blessing and
a half-sovereign, he vanished into the shop, leaving me to gaze at the
lathes, drills, and bars of metal displayed in the window. Presently he
emerged with a small parcel, and explained, in answer to my inquiring
look: "A strip of tool steel and a block of metal for Polton."

His next purchase was rather more eccentric. We were proceeding along
Holborn when his attention was suddenly arrested by the window of a
furniture shop, in which was displayed a collection of obsolete French
small-arms--relics of the tragedy of 1870--which were being sold for
decorative purposes. After a brief inspection, he entered the shop, and
shortly reappeared carrying a long sword-bayonet and an old Chassep\F4t
rifle.

"What may be the meaning of this martial display?" I asked, as we turned
down Fetter Lane.

"House protection," he replied promptly. "You will agree that a
discharge of musketry, followed by a bayonet charge, would disconcert
the boldest of burglars."

I laughed at the absurd picture thus drawn of the strenuous
house-protector, but nevertheless continued to speculate on the meaning
of my friend's eccentric proceedings, which I felt sure were in some way
related to the murder in Brackenhurst Chambers, though I could not trace
the connection.

After a late lunch, I hurried out to transact such of my business as had
been interrupted by the stirring events of the morning, leaving
Thorndyke busy with a drawing-board, squares, scale, and compasses,
making accurate, scaled drawings from his rough sketches; while Polton,
with the brown-paper parcel in his hand, looked on at him with an air of
anxious expectation.

As I was returning homeward in the evening by way of Mitre Court, I
overtook Mr. Marchmont, who was also bound for our chambers, and we
walked on together.

"I had a note from Thorndyke," he explained, "asking for a specimen of
handwriting, so I thought I would bring it along myself, and hear if he
has any news."

When we entered the chambers, we found Thorndyke in earnest consultation
with Polton, and on the table before them I observed, to my great
surprise, the dagger with which the murder had been committed.

[Illustration: THE ALUMINIUM DAGGER.]

"I have got you the specimen that you asked for," said Marchmont. "I
didn't think I should be able to, but, by a lucky chance, Curtis kept
the only letter he ever received from the party in question."

He drew the letter from his wallet, and handed it to Thorndyke, who
looked at it attentively and with evident satisfaction.

"By the way," said Marchmont, taking up the dagger, "I thought the
inspector took this away with him."

"He took the original," replied Thorndyke. "This is a duplicate, which
Polton has made, for experimental purposes, from my drawings."

"Really!" exclaimed Marchmont, with a glance of respectful admiration at
Polton; "it is a perfect replica--and you have made it so quickly, too."

"It was quite easy to make," said Polton, "to a man accustomed to work
in metal."

"Which," added Thorndyke, "is a fact of some evidential value."

At this moment a hansom drew up outside. A moment later flying footsteps
were heard on the stairs. There was a furious battering at the door,
and, as Polton threw it open, Mr. Curtis burst wildly into the room.

"Here is a frightful thing, Marchmont!" he gasped. "Edith--my
daughter--arrested for the murder. Inspector Badger came to our house
and took her. My God! I shall go mad!"

Thorndyke laid his hand on the excited man's shoulder. "Don't distress
yourself, Mr. Curtis," said he. "There is no occasion, I assure you. I
suppose," he added, "your daughter is left-handed?"

"Yes, she is, by a most disastrous coincidence. But what are we to do?
Good God! Dr. Thorndyke, they have taken her to prison--to prison--think
of it! My poor Edith!"

"We'll soon have her out," said Thorndyke. "But listen; there is someone
at the door."

A brisk rat-tat confirmed his statement; and when I rose to open the
door, I found myself confronted by Inspector Badger. There was a moment
of extreme awkwardness, and then both the detective and Mr. Curtis
proposed to retire in favour of the other.

"Don't go, inspector," said Thorndyke; "I want to have a word with you.
Perhaps Mr. Curtis would look in again, say, in an hour. Will you? We
shall have news for you by then, I hope."

Mr. Curtis agreed hastily, and dashed out of the room with his
characteristic impetuosity. When he had gone, Thorndyke turned to the
detective, and remarked dryly:

"You seem to have been busy, inspector?"

"Yes," replied Badger; "I haven't let the grass grow under my feet; and
I've got a pretty strong case against Miss Curtis already. You see, she
was the last person seen in the company of the deceased; she had a
grievance against him; she is left-handed, and you remember that the
murder was committed by a left-handed person."

"Anything else?"

"Yes. I have seen those Italians, and the whole thing was a put-up job.
A woman, in a widow's dress and veil, paid them to go and play the fool
outside the building, and she gave them the letter that was left with
the porter. They haven't identified her yet, but she seems to agree in
size with Miss Curtis."

"And how did she get out of the chambers, with the door bolted on the
inside?"

"Ah, there you are! That's a mystery at present--unless you can give us
an explanation." The inspector made this qualification with a faint
grin, and added: "As there was no one in the place when we broke into
it, the murderer must have got out somehow. You can't deny that."

"I do deny it, nevertheless," said Thorndyke. "You look surprised," he
continued (which was undoubtedly true), "but yet the whole thing is
exceedingly obvious. The explanation struck me directly I looked at the
body. There was evidently no practicable exit from the flat, and there
was certainly no one in it when you entered. Clearly, then, _the
murderer had never been in the place at all_."

"I don't follow you in the least," said the inspector.

"Well," said Thorndyke, "as I have finished with the case, and am
handing it over to you, I will put the evidence before you _seriatim_.
Now, I think we are agreed that, at the moment when the blow was struck,
the deceased was standing before the fireplace, winding the clock. The
dagger entered obliquely from the left, and, if you recall its position,
you will remember that its hilt pointed directly towards an open
window."

"Which was forty feet from the ground."

"Yes. And now we will consider the very peculiar character of the weapon
with which the crime was committed."

He had placed his hand upon the knob of a drawer, when we were
interrupted by a knock at the door. I sprang up, and, opening it,
admitted no less a person than the porter of Brackenhurst Chambers. The
man looked somewhat surprised on recognizing our visitors, but advanced
to Thorndyke, drawing a folded paper from his pocket.

"I've found the article you were looking for, sir," said he, "and a rare
hunt I had for it. It had stuck in the leaves of one of them shrubs."

Thorndyke opened the packet, and, having glanced inside, laid it on the
table.

"Thank you," said he, pushing a sovereign across to the gratified
official. "The inspector has your name, I think?"

"He have, sir," replied the porter; and, pocketing his fee, he departed,
beaming.

"To return to the dagger," said Thorndyke, opening the drawer. "It was a
very peculiar one, as I have said, and as you will see from this model,
which is an exact duplicate." Here he exhibited Polton's production to
the astonished detective. "You see that it is extraordinarily slender,
and free from projections, and of unusual materials. You also see that
it was obviously not made by an ordinary dagger-maker; that, in spite of
the Italian word scrawled on it, there is plainly written all over it
'British mechanic.' The blade is made from a strip of common
three-quarter-inch tool steel; the hilt is turned from an aluminium rod;
and there is not a line of engraving on it that could not be produced in
a lathe by any engineer's apprentice. Even the boss at the top is
mechanical, for it is just like an ordinary hexagon nut. Then, notice
the dimensions, as shown on my drawing. The parts A and B, which just
project beyond the blade, are exactly similar in diameter--and such
exactness could hardly be accidental. They are each parts of a circle
having a diameter of 10.9 millimetres--a dimension which happens, by a
singular coincidence, to be exactly the calibre of the old Chassep\F4t
rifle, specimens of which are now on sale at several shops in London.
Here is one, for instance."

He fetched the rifle that he had bought, from the corner in which it was
standing, and, lifting the dagger by its point, slipped the hilt into
the muzzle. When he let go, the dagger slid quietly down the barrel,
until its hilt appeared in the open breech.

"Good God!" exclaimed Marchmont. "You don't suggest that the dagger was
shot from a gun?"

"I do, indeed; and you now see the reason for the aluminium hilt--to
diminish the weight of the already heavy projectile--and also for this
hexagonal boss on the end?"

"No, I do not," said the inspector; "but I say that you are suggesting
an impossibility."

"Then," replied Thorndyke, "I must explain and demonstrate. To begin
with, this projectile had to travel point foremost; therefore it had to
be made to spin--and it certainly was spinning when it entered the body,
as the clothing and the wound showed us. Now, to make it spin, it had to
be fired from a rifled barrel; but as the hilt would not engage in the
rifling, it had to be fitted with something that would. That something
was evidently a soft metal washer, which fitted on to this hexagon, and
which would be pressed into the grooves of the rifling, and so spin the
dagger, but would drop off as soon as the weapon left the barrel. Here
is such a washer, which Polton has made for us."

He laid on the table a metal disc, with a hexagonal hole through it.

"This is all very ingenious," said the inspector, "but I say it is
impossible and fantastic."

"It certainly sounds rather improbable," Marchmont agreed.

"We will see," said Thorndyke. "Here is a makeshift cartridge of
Polton's manufacture, containing an eighth charge of smokeless powder
for a 20-bore gun."

He fitted the washer on to the boss of the dagger in the open breech of
the rifle, pushed it into the barrel, inserted the cartridge, and closed
the breech. Then, opening the office-door, he displayed a target of
padded strawboard against the wall.

"The length of the two rooms," said he, "gives us a distance of
thirty-two feet. Will you shut the windows, Jervis?"

I complied, and he then pointed the rifle at the target. There was a
dull report--much less loud than I had expected--and when we looked at
the target, we saw the dagger driven in up to its hilt at the margin of
the bull's-eye.

"You see," said Thorndyke, laying down the rifle, "that the thing is
practicable. Now for the evidence as to the actual occurrence. First, on
the original dagger there are linear scratches which exactly correspond
with the grooves of the rifling. Then there is the fact that the dagger
was certainly spinning from left to right--in the direction of the
rifling, that is--when it entered the body. And then there is this,
which, as you heard, the porter found in the garden."

He opened the paper packet. In it lay a metal disc, perforated by a
hexagonal hole. Stepping into the office, he picked up from the floor
the washer that he had put on the dagger, and laid it on the paper
beside the other. The two discs were identical in size, and the margin
of each was indented with identical markings, corresponding to the
rifling of the barrel.

The inspector gazed at the two discs in silence for a while; then,
looking up at Thorndyke, he said:

"I give in, Doctor. You're right, beyond all doubt; but how you came to
think of it beats me into fits. The only question now is, Who fired the
gun, and why wasn't the report heard?"

"As to the latter," said Thorndyke, "it is probable that he used a
compressed-air attachment, not only to diminish the noise, but also to
prevent any traces of the explosive from being left on the dagger. As to
the former, I think I can give you the murderer's name; but we had
better take the evidence in order. You may remember," he continued,
"that when Dr. Jervis stood as if winding the clock, I chalked a mark on
the floor where he stood. Now, standing on that marked spot, and looking
out of the open window, I could see two of the windows of a house nearly
opposite. They were the second- and third-floor windows of No. 6,
Cotman Street. The second-floor is occupied by a firm of architects; the
third-floor by a commission agent named Thomas Barlow. I called on Mr.
Barlow, but before describing my visit, I will refer to another matter.
You haven't those threatening letters about you, I suppose?"

"Yes, I have," said the inspector; and he drew forth a wallet from his
breast-pocket.

"Lot us take the first one, then," said Thorndyke. "You see that the
paper and envelope are of the very commonest, and the writing
illiterate. But the ink does not agree with this. Illiterate people
usually buy their ink in penny bottles. Now, this envelope is addressed
with Draper's dichroic ink--a superior office ink, sold only in large
bottles--and the red ink in which the note is written is an unfixed,
scarlet ink, such as is used by draughtsmen, and has been used, as you
can see, in a stylographic pen. But the most interesting thing about
this letter is the design drawn at the top. In an artistic sense, the
man could not draw, and the anatomical details of the skull are
ridiculous. Yet the drawing is very neat. It has the clean, wiry line of
a machine drawing, and is done with a steady, practised hand. It is also
perfectly symmetrical; the skull, for instance, is exactly in the
centre, and, when we examine it through a lens, we see why it is so, for
we discover traces of a pencilled centre-line and ruled cross-lines.
Moreover, the lens reveals a tiny particle of draughtsman's soft, red,
rubber, with which the pencil lines were taken out; and all these facts,
taken together, suggest that the drawing was made by someone accustomed
to making accurate mechanical drawings. And now we will return to Mr.
Barlow. He was out when I called, but I took the liberty of glancing
round the office, and this is what I saw. On the mantelshelf was a
twelve-inch flat boxwood rule, such as engineers use, a piece of soft,
red rubber, and a stone bottle of Draper's dichroic ink. I obtained, by
a simple ruse, a specimen of the office notepaper and the ink. We will
examine it presently. I found that Mr. Barlow is a new tenant, that he
is rather short, wears a wig and spectacles, and always wears a glove on
his left hand. He left the office at 8.30 this morning, and no one saw
him arrive. He had with him a square case, and a narrow, oblong one
about five feet in length; and he took a cab to Victoria, and apparently
caught the 8.51 train to Chatham."

"Ah!" exclaimed the inspector.

"But," continued Thorndyke, "now examine those three letters, and
compare them with this note that I wrote in Mr. Barlow's office. You see
that the paper is of the same make, with the same water-mark, but that
is of no great significance. What is of crucial importance is this: You
see, in each of these letters, two tiny indentations near the bottom
corner. Somebody has used compasses or drawing-pins over the packet of
notepaper, and the points have made little indentations, which have
marked several of the sheets. Now, notepaper is cut to its size after it
is folded, and if you stick a pin into the top sheet of a section, the
indentations on all the underlying sheets will be at exactly similar
distances from the edges and corners of the sheet. But you see that
these little dents are all at the same distance from the edges and the
corner." He demonstrated the fact with a pair of compasses. "And now
look at this sheet, which I obtained at Mr. Barlow's office. There are
two little indentations--rather faint, but quite visible--near the
bottom corner, and when we measure them with the compasses, we find that
they are exactly the same distance apart as the others, and the same
distance from the edges and the bottom corner. The irresistible
conclusion is that these four sheets came from the same packet."

The inspector started up from his chair, and faced Thorndyke. "Who is
this Mr. Barlow?" he asked.

"That," replied Thorndyke, "is for you to determine; but I can give you
a useful hint. There is only one person who benefits by the death of
Alfred Hartridge, but he benefits to the extent of twenty thousand
pounds. His name is Leonard Wolfe, and I learn from Mr. Marchmont that
he is a man of indifferent character--a gambler and a spendthrift. By
profession he is an engineer, and he is a capable mechanician. In
appearance he is thin, short, fair, and clean-shaven, and he has lost
the middle finger of his left hand. Mr. Barlow is also short, thin, and
fair, but wears a wig, a beard, and spectacles, and always wears a glove
on his left hand. I have seen the handwriting of both these gentlemen,
and should say that it would be difficult to distinguish one from the
other."

"That's good enough for me," said the inspector. "Give me his address,
and I'll have Miss Curtis released at once."

       *       *       *       *       *

The same night Leonard Wolfe was arrested at Eltham, in the very act of
burying in his garden a large and powerful compressed-air rifle. He was
never brought to trial, however, for he had in his pocket a more
portable weapon--a large-bore Derringer pistol--with which he managed
to terminate an exceedingly ill-spent life.

"And, after all," was Thorndyke's comment, when he heard of the event,
"he had his uses. He has relieved society of two very bad men, and he
has given us a most instructive case. He has shown us how a clever and
ingenious criminal may take endless pains to mislead and delude the
police, and yet, by inattention to trivial details, may scatter clues
broadcast. We can only say to the criminal class generally, in both
respects, 'Go thou and do likewise.'"




VIII

A MESSAGE FROM THE DEEP SEA


The Whitechapel Road, though redeemed by scattered relics of a more
picturesque past from the utter desolation of its neighbour the
Commercial Road, is hardly a gay thoroughfare. Especially at its eastern
end, where its sordid modernity seems to reflect the colourless lives of
its inhabitants, does its grey and dreary length depress the spirits of
the wayfarer. But the longest and dullest road can be made delightful by
sprightly discourse seasoned with wit and wisdom, and so it was that, as
I walked westward by the side of my friend John Thorndyke, the long,
monotonous road seemed all too short.

We had been to the London Hospital to see a remarkable case of
acromegaly, and, as we returned, we discussed this curious affection,
and the allied condition of gigantism, in all their bearings, from the
origin of the "Gibson chin" to the physique of Og, King of Bashan.

"It would have been interesting," Thorndyke remarked as we passed up
Aldgate High Street, "to have put one's finger into His Majesty's
pituitary fossa--after his decease, of course. By the way, here is
Harrow Alley; you remember Defoe's description of the dead-cart waiting
out here, and the ghastly procession coming down the alley." He took my
arm and led me up the narrow thoroughfare as far as the sharp turn by
the "Star and Still" public-house, where we turned to look back.

"I never pass this place," he said musingly, "but I seem to hear the
clang of the bell and the dismal cry of the carter--"

He broke off abruptly. Two figures had suddenly appeared framed in the
archway, and now advanced at headlong speed. One, who led, was a stout,
middle-aged Jewess, very breathless and dishevelled; the other was a
well-dressed young man, hardly less agitated than his companion. As they
approached, the young man suddenly recognized my colleague, and accosted
him in agitated tones.

"I've just been sent for to a case of murder or suicide. Would you mind
looking at it for me, sir? It's my first case, and I feel rather
nervous."

Here the woman darted back, and plucked the young doctor by the arm.

"Hurry! hurry!" she exclaimed, "don't stop to talk." Her face was as
white as lard, and shiny with sweat; her lips twitched, her hands shook,
and she stared with the eyes of a frightened child.

"Of course I will come, Hart," said Thorndyke; and, turning back, we
followed the woman as she elbowed her way frantically among the
foot-passengers.

"Have you started in practice here?" Thorndyke asked as we hurried
along.

"No, sir," replied Dr. Hart; "I am an assistant. My principal is the
police-surgeon, but he is out just now. It's very good of you to come
with me, sir."

"Tut, tut," rejoined Thorndyke. "I am just coming to see that you do
credit to my teaching. That looks like the house."

We had followed our guide into a side street, halfway down which we
could see a knot of people clustered round a doorway. They watched us as
we approached, and drew aside to let us enter. The woman whom we were
following rushed into the passage with the same headlong haste with
which she had traversed the streets, and so up the stairs. But as she
neared the top of the flight she slowed down suddenly, and began to
creep up on tiptoe with noiseless and hesitating steps. On the landing
she turned to face us, and pointing a shaking forefinger at the door of
the back room, whispered almost inaudibly, "She's in there," and then
sank half-fainting on the bottom stair of the next flight.

I laid my hand on the knob of the door, and looked back at Thorndyke. He
was coming slowly up the stairs, closely scrutinizing floor, walls, and
handrail as he came. When he reached the landing, I turned the handle,
and we entered the room together, closing the door after us. The blind
was still down, and in the dim, uncertain light nothing out of the
common was, at first, to be seen. The shabby little room looked trim and
orderly enough, save for a heap of cast-off feminine clothing piled upon
a chair. The bed appeared undisturbed except by the half-seen shape of
its occupant, and the quiet face, dimly visible in its shadowy corner,
might have been that of a sleeper but for its utter stillness and for a
dark stain on the pillow by its side.

Dr. Hart stole on tiptoe to the bedside, while Thorndyke drew up the
blind; and as the garish daylight poured into the room, the young
surgeon fell back with a gasp of horror.

"Good God!" he exclaimed; "poor creature! But this is a frightful thing,
sir!"

The light streamed down upon the white face of a handsome girl of
twenty-five, a face peaceful, placid, and beautiful with the austere and
almost unearthly beauty of the youthful dead. The lips were slightly
parted, the eyes half closed and drowsy, shaded with sweeping lashes;
and a wealth of dark hair in massive plaits served as a foil to the
translucent skin.

Our friend had drawn back the bedclothes a few inches, and now there was
revealed, beneath the comely face, so serene and inscrutable, and yet so
dreadful in its fixity and waxen pallor, a horrible, yawning wound that
almost divided the shapely neck.

Thorndyke looked down with stern pity at the plump white face.

"It was savagely done," said he, "and yet mercifully, by reason of its
very savagery. She must have died without waking."

"The brute!" exclaimed Hart, clenching his fists and turning crimson
with wrath. "The infernal cowardly beast! He shall hang! By God, he
shall hang!" In his fury the young fellow shook his fists in the air,
even as the moisture welled up into his eyes.

Thorndyke touched him on the shoulder. "That is what we are here for,
Hart," said he. "Get out your notebook;" and with this he bent down over
the dead girl.

At the friendly reproof the young surgeon pulled himself together, and,
with open notebook, commenced his investigation, while I, at Thorndyke's
request, occupied myself in making a plan of the room, with a
description of its contents and their arrangements. But this occupation
did not prevent me from keeping an eye on Thorndyke's movements, and
presently I suspended my labours to watch him as, with his
pocket-knife, he scraped together some objects that he had found on the
pillow.

"What do you make of this?" he asked, as I stepped over to his side. He
pointed with the blade to a tiny heap of what looked like silver sand,
and, as I looked more closely, I saw that similar particles were
sprinkled on other parts of the pillow.

"Silver sand!" I exclaimed. "I don't understand at all how it can have
got there. Do you?"

Thorndyke shook his head. "We will consider the explanation later," was
his reply. He had produced from his pocket a small metal box which he
always carried, and which contained such requisites as cover-slips,
capillary tubes, moulding wax, and other "diagnostic materials." He now
took from it a seed-envelope, into which he neatly shovelled the little
pinch of sand with his knife. He had closed the envelope, and was
writing a pencilled description on the outside, when we were startled by
a cry from Hart.

"Good God, sir! Look at this! It was done by a woman!"

He had drawn back the bedclothes, and was staring aghast at the dead
girl's left hand. It held a thin tress of long, red hair.

Thorndyke hastily pocketed his specimen, and, stepping round the little
bedside table, bent over the hand with knitted brows. It was closed,
though not tightly clenched, and when an attempt was made gently to
separate the fingers, they were found to be as rigid as the fingers of a
wooden hand. Thorndyke stooped yet more closely, and, taking out his
lens, scrutinized the wisp of hair throughout its entire length.

"There is more here than meets the eye at the first glance," he
remarked. "What say you, Hart?" He held out his lens to his quondam
pupil, who was about to take it from him when the door opened, and three
men entered. One was a police-inspector, the second appeared to be a
plain-clothes officer, while the third was evidently the divisional
surgeon.

"Friends of yours, Hart?" inquired the latter, regarding us with some
disfavour.

Thorndyke gave a brief explanation of our presence to which the newcomer
rejoined:

"Well, sir, your _locus standi_ here is a matter for the inspector. My
assistant was not authorized to call in outsiders. You needn't wait,
Hart."

With this he proceeded to his inspection, while Thorndyke withdrew the
pocket-thermometer that he had slipped under the body, and took the
reading.

The inspector, however, was not disposed to exercise the prerogative at
which the surgeon had hinted; for an expert has his uses.

"How long should you say she'd been dead, sir?" he asked affably.

"About ten hours," replied Thorndyke.

The inspector and the detective simultaneously looked at their watches.
"That fixes it at two o'clock this morning," said the former. "What's
that, sir?"

The surgeon was pointing to the wisp of hair in the dead girl's hand.

"My word!" exclaimed the inspector. "A woman, eh? She must be a tough
customer. This looks like a soft job for you, sergeant."

"Yes," said the detective. "That accounts for that box with the hassock
on it at the head of the bed. She had to stand on them to reach over.
But she couldn't have been very tall."

"She must have been mighty strong, though," said the inspector; "why,
she has nearly cut the poor wench's head off." He moved round to the
head of the bed, and, stooping over, peered down at the gaping wound.
Suddenly he began to draw his hand over the pillow, and then rub his
fingers together. "Why," he exclaimed, "there's sand on the
pillow--silver sand! Now, how can that have come there?"

The surgeon and the detective both came round to verify this discovery,
and an earnest consultation took place as to its meaning.

"Did you notice it, sir?" the inspector asked Thorndyke.

"Yes," replied the latter; "it's an unaccountable thing, isn't it?"

"I don't know that it is, either," said the detective, he ran over to
the washstand, and then uttered a grunt of satisfaction. "It's quite a
simple matter, after all, you see," he said, glancing complacently at my
colleague. "There's a ball of sand-soap on the washstand, and the basin
is full of blood-stained water. You see, she must have washed the blood
off her hands, and off the knife, too--a pretty cool customer she must
be--and she used the sand-soap. Then, while she was drying her hands,
she must have stood over the head of the bed, and let the sand fall on
to the pillow. I think that's clear enough."

"Admirably clear," said Thorndyke; "and what do you suppose was the
sequence of events?"

The gratified detective glanced round the room. "I take it," said he,
"that the deceased read herself to sleep. There is a book on the table
by the bed, and a candlestick with nothing in it but a bit of burnt wick
at the bottom of the socket. I imagine that the woman came in quietly,
lit the gas, put the box and the hassock at the bedhead, stood on them,
and cut her victim's throat. Deceased must have waked up and clutched
the murderess's hair--though there doesn't seem to have been much of a
struggle; but no doubt she died almost at once. Then the murderess
washed her hands, cleaned the knife, tidied up the bed a bit, and went
away. That's about how things happened, I think, but how she got in
without anyone hearing, and how she got out, and where she went to, are
the things that we've got to find out."

"Perhaps," said the surgeon, drawing the bedclothes over the corpse, "we
had better have the landlady in and make a few inquiries." He glanced
significantly at Thorndyke, and the inspector coughed behind his hand.
My colleague, however, chose to be obtuse to these hints: opening the
door, he turned the key backwards and forwards several times, drew it
out, examined it narrowly, and replaced it.

"The landlady is outside on the landing," he remarked, holding the door
open.

Thereupon the inspector went out, and we all followed to hear the result
of his inquiries.

"Now, Mrs. Goldstein," said the officer, opening his notebook, "I want
you to tell us all that you know about this affair, and about the girl
herself. What was her name?"

The landlady, who had been joined by a white-faced, tremulous man, wiped
her eyes, and replied in a shaky voice: "Her name, poor child, was Minna
Adler. She was a German. She came from Bremen about two years ago. She
had no friends in England--no relatives, I mean. She was a waitress at a
restaurant in Fenchurch Street, and a good, quiet, hard-working girl."

"When did you discover what had happened?"

"About eleven o'clock. I thought she had gone to work as usual, but my
husband noticed from the back yard that her blind was still down. So I
went up and knocked, and when I got no answer, I opened the door and
went in, and then I saw--" Here the poor soul, overcome by the dreadful
recollection, burst into hysterical sobs.

"Her door was unlocked, then; did she usually lock it?"

"I think so," sobbed Mrs. Goldstein. "The key was always inside."

"And the street door; was that secure when you came down this morning?"

"It was shut. We don't bolt it because some of the lodgers come home
rather late."

"And now tell us, had she any enemies? Was there anyone who had a grudge
against her?"

"No, no, poor child! Why should anyone have a grudge against her? No,
she had no quarrel--no real quarrel--with anyone; not even with Miriam."

"Miriam!" inquired the inspector. "Who is she?"

"That was nothing," interposed the man hastily. "That was not a
quarrel."

"Just a little unpleasantness, I suppose, Mr. Goldstein?" suggested the
inspector.

"Just a little foolishness about a young man," said Mr. Goldstein. "That
was all. Miriam was a little jealous. But it was nothing."

"No, no. Of course. We all know that young women are apt to--"

A soft footstep had been for some time audible, slowly descending the
stair above, and at this moment a turn of the staircase brought the
newcomer into view. And at that vision the inspector stopped short as if
petrified, and a tense, startled silence fell upon us all. Down the
remaining stairs there advanced towards us a young woman, powerful
though short, wild-eyed, dishevelled, horror-stricken, and of a ghastly
pallor: and her hair was a fiery red.

Stock still and speechless we all stood as this apparition came slowly
towards us; but suddenly the detective slipped back into the room,
closing the door after him, to reappear a few moments later holding a
small paper packet, which, after a quick glance at the inspector, he
placed in his breast pocket.

"This is my daughter Miriam that we spoke about, gentlemen," said Mr.
Goldstein. "Miriam, those are the doctors and the police."

The girl looked at us from one to the other. "You have seen her, then,"
she said in a strange, muffled voice, and added: "She isn't dead, is
she? Not really dead?" The question was asked in a tone at once coaxing
and despairing, such as a distracted mother might use over the corpse of
her child. It filled me with vague discomfort, and, unconsciously, I
looked round towards Thorndyke.

To my surprise he had vanished.

Noiselessly backing towards the head of the stairs, where I could
command a view of the hall, or passage, I looked down, and saw him in
the act of reaching up to a shelf behind the street door. He caught my
eye, and beckoned, whereupon I crept away unnoticed by the party on the
landing. When I reached the hall, he was wrapping up three small
objects, each in a separate cigarette-paper; and I noticed that he
handled them with more than ordinary tenderness.

"We didn't want to see that poor devil of a girl arrested," said he, as
he deposited the three little packets gingerly in his pocket-box. "Let
us be off." He opened the door noiselessly, and stood for a moment,
turning the latch backwards and forwards, and closely examining its
bolt.

I glanced up at the shelf behind the door. On it were two flat china
candlesticks, in one of which I had happened to notice, as we came in, a
short end of candle lying in the tray, and I now looked to see if that
was what Thorndyke had annexed; but it was still there.

I followed my colleague out into the street, and for some time we walked
on without speaking. "You guessed what the sergeant had in that paper,
of course," said Thorndyke at length.

"Yes. It was the hair from the dead woman's hand; and I thought that he
had much better have left it there."

"Undoubtedly. But that is the way in which well-meaning policemen
destroy valuable evidence. Not that it matters much in this particular
instance; but it might have been a fatal mistake."

"Do you intend to take any active part in this case?" I asked.

"That depends on circumstances. I have collected some evidence, but what
it is worth I don't yet know. Neither do I know whether the police have
observed the same set of facts; but I need not say that I shall do
anything that seems necessary to assist the authorities. That is a
matter of common citizenship."

The inroads made upon our time by the morning's adventures made it
necessary that we should go each about his respective business without
delay; so, after a perfunctory lunch at a tea-shop, we separated, and I
did not see my colleague again until the day's work was finished, and I
turned into our chambers just before dinner-time.

Here I found Thorndyke seated at the table, and evidently full of
business. A microscope stood close by, with a condenser throwing a spot
of light on to a pinch of powder that had been sprinkled on to the
slide; his collecting-box lay open before him, and he was engaged,
rather mysteriously, in squeezing a thick white cement from a tube on to
three little pieces of moulding-wax.

"Useful stuff, this Fortafix," he remarked; "it makes excellent casts,
and saves the trouble and mess of mixing plaster, which is a
consideration for small work like this. By the way, if you want to know
what was on that poor girl's pillow, just take a peep through the
microscope. It is rather a pretty specimen."

I stepped across, and applied my eye to the instrument. The specimen
was, indeed, pretty in more than a technical sense. Mingled with
crystalline grains of quartz, glassy spicules, and water-worn fragments
of coral, were a number of lovely little shells, some of the texture of
fine porcelain, others like blown Venetian glass.

[Illustration: THE SAND FROM THE MURDERED WOMAN'S PILLOW, MAGNIFIED 25
DIAMETERS.]

"These are Foraminifera!" I exclaimed.

"Yes."

"Then it is not silver sand, after all?"

"Certainly not."

"But what is it, then?"

Thorndyke smiled. "It is a message to us from the deep sea, Jervis;
from the floor of the Eastern Mediterranean."

"And can you read the message?"

"I think I can," he replied, "but I shall know soon, I hope."

I looked down the microscope again, and wondered what message these tiny
shells had conveyed to my friend. Deep-sea sand on a dead woman's
pillow! What could be more incongruous? What possible connection could
there be between this sordid crime in the east of London and the deep
bed of the "tideless sea"?

Meanwhile Thorndyke squeezed out more cement on to the three little
pieces of moulding-wax (which I suspected to be the objects that I had
seen him wrapping up with such care in the hall of the Goldsteins'
house); then, laying one of them down on a glass slide, with its
cemented side uppermost, he stood the other two upright on either side
of it. Finally he squeezed out a fresh load of the thick cement,
apparently to bind the three objects together, and carried the slide
very carefully to a cupboard, where he deposited it, together with the
envelope containing the sand and the slide from the stage of the
microscope.

He was just locking the cupboard when a sharp rat-tat on our knocker
sent him hurriedly to the door. A messenger-boy, standing on the
threshold, held out a dirty envelope.

"Mr. Goldstein kept me a awful long time, sir," said he; "I haven't been
a-loitering."

Thorndyke took the envelope over to the gas-light, and, opening it, drew
forth a sheet of paper, which he scanned quickly and almost eagerly;
and, though his face remained as inscrutable as a mask of stone, I felt
a conviction that the paper had told him something that he wished to
know.

The boy having been sent on his way rejoicing, Thorndyke turned to the
bookshelves, along which he ran his eye thoughtfully until it alighted
on a shabbily-bound volume near one end. This he reached down, and as he
laid it open on the table, I glanced at it, and was surprised to observe
that it was a bi-lingual work, the opposite pages being apparently in
Russian and Hebrew.

"The Old Testament in Russian and Yiddish," he remarked, noting my
surprise. "I am going to get Polton to photograph a couple of specimen
pages--is that the postman or a visitor?"

It turned out to be the postman, and as Thorndyke extracted from the
letter-box a blue official envelope, he glanced significantly at me.

"This answers your question, I think, Jervis," said he. "Yes; coroner's
subpoena and a very civil letter: 'sorry to trouble you, but I had no
choice under the circumstances'--of course he hadn't--'Dr. Davidson has
arranged to make the autopsy to-morrow at 4 p.m., and I should be glad
if you could be present. The mortuary is in Barker Street, next to the
school.' Well, we must go, I suppose, though Davidson will probably
resent it." He took up the Testament, and went off with it to the
laboratory.

We lunched at our chambers on the following day, and, after the meal,
drew up our chairs to the fire and lit our pipes. Thorndyke was
evidently preoccupied, for he laid his open notebook on his knee, and,
gazing meditatively into the fire, made occasional entries with his
pencil as though he were arranging the points of an argument. Assuming
that the Aldgate murder was the subject of his cogitations, I ventured
to ask:

"Have you any material evidence to offer the coroner?"

He closed his notebook and put it away. "The evidence that I have," he
said, "is material and important; but it is disjointed and rather
inconclusive. If I can join it up into a coherent whole, as I hope to do
before I reach the court, it will be very important indeed--but here is
my invaluable familiar, with the instruments of research." He turned
with a smile towards Polton, who had just entered the room, and master
and man exchanged a friendly glance of mutual appreciation. The
relations of Thorndyke and his assistant were a constant delight to me:
on the one side, service, loyal and whole-hearted; on the other, frank
and full recognition.

"I should think those will do, sir," said Polton, handing his principal
a small cardboard box such as playing-cards are carried in. Thorndyke
pulled off the lid, and I then saw that the box was fitted internally
with grooves for plates, and contained two mounted photographs. The
latter were very singular productions indeed; they were copies each of a
page of the Testament, one Russian and the other Yiddish; but the
lettering appeared white on a black ground, of which it occupied only
quite a small space in the middle, leaving a broad black margin. Each
photograph was mounted on a stiff card, and each card had a duplicate
photograph pasted on the back.

Thorndyke exhibited them to me with a provoking smile, holding them
daintily by their edges, before he slid them back into the grooves of
their box.

"We are making a little digression into philology, you see," he
remarked, as he pocketed the box. "But we must be off now, or we shall
keep Davidson waiting. Thank you, Polton."

The District Railway carried us swiftly eastward, and we emerged from
Aldgate Station a full half-hour before we were due. Nevertheless,
Thorndyke stepped out briskly, but instead of making directly for the
mortuary, he strayed off unaccountably into Mansell Street, scanning the
numbers of the houses as he went. A row of old houses, picturesque but
grimy, on our right seemed specially to attract him, and he slowed down
as we approached them.

"There is a quaint survival, Jervis," he remarked, pointing to a crudely
painted, wooden effigy of an Indian standing on a bracket at the door of
a small old-fashioned tobacconist's shop. We halted to look at the
little image, and at that moment the side door opened, and a woman came
out on to the doorstop, where she stood gazing up and down the street.

Thorndyke immediately crossed the pavement, and addressed her,
apparently with some question, for I heard her answer presently: "A
quarter-past six is his time, sir, and he is generally punctual to the
minute."

"Thank you," said Thorndyke; "I'll bear that in mind;" and, lifting his
hat, he walked on briskly, turning presently up a side-street which
brought us out into Aldgate. It was now but five minutes to four, so we
strode off quickly to keep our tryst at the mortuary; but although we
arrived at the gate as the hour was striking, when we entered the
building we found Dr. Davidson hanging up his apron and preparing to
depart.

"Sorry I couldn't wait for you," he said, with no great show of
sincerity, "but a _post-mortem_ is a mere farce in a case like this; you
have seen all that there was to see. However, there is the body; Hart
hasn't closed it up yet."

With this and a curt "good-afternoon" he departed.

"I must apologize for Dr. Davidson, sir," said Hart, looking up with a
vexed face from the desk at which he was writing out his notes.

"You needn't," said Thorndyke; "you didn't supply him with manners; and
don't let me disturb you. I only want to verify one or two points."

Accepting the hint, Hart and I remained at the desk, while Thorndyke,
removing his hat, advanced to the long slate table, and bent over its
burden of pitiful tragedy. For some time he remained motionless, running
his eye gravely over the corpse, in search, no doubt, of bruises and
indications of a struggle. Then he stooped and narrowly examined the
wound, especially at its commencement and end. Suddenly he drew nearer,
peering intently as if something had attracted his attention, and having
taken out his lens, fetched a small sponge, with which he dried an
exposed process of the spine. Holding his lens before the dried spot, he
again scrutinized it closely, and then, with a scalpel and forceps,
detached some object, which he carefully washed, and then once more
examined through his lens as it lay in the palm of his hand. Finally, as
I expected, he brought forth his "collecting-box," took from it a
seed-envelope, into which he dropped the object--evidently something
quite small--closed up the envelope, wrote on the outside of it, and
replaced it in the box.

"I think I have seen all that I wanted to see," he said, as he pocketed
the box and took up his hat. "We shall meet to-morrow morning at the
inquest." He shook hands with Hart, and we went out into the relatively
pure air.

On one pretext or another, Thorndyke lingered about the neighbourhood of
Aldgate until a church bell struck six, when he bent his steps towards
Harrow Alley. Through the narrow, winding passage he walked, slowly and
with a thoughtful mien, along Little Somerset Street and out into
Mansell Street, until just on the stroke of a quarter-past we found
ourselves opposite the little tobacconist's shop.

Thorndyke glanced at his watch and halted, looking keenly up the street.
A moment later he hastily took from his pocket the cardboard box, from
which he extracted the two mounted photographs which had puzzled me so
much. They now seemed to puzzle Thorndyke equally, to judge by his
expression, for he held them close to his eyes, scrutinizing them with
an anxious frown, and backing by degrees into the doorway at the side of
the tobacconist's. At this moment I became aware of a man who, as he
approached, seemed to eye my friend with some curiosity and more
disfavour; a very short, burly young man, apparently a foreign Jew,
whose face, naturally sinister and unprepossessing, was further
disfigured by the marks of smallpox.

"Excuse me," he said brusquely, pushing past Thorndyke; "I live here."

"I am sorry," responded Thorndyke. He moved aside, and then suddenly
asked: "By the way, I suppose you do not by any chance understand
Yiddish?"

"Why do you ask?" the newcomer demanded gruffly.

"Because I have just had these two photographs of lettering given to
me. One is in Greek, I think, and one in Yiddish, but I have forgotten
which is which." He held out the two cards to the stranger, who took
them from him, and looked at them with scowling curiosity.

"This one is Yiddish," said he, raising his right hand, "and this other
is Russian, not Greek." He held out the two cards to Thorndyke, who took
them from him, holding them carefully by the edges as before.

"I am greatly obliged to you for your kind assistance," said Thorndyke;
but before he had time to finish his thanks, the man had entered, by
means of his latchkey, and slammed the door.

Thorndyke carefully slid the photographs back into their grooves,
replaced the box in his pocket, and made an entry in his notebook.

"That," said he, "finishes my labours, with the exception of a small
experiment which I can perform at home. By the way, I picked up a morsel
of evidence that Davidson had overlooked. He will be annoyed, and I am
not very fond of scoring off a colleague; but he is too uncivil for me
to communicate with."

       *       *       *       *       *

The coroner's subpoena had named ten o'clock as the hour at which
Thorndyke was to attend to give evidence, but a consultation with a
well-known solicitor so far interfered with his plans that we were a
quarter of an hour late in starting from the Temple. My friend was
evidently in excellent spirits, though silent and preoccupied, from
which I inferred that he was satisfied with the results of his labours;
but, as I sat by his side in the hansom, I forbore to question him, not
from mere unselfishness, but rather from the desire to hear his
evidence for the first time in conjunction with that of the other
witnesses.

The room in which the inquest was held formed part of a school adjoining
the mortuary. Its vacant bareness was on this occasion enlivened by a
long, baize-covered table, at the head of which sat the coroner, while
one side was occupied by the jury; and I was glad to observe that the
latter consisted, for the most part, of genuine working men, instead of
the stolid-faced, truculent "professional jurymen" who so often grace
these tribunals.

A row of chairs accommodated the witnesses, a corner of the table was
allotted to the accused woman's solicitor, a smart dapper gentleman in
gold pince-nez, a portion of one side to the reporters, and several
ranks of benches were occupied by a miscellaneous assembly representing
the public.

There were one or two persons present whom I was somewhat surprised to
see. There was, for instance, our pock-marked acquaintance of Mansell
Street, who greeted us with a stare of hostile surprise; and there was
Superintendent Miller of Scotland Yard, in whose manner I seemed to
detect some kind of private understanding with Thorndyke. But I had
little time to look about me, for when we arrived, the proceedings had
already commenced. Mrs. Goldstein, the first witness, was finishing her
recital of the circumstances under which the crime was discovered, and,
as she retired, weeping hysterically, she was followed by looks of
commiseration from the sympathetic jurymen.

The next witness was a young woman named Kate Silver. As she stepped
forward to be sworn she flung a glance of hatred and defiance at Miriam
Goldstein, who, white-faced and wild of aspect, with her red hair
streaming in dishevelled masses on to her shoulders, stood apart in
custody of two policemen, staring about her as if in a dream.

"You were intimately acquainted with the deceased, I believe?" said the
coroner.

"I was. We worked at the same place for a long time--the Empire
Restaurant in Fenchurch Street--and we lived in the same house. She was
my most intimate friend."

"Had she, as far as you know, any friends or relations in England?"

"No. She came to England from Bremen about three years ago. It was then
that I made her acquaintance. All her relations were in Germany, but she
had many friends here, because she was a very lively, amiable girl."

"Had she, as far as you know, any enemies--any persons, I mean, who bore
any grudge against her and were likely to do her an injury?"

"Yes. Miriam Goldstein was her enemy. She hated her."

"You say Miriam Goldstein hated the deceased. How do you know that?"

"She made no secret of it. They had had a violent quarrel about a young
man named Moses Cohen. He was formerly Miriam's sweetheart, and I think
they were very fond of one another until Minna Adler came to lodge at
the Goldsteins' house about three months ago. Then Moses took a fancy to
Minna, and she encouraged him, although she had a sweetheart of her own,
a young man named Paul Petrofsky, who also lodged in the Goldsteins'
house. At last Moses broke off with Miriam, and engaged himself to
Minna. Then Miriam was furious, and complained to Minna about what she
called her perfidious conduct; but Minna only laughed, and told her she
could have Petrofsky instead."

"And what did Minna say to that?" asked the coroner.

"She was still more angry, because Moses Cohen is a smart, good-looking
young man, while Petrofsky is not much to look at. Besides, Miriam did
not like Petrofsky; he had been rude to her, and she had made her father
send him away from the house. So they were not friends, and it was just
after that that the trouble came."

"The trouble?"

"I mean about Moses Cohen. Miriam is a very passionate girl, and she was
furiously jealous of Minna, so when Petrofsky annoyed her by taunting
her about Moses Cohen and Minna, she lost her temper, and said dreadful
things about both of them."

"As, for instance--?"

"She said that she would kill them both, and that she would like to cut
Minna's throat."

"When was this?"

"It was the day before the murder."

"Who heard her say these things besides you?"

"Another lodger named Edith Bryant and Petrofsky. We were all standing
in the hall at the time."

"But I thought you said Petrofsky had been turned away from the house."

"So he had, a week before; but he had left a box in his room, and on
this day he had come to fetch it. That was what started the trouble.
Miriam had taken his room for her bedroom, and turned her old one into a
workroom. She said he should not go to her room to fetch his box."

"And did he?"

"I think so. Miriam and Edith and I went out, leaving him in the hall.
When we came back the box was gone, and, as Mrs. Goldstein was in the
kitchen and there was nobody else in the house, he must have taken it."

"You spoke of Miriam's workroom. What work did she do?"

"She cut stencils for a firm of decorators."

Here the coroner took a peculiarly shaped knife from the table before
him, and handed it to the witness.

"Have you ever seen that knife before?" he asked.

"Yes. It belongs to Miriam Goldstein. It is a stencil-knife that she
used in her work."

This concluded the evidence of Kate Silver, and when the name of the
next witness, Paul Petrofsky, was called, our Mansell Street friend came
forward to be sworn. His evidence was quite brief, and merely
corroborative of that of Kate Silver, as was that of the next witness,
Edith Bryant. When these had been disposed of, the coroner announced:

"Before taking the medical evidence, gentlemen, I propose to hear that
of the police-officers, and first we will call Detective-sergeant Alfred
Bates."

The sergeant stepped forward briskly, and proceeded to give his evidence
with official readiness and precision.

"I was called by Constable Simmonds at eleven-forty-nine, and reached
the house at two minutes to twelve in company with Inspector Harris and
Divisional Surgeon Davidson. When I arrived Dr. Hart, Dr. Thorndyke, and
Dr. Jervis were already in the room. I found the deceased woman, Minna
Adler, lying in bed with her throat cut. She was dead and cold. There
were no signs of a struggle, and the bed did not appear to have been
disturbed. There was a table by the bedside on which was a book and an
empty candlestick. The candle had apparently burnt out, for there was
only a piece of charred wick at the bottom of the socket. A box had been
placed on the floor at the head of the bed and a hassock stood on it.
Apparently the murderer had stood on the hassock and leaned over the
head of the bed to commit the murder. This was rendered necessary by the
position of the table, which could not have been moved without making
some noise and perhaps disturbing the deceased. I infer from the
presence of the box and hassock that the murderer is a short person."

"Was there anything else that seemed to fix the identity of the
murderer?"

"Yes. A tress of a woman's red hair was grasped in the left hand of the
deceased."

As the detective uttered this statement, a simultaneous shriek of horror
burst from the accused woman and her mother. Mrs. Goldstein sank
half-fainting on to a bench, while Miriam, pale as death, stood as one
petrified, fixing the detective with a stare of terror, as he drew from
his pocket two small paper packets, which he opened and handed to the
coroner.

"The hair in the packet marked _A_," said he, "is that which was found
in the hand of the deceased; that in the packet marked _B_ is the hair
of Miriam Goldstein."

Here the accused woman's solicitor rose. "Where did you obtain the hair
in the packet marked _B_?" he demanded.

"I took it from a bag of combings that hung on the wall of Miriam
Goldstein's bedroom," answered the detective.

"I object to this," said the solicitor. "There is no evidence that the
hair from that bag was the hair of Miriam Goldstein at all."

Thorndyke chuckled softly. "The lawyer is as dense as the policeman," he
remarked to me in an undertone. "Neither of them seems to see the
significance of that bag in the least."

"Did you know about the bag, then?" I asked in surprise.

"No. I thought it was the hair-brush."

I gazed at my colleague in amazement, and was about to ask for some
elucidation of this cryptic reply, when he held up his finger and turned
again to listen.

"Very well, Mr. Horwitz," the coroner was saying, "I will make a note of
your objection, but I shall allow the sergeant to continue his
evidence."

The solicitor sat down, and the detective resumed his statement.

"I have examined and compared the two samples of hair, and it is my
opinion that they are from the head of the same person. The only other
observation that I made in the room was that there was a small quantity
of silver sand sprinkled on the pillow around the deceased woman's
head."

"Silver sand!" exclaimed the coroner. "Surely that is a very singular
material to find on a woman's pillow?"

"I think it is easily explained," replied the sergeant. "The wash-hand
basin was full of bloodstained water, showing that the murderer had
washed his--or her--hands, and probably the knife, too, after the crime.
On the washstand was a ball of sand-soap, and I imagine that the
murderer used this to cleanse his--or her--hands, and, while drying
them, must have stood over the head of the bed and let the sand
sprinkle down on to the pillow."

"A simple but highly ingenious explanation," commented the coroner
approvingly, and the jurymen exchanged admiring nods and nudges.

"I searched the rooms occupied by the accused woman, Miriam Goldstein,
and found there a knife of the kind used by stencil cutters, but larger
than usual. There were stains of blood on it which the accused explained
by saying that she cut her finger some days ago. She admitted that the
knife was hers."

This concluded the sergeant's evidence, and he was about to sit down
when the solicitor rose.

"I should like to ask this witness one or two questions," said he, and
the coroner having nodded assent, he proceeded: "Has the finger of the
accused been examined since her arrest?"

"I believe not," replied the sergeant. "Not to my knowledge, at any
rate."

The solicitor noted the reply, and then asked: "With reference to the
silver sand, did you find any at the bottom of the wash-hand basin?"

The sergeant's face reddened. "I did not examine the wash-hand basin,"
he answered.

"Did anybody examine it?"

"I think not."

"Thank you." Mr. Horwitz sat down, and the triumphant squeak of his
quill pen was heard above the muttered disapproval of the jury.

"We shall now take the evidence of the doctors, gentlemen," said the
coroner, "and we will begin with that of the divisional surgeon. You saw
the deceased, I believe, Doctor," he continued, when Dr. Davidson had
been sworn, "soon after the discovery of the murder, and you have since
then made an examination of the body?"

"Yes. I found the body of the deceased lying in her bed, which had
apparently not been disturbed. She had been dead about ten hours, and
rigidity was complete in the limbs but not in the trunk. The cause of
death was a deep wound extending right across the throat and dividing
all the structures down to the spine. It had been inflicted with a
single sweep of a knife while deceased was lying down, and was evidently
homicidal. It was not possible for the deceased to have inflicted the
wound herself. It was made with a single-edged knife, drawn from left to
right; the assailant stood on a hassock placed on a box at the head of
the bed and leaned over to strike the blow. The murderer is probably
quite a short person, very muscular, and right-handed. There was no sign
of a struggle, and, judging by the nature of the injuries, I should say
that death was almost instantaneous. In the left hand of the deceased
was a small tress of a woman's red hair. I have compared that hair with
that of the accused, and am of opinion that it is her hair."

"You were shown a knife belonging to the accused?"

"Yes; a stencil-knife. There were stains of dried blood on it which I
have examined and find to be mammalian blood. It is probably human
blood, but I cannot say with certainty that it is."

"Could the wound have been inflicted with this knife?"

"Yes, though it is a small knife to produce so deep a wound. Still, it
is quite possible."

The coroner glanced at Mr. Horwitz. "Do you wish to ask this witness any
questions?" he inquired.

"If you please, sir," was the reply. The solicitor rose, and, having
glanced through his notes, commenced: "You have described certain
blood-stains on this knife. But we have heard that there was
blood-stained water in the wash-hand basin, and it is suggested, most
reasonably, that the murderer washed his hands and the knife. But if the
knife was washed, how do you account for the bloodstains on it?"

"Apparently the knife was not washed, only the hands."

"But is not that highly improbable?"

"No, I think not."

"You say that there was no struggle, and that death was practically
instantaneous, but yet the deceased had torn out a lock of the
murderess's hair. Are not those two statements inconsistent with one
another?"

"No. The hair was probably grasped convulsively at the moment of death.
At any rate, the hair was undoubtedly in the dead woman's hand."

"Is it possible to identify positively the hair of any individual?"

"No. Not with certainty. But this is very peculiar hair."

The solicitor sat down, and, Dr. Hart having been called, and having
briefly confirmed the evidence of his principal, the coroner announced:
"The next witness, gentleman, is Dr. Thorndyke, who was present almost
accidentally, but was actually the first on the scene of the murder. He
has since made an examination of the body, and will, no doubt, be able
to throw some further light on this horrible crime."

Thorndyke stood up, and, having been sworn, laid on the table a small
box with a leather handle. Then, in answer to the coroner's questions,
he described himself as the lecturer on Medical Jurisprudence at St.
Margaret's Hospital, and briefly explained his connection with the
case. At this point the foreman of the jury interrupted to ask that his
opinion might be taken on the hair and the knife, as these were matters
of contention, and the objects in question were accordingly handed to
him.

"Is the hair in the packet marked _A_ in your opinion from the same
person as that in the packet marked _B_?" the coroner asked.

"I have no doubt that they are from the same person," was the reply.

"Will you examine this knife and tell us if the wound on the deceased
might have been inflicted with it?"

Thorndyke examined the blade attentively, and then handed the knife back
to the coroner.

"The wound might have been inflicted with this knife," said he, "but I
am quite sure it was not."

"Can you give us your reasons for that very definite opinion?"

"I think," said Thorndyke, "that it will save time if I give you the
facts in a connected order." The coroner bowed assent, and he proceeded:
"I will not waste your time by reiterating facts already stated.
Sergeant Bates has fully described the state of the room, and I have
nothing to add on that subject. Dr. Davidson's description of the body
covers all the facts: the woman had been dead about ten hours, the wound
was unquestionably homicidal, and was inflicted in the manner that he
has described. Death was apparently instantaneous, and I should say that
the deceased never awakened from her sleep."

"But," objected the coroner, "the deceased held a lock of hair in her
hand."

"That hair," replied Thorndyke, "was not the hair of the murderer. It
was placed in the hand of the corpse for an obvious purpose; and the
fact that the murderer had brought it with him shows that the crime was
premeditated, and that it was committed by someone who had had access to
the house and was acquainted with its inmates."

As Thorndyke made this statement, coroner, jurymen, and spectators alike
gazed at him in open-mouthed amazement. There was an interval of intense
silence, broken by a wild, hysteric laugh from Mrs. Goldstein, and then
the coroner asked:

"How did you know that the hair in the hand of the corpse was not that
of the murderer?"

"The inference was very obvious. At the first glance the peculiar and
conspicuous colour of the hair struck me as suspicious. But there were
three facts, each of which was in itself sufficient to prove that the
hair was probably not that of the murderer.

"In the first place there was the condition of the hand. When a person,
at the moment of death, grasps any object firmly, there is set up a
condition known as cadaveric spasm. The muscular contraction passes
immediately into _rigor mortis_, or death-stiffening, and the object
remains grasped by the dead hand until the rigidity passes off. In this
case the hand was perfectly rigid, but it did not grasp the hair at all.
The little tress lay in the palm quite loosely and the hand was only
partially closed. Obviously the hair had been placed in it after death.
The other two facts had reference to the condition of the hair itself.
Now, when a lock of hair is torn from the head, it is evident that all
the roots will be found at the same end of the lock. But in the present
instance this was not the case; the lock of hair which lay in the dead
woman's hand had roots at both ends, and so could not have been torn
from the head of the murderer. But the third fact that I observed was
still more conclusive. The hairs of which that little tress was composed
had not been pulled out at all. They had fallen out spontaneously. They
were, in fact, shed hairs--probably combings. Let me explain the
difference. When a hair is shed naturally, it drops out of the little
tube in the skin called the root sheath, having been pushed out by the
young hair growing up underneath; the root end of such a shed hair shows
nothing but a small bulbous enlargement--the root bulb. But when a hair
is forcibly pulled out, its root drags out the root sheath with it, and
this can be plainly seen as a glistening mass on the end of the hair. If
Miriam Goldstein will pull out a hair and pass it to me, I will show you
the great difference between hair which is pulled out and hair which is
shed."

[Illustration: _A_, SHED HAIRS SHOWING THE NAKED BULB, MAGNIFIED 32
DIAMETERS.

_B_, HAIRS PLUCKED FROM SCALP, SHOWING THE ADHERENT ROOT-SHEATHS,
MAGNIFIED 20 DIAMETERS.]

The unfortunate Miriam needed no pressing. In a twinkling she had
tweaked out a dozen hairs, which a constable handed across to Thorndyke,
by whom they were at once fixed in a paper-clip. A second clip being
produced from the box, half a dozen hairs taken from the tress which had
been found in the dead woman's hand were fixed in it. Then Thorndyke
handed the two clips, together with a lens, to the coroner.

"Remarkable!" exclaimed the latter, "and most conclusive." He passed the
objects on to the foreman, and there was an interval of silence while
the jury examined them with breathless interest and much facial
contortion.

"The next question," resumed Thorndyke, "was, Whence did the murderer
obtain these hairs? I assumed that they had been taken from Miriam
Goldstein's hair-brush; but the sergeant's evidence makes it pretty
clear that they were obtained from the very bag of combings from which
he took a sample for comparison."

"I think, Doctor," remarked the coroner, "you have disposed of the hair
clue pretty completely. May I ask if you found anything that might throw
any light on the identity of the murderer?"

"Yes," replied Thorndyke, "I observed certain things which determine the
identity of the murderer quite conclusively." He turned a significant
glance on Superintendent Miller, who immediately rose, stepped quietly
to the door, and then returned, putting something into his pocket. "When
I entered the hall," Thorndyke continued, "I noted the following facts:
Behind the door was a shelf on which were two china candlesticks. Each
was fitted with a candle, and in one was a short candle-end, about an
inch long, lying in the tray. On the floor, close to the mat, was a spot
of candle-wax and some faint marks of muddy feet. The oil-cloth on the
stairs also bore faint footmarks, made by wet goloshes. They were
ascending the stairs, and grew fainter towards the top. There were two
more spots of candle-wax on the stairs, and one on the handrail; a burnt
end of a wax match halfway up the stairs, and another on the landing.
There were no descending footmarks, but one of the spots of wax close to
the balusters had been trodden on while warm and soft, and bore the mark
of the front of the heel of a golosh descending the stairs. The lock of
the street door had been recently oiled, as had also that of the bedroom
door, and the latter had been unlocked from outside with a bent wire,
which had made a mark on the key. Inside the room I made two further
observations. One was that the dead woman's pillow was lightly sprinkled
with sand, somewhat like silver sand, but greyer and less gritty. I
shall return to this presently.

"The other was that the candlestick on the bedside table was empty. It
was a peculiar candlestick, having a skeleton socket formed of eight
flat strips of metal. The charred wick of a burnt-out candle was at the
bottom of the socket, but a little fragment of wax on the top edge
showed that another candle had been stuck in it and had been taken out,
for otherwise that fragment would have been melted. I at once thought of
the candle-end in the hall, and when I went down again I took that end
from the tray and examined it. On it I found eight distinct marks
corresponding to the eight bars of the candlestick in the bedroom. It
had been carried in the right hand of some person, for the warm, soft
wax had taken beautifully clear impressions of a right thumb and
forefinger. I took three moulds of the candle-end in moulding wax, and
from these moulds have made this cement cast, which shows both the
fingerprints and the marks of the candlestick." He took from his box a
small white object, which he handed to the coroner.

"And what do you gather from these facts?" asked the coroner.

"I gather that at about a quarter to two on the morning of the crime, a
man (who had, on the previous day visited the house to obtain the tress
of hair and oil the locks) entered the house by means of a latchkey. We
can fix the time by the fact that it rained on that morning from
half-past one to a quarter to two, this being the only rain that has
fallen for a fortnight, and the murder was committed at about two
o'clock. The man lit a wax match in the hall and another halfway up the
stairs. He found the bedroom door locked, and turned the key from
outside with a bent wire. He entered, lit the candle, placed the box and
hassock, murdered his victim, washed his hands and knife, took the
candle-end from the socket and went downstairs, where he blew out the
candle and dropped it into the tray.

"The next clue is furnished by the sand on the pillow. I took a little
of it, and examined it under the microscope, when it turned out to be
deep-sea sand from the Eastern Mediterranean. It was full of the minute
shells called 'Foraminifera,' and as one of these happened to belong to
a species which is found only in the Levant, I was able to fix the
locality."

"But this is very remarkable," said the coroner. "How on earth could
deep-sea sand have got on to this woman's pillow?"

"The explanation," replied Thorndyke, "is really quite simple. Sand of
this kind is contained in considerable quantities in Turkey sponges. The
warehouses in which the sponges are unpacked are often strewn with it
ankle deep; the men who unpack the cases become dusted over with it,
their clothes saturated and their pockets filled with it. If such a
person, with his clothes and pockets full of sand, had committed this
murder, it is pretty certain that in leaning over the head of the bed in
a partly inverted position he would have let fall a certain quantity of
the sand from his pockets and the interstices of his clothing. Now, as
soon as I had examined this sand and ascertained its nature, I sent a
message to Mr. Goldstein asking him for a list of the persons who were
acquainted with the deceased, with their addresses and occupations. He
sent me the list by return, and among the persons mentioned was a man
who was engaged as a packer in a wholesale sponge warehouse in the
Minories. I further ascertained that the new season's crop of Turkey
sponges had arrived a few days before the murder.

"The question that now arose was, whether this sponge-packer was the
person whose fingerprints I had found on the candle-end. To settle this
point, I prepared two mounted photographs, and having contrived to meet
the man at his door on his return from work, I induced him to look at
them and compare them. He took them from me, holding each one between a
forefinger and thumb. When he returned them to me, I took them home and
carefully dusted each on both sides with a certain surgical
dusting-powder. The powder adhered to the places where his fingers and
thumbs had pressed against the photographs, showing the fingerprints
very distinctly. Those of the right hand were identical with the prints
on the candle, as you will see if you compare them with the cast." He
produced from the box the photograph of the Yiddish lettering, on the
black margin of which there now stood out with startling distinctness a
yellowish-white print of a thumb.

Thorndyke had just handed the card to the coroner when a very singular
disturbance arose. While my friend had been giving the latter part of
his evidence, I had observed the man Petrofsky rise from his seat and
walk stealthily across to the door. He turned the handle softly and
pulled, at first gently, and then with more force. But the door was
locked. As he realized this, Petrofsky seized the handle with both
hands and tore at it furiously, shaking it to and fro with the violence
of a madman, and his shaking limbs, his starting eyes, glaring insanely
at the astonished spectators, his ugly face, dead white, running with
sweat and hideous with terror, made a picture that was truly shocking.

Suddenly he let go the handle, and with a horrible cry thrust his hand
under the skirt of his coat and rushed at Thorndyke. But the
superintendent was ready for this. There was a shout and a scuffle, and
then Petrofsky was born down, kicking and biting like a maniac, while
Miller hung on to his right hand and the formidable knife that it
grasped.

[Illustration: SUPERINTENDENT MILLER RISES TO THE OCCASION.]

"I will ask you to hand that knife to the coroner," said Thorndyke, when
Petrofsky had been secured and handcuffed, and the superintendent had
readjusted his collar. "Will you kindly examine it, sir," he continued,
"and tell me if there is a notch in the edge, near to the point--a
triangular notch about an eighth of an inch long?"

The coroner looked at the knife, and then said in a tone of surprise:
"Yes, there is. You have seen this knife before, then?"

"No, I have not," replied Thorndyke. "But perhaps I had better continue
my statement. There is no need for me to tell you that the fingerprints
on the card and on the candle are those of Paul Petrofsky; I will
proceed to the evidence furnished by the body.

"In accordance with your order, I went to the mortuary and examined the
corpse of the deceased. The wound has been fully and accurately
described by Dr. Davidson, but I observed one fact which I presume he
had overlooked. Embedded in the bone of the spine--in the left
transverse process of the fourth vertebra--I discovered a small particle
of steel, which I carefully extracted."

He drew his collecting-box from his pocket, and taking from it a
seed-envelope, handed the latter to the coroner. "That fragment of steel
is in this envelope," he said, "and it is possible that it may
correspond to the notch in the knife-blade."

Amidst an intense silence the coroner opened the little envelope, and
let the fragment of steel drop on to a sheet of paper. Laying the knife
on the paper, he gently pushed the fragment towards the notch. Then he
looked up at Thorndyke.

"It fits exactly," said he.

There was a heavy thud at the other end of the room and we all looked
round.

Petrofsky had fallen on to the floor insensible.

       *       *       *       *       *

"An instructive case, Jervis," remarked Thorndyke, as we walked
homewards--"a case that reiterates the lesson that the authorities still
refuse to learn."

"What is that?" I asked.

"It is this. When it is discovered that a murder has been committed, the
scene of that murder should instantly become as the Palace of the
Sleeping Beauty. Not a grain of dust should be moved, not a soul should
be allowed to approach it, until the scientific observer has seen
everything _in situ_ and absolutely undisturbed. No tramplings of
excited constables, no rummaging by detectives, no scrambling to and fro
of bloodhounds. Consider what would have happened in this case if we had
arrived a few hours later. The corpse would have been in the mortuary,
the hair in the sergeant's pocket, the bed rummaged and the sand
scattered abroad, the candle probably removed, and the stairs covered
with fresh tracks.

"There would not have been the vestige of a clue."

"And," I added, "the deep sea would have uttered its message in vain."


THE END.


PREFACE

By one of those coincidences which are quite inadmissible in fiction, but
of frequent occurrence in real life, an incident in the story of The
Cat's Eye has found an almost exact duplicate in an actual case which has
been reported in the Press.

The real case was concerned with a most alarming misadventure which
befell a distinguished police official of high rank. The fictitious
incident occurs in Chapter Ten of this book; and the reading of that
chapter will inevitably convey the impression that I have appropriated
the real case and incorporated it in my story; a proceeding that the
reader might properly consider to be in questionable taste.

It seems, therefore, desirable to explain that Chapter Ten was written
some months before the real tragedy occurred. Indeed, by that time, the
book was so nearly completed that it was impracticable to eliminate the
incident, which was an integral part of the plot.

The coincidence is to be regretted; but worse things might easily have
happened. But for the circumstance that I had to lay this book aside to
complete some other work, The Cat's Eye would have been in print when the
crime was committed; and it might then have been difficult for any
one--even for the author--to believe that the fictitious crime had not
furnished the suggestion for the real one.

RAF

Gravesend,

19th June 1923.



CONTENTS

1 In the Midst of Life
2 Sir Lawrence declares a Vendetta
3 Thorndyke takes up the Inquiry
4 The Lady of Shalott
5 Mr Halliburton's Mascot
6 Introduces an Ant-eater and a Detective
7 The Vanished Heirloom
8 A Jacobite Romance
9 Exit Moakey
10 A Timely Warning
11 The Blue Hair
12 From the Jaws of Death
13 Thorndyke states his Position
14 Beauchamp Blake
15 The Squire and the Sleuth-hound
16 Mr Brodribb's Embassy
17 The Secret Chamber
18 The Cat's Eye
19 A Relic of the '45
20 QED



CHAPTER ONE IN THE MIDST OF LIFE

I am not a superstitious man. Indeed superstition, which is inseparably
bound up with ignorance or disregard of evidence, would ill accord with
the silken gown of a King's Counsel. And still less am I tainted with
that particular form of superstition in which the fetishism of barbarous
and primitive man is incongruously revived in a population of, at least
nominally, educated persons, by the use of charms, amulets, mascots and
the like.

Had it been otherwise; had I been the subject of this curious atavistic
tendency, I should surely have been led to believe that from the simple
gem whose name I have used to give a title to this chronicle, some subtle
influence exhaled whereby the whole course of my life was directed into
new channels. But I do not believe anything of the kind; and therefore,
though it did actually happen that the appearance of the Cat's Eye was
coincident with a radical change in the course and manner of my life, and
even, as it seemed, with my very personality; and though with the Cat's
Eye the unfolding of the new life seemed constantly associated; still I
would have it understood that I use the name merely as a label to docket
together a succession of events that form a consistent and natural group.

The particular train of events with which this history deals began on a
certain evening near the end of the long vacation. It was a cloudy
evening, I remember, and very dark, for it was past eight o'clock and the
days were drawing in rapidly. I was returning across Hampstead Heath
towards my lodgings in the village, and was crossing the broken,
gorse-covered and wooded hollow to the west of the Spaniards Road, when I
heard the footsteps of someone running, and running swiftly, as I could
judge by the rapid rhythm of the footfalls and the sound of scattering
gravel. I halted to listen, noting that the rhythm of the footsteps was
slightly irregular, like the ticking of an ill-adjusted clock; and even
as I halted, I saw the runner. But only for a moment, and then but dimly.
The vague shape of a man came out of the gloom, passed swiftly across my
field of vision, and was gone. I could not see what he was like. The dim
shape appeared and vanished into the darkness, leaving me standing
motionless, listening with vague suspicion to the now faint footfalls and
wondering what I ought to do.

Suddenly the silence was rent by a piercing cry, the cry of a woman
calling for help. And, strangely enough, it came from the opposite
direction to that towards which the fugitive was running. In an instant I
turned and raced across the rugged hollow towards the spot from whence
the sound seemed to come, and as I scrambled up a gravelly hillock I saw,
faintly silhouetted on the murky skyline of some rising ground ahead, the
figures of a man and a woman struggling together; and I had just noted
that the man seemed to be trying to escape when I saw him deal the woman
a blow, on which she uttered a shriek and fell, while the man, having
wrenched himself free, darted down the farther slope and vanished into
the encompassing darkness.

When I reached the woman she was sitting up with her right hand pressed
to her side, and as I approached she called out sharply:

'Follow him! Follow that man! Never mind me!'

I stood for a moment irresolute, for on the hand that was pressed to her
side I had noticed a smear of blood. But as I hesitated, she repeated:
'Follow him! Don't let him escape! He has just committed a dreadful
murder!'

On this I ran down the slope in the direction that the man had taken and
stumbled on over the rugged, gravelly hillocks and hollows, among the
furze bushes and the birches and other small trees. But it was a hopeless
pursuit. The man had vanished utterly, and from the dark heath not a
sound came to give a hint as to the direction in which he had gone. There
was no definite path, nor was it likely that he would have followed one;
and as I ran forward, tripping over roots and sandy hummocks, the
futility of the pursuit became every moment more obvious, while I felt a
growing uneasiness as to the condition of the woman I had left sitting on
the ground and apparently bleeding from a wound. At length I gave up the
chase and began to retrace my steps, now full of anxiety lest I should be
unable to find the spot where I had left her, and speculating on the
possibility that the victim of the murder of which she had spoken might
yet be alive and in urgent need of help.

I returned as quickly as I could, watching the direction anxiously and
trying vainly to pick up landmarks. But the uneven, gorse-covered ground
was a mere formless expanse intersected in all directions by indistinct
tracks, confused by the numbers of birch-trees and stunted oaks, and shut
in on all sides by a wall of darkness. Presently I halted with a
despairing conviction that I had lost my way hopelessly, and at that
moment I discerned dimly through the gloom the shape of a piece of rising
ground lying away to the right. Instantly I hurried towards it, and as I
climbed the slope, I thought I recognised it as the place from which I
had started. A moment later, the identity of the place was confirmed
beyond all doubt, for I perceived lying on the ground a shawl or scarf
which I now remembered to have seen lying near the woman as she sat with
her hand pressed to her side, urging me to follow her assailant.

But the woman herself had disappeared. I picked up the shawl, and
throwing it over my arm, stood for a few moments, peering about me and
listening intently. Not a sound could I distinguish, however, nor could I
perceive any trace of the vanished woman. Then I noticed, a few yards
away, a defined path leading towards a patch of deeper darkness that
looked like a copse or plantation, and following this, I presently came
upon her, standing by a fence and clinging to it for support.

'The man has got away,' said I. 'There is no sign of him. But what about
you? Are you hurt much?'

'I don't think so,' she answered faintly. 'The wretch tried to stab me,
but I don't think--' Here her voice faded away, as she fell forward
against the fence and seemed about to collapse. I caught her, and lifting
her bodily, carried her along the path, which appeared to lead to a
house. Presently I came to an open gate, and entering the enclosed
grounds, saw before me an old-fashioned house, the door of which stood
ajar, showing a faint light from within. As I approached the door, a
telephone bell rang and a woman's voice, harsh and terrified, smote my
ear:

'Are you there? This is Rowan Lodge. Send to the police immediately! Mr
Drayton has been robbed and murdered! Yes, Mr Drayton. He is lying dead
in his room. I am his housekeeper. Send the police and a doctor!'

At this moment I pushed open the door and entered; and at my appearance,
with the insensible woman in my arms, the housekeeper shrieked aloud, and
dropping the receiver, started back with a gesture of wild terror.

'My God!' she exclaimed, 'What is this? Not another!'

'I hope not,' I replied, not, however, without misgivings. 'This lady
tried to hold the man as he was escaping and the villain stabbed her.
Where can I lay her down?'

The whimpering housekeeper flung open a door, and snatching a match-box
from the hall table, struck a match and preceded me into a room where, by
the light of the match that flickered in her shaking hand, I made out a
sofa and laid my burden on it, rolling up the shawl and placing it under
her head. Then the housekeeper lit the gas and came and stood by the
sofa, wringing her hands and gazing down with horrified pity at the
corpse-like figure.

'Poor dear!' she sobbed. 'Such a pretty creature, too, and quite a lady!
God help us! What can we do for her? She may be bleeding to death!'

The same thought was in my mind, and the same question, but as I answered
that we could do nothing until the doctor arrived, the woman--or rather
girl, for she was not more than twenty-six--opened her eyes and asked in
a faint voice: 'Is Mr Drayton dead?'

The housekeeper sobbed an indistinct affirmative and then added:

'But try not to think about it, my dear. Just keep yourself quite quiet
until the doctor comes.'

'Are you sure he is dead?' I asked in a low voice.

'I wish I were not,' she sobbed. Then, with an earnest look at the young
lady--who seemed now to be reviving somewhat--she added:

'Come with me and see; and do you lie quite still until I come back, my
dear.'

With this she led me out of the room, and turning from the hall into a
short corridor, passed quickly along it and stopped at a door. 'He is in
there,' she said in a shaky voice that was half a sob. She opened the
door softly, peered in, and then, with a shuddering cry, turned and ran
back to the room that we had just left.

When she had gone I entered the room half-reluctantly, for the atmosphere
of tragedy and horror was affecting me most profoundly. It was a smallish
room, almost unfurnished save for a range of cabinets such as insect
collectors use; and opposite one of these a man lay motionless on the
floor, looking, with his set, marble-white face and fixed, staring eyes,
like some horrible waxwork figure. I stooped over him to see if there
were any sign of life. But even to a layman's eye the fixity, the utter
immobility was unmistakable. The man was dead beyond all doubt. I
listened with my ear at his mouth and laid my finger on the chilly wrist.
But the first glance had told me all. The man was dead.

As I stood up, still with my eyes riveted on the face, set in that
ghastly stare, I became conscious of a certain dim sense of recognition.
It was a strong, resolute face, and even in death, the fixed expression
spoke rather of anger than of fear. Where had I seen that face? And then
in a flash I recalled the name that the housekeeper had called through
the telephone--Mr Drayton. Of course. This was the brother of my neighbour
in the Temple, Sir Lawrence Drayton, the famous Chancery lawyer. He had
spoken to me of a brother who lived at Hampstead, and there could be no
doubt that this was he. The likeness was unmistakable.

But, as I realised this, I realised also the certainty that this crime
would become my professional concern. Sir Lawrence would undoubtedly put
the case in the hands of my friend John Thorndyke--the highest
medico-legal authority and the greatest criminal lawyer of our time--and
my association with Thorndyke would make me a party to the investigation.
And that being so, it behoved me to gather what data I could before the
police arrived and took possession.

The mechanism of the crime was obvious enough, though there were one or
two mysterious features. Of the cabinet opposite which the body lay, one
drawer was pulled out, and its loose glass cover had been removed and lay
shattered on the floor beside the corpse. The contents of this drawer
explained the motive of the crime, for they consisted of specimens of
jewellery, all more or less antique, and many of them quite simple and
rustic in character, but still jewels. A number had evidently been taken,
to judge by the empty trays, but the greater part of the contents of the
drawer remained intact.

The rifled drawer was the second from the top. Having turned up the gas
and lit a second burner, I drew out the top drawer. The contents of this
were untouched, though the drawer appeared to have been opened, for the
cover-glass was marked by a number of rather conspicuous fingerprints. Of
course these were not necessarily the prints of the robber's fingers, but
they probably were, for their extreme distinctness suggested a dirty and
sweaty hand such as would naturally appertain to a professional thief in
a state of some bodily fear. Moreover the reason why this drawer should
have been passed over was quite obvious. Its contents were of no
intrinsic value, consisting chiefly of Buckinghamshire lace bobbins with
carved inscriptions and similar simple objects.

I next drew out the third drawer, which I found quite untouched, and the
absence of any fingerprints on the cover-glass confirmed the probable
identity of those on the glass of the top drawer. By way of further
settling this question, I picked up the fragments of the broken glass and
looked them over carefully; and when I found several of them marked with
similar distinct fingerprints, the probability that they were those of
the murderer became so great as nearly to amount to certainty.

I did not suppose that these fingerprints would be of much interest to
Thorndyke. They were rather the concern of the police and the Habitual
Criminals Registry. But still I knew that if he had been in my place he
would have secured specimens, on the chance of their being of use
hereafter, and I could do no less than take the opportunity that offered.
Looking over the broken fragments again, I selected two pieces, each
about four inches square, both of which bore several fingerprints. I
placed them carefully face to face in a large envelope from my pocket,
having first wrapped their corners in paper to prevent the surfaces from
touching.

I had just bestowed the envelope in my letter-case and slipped the latter
into my pocket when I heard a man's voice in the hall. I opened the door,
and walking along the corridor, found a police inspector and a sergeant
in earnest conversation with the housekeeper, while an elderly man, whom
I judged to be the doctor, stood behind, listening attentively.

'Well,' said the inspector 'we'd better see to the lady. Will you have a
look at her, doctor, and when you've attended to her, perhaps you will
let us know whether she is in a fit state to answer questions. But you
might just take a look at the body first.' Here he observed me and
inquired: 'Let me see, who is this gentleman?'

I explained briefly my connection with the case as we walked down the
corridor, and the inspector made no comment at the moment. We all entered
the room, and the doctor stooped over the body and made a rapid
inspection.

'Yes,' he said, rising and shaking his head, 'there's no doubt that he is
dead, poor fellow. A shocking affair. But I had better go and see to this
poor lady before I make any detailed examination.'

With this he bustled away, and the inspector and the sergeant knelt down
beside the corpse but refrained from touching it.

'Knife wound, apparently,' said the inspector, nodding gloomily at a
small pool of blood that appeared between the outstretched right arm and
the side. 'Seems to have been a left-handed man, too, unless he struck
from behind, which he pretty evidently did not.' He stood up, and once
more looking at me, somewhat inquisitively, said: 'I had better have your
name and address, sir.'

'My name is Anstey--Robert Anstey, KC, and my address is 8A Kings Bench
Walk, Inner Temple.'

'Oh, I know you, sir,' said the inspector with a sudden change of manner.
'You are Dr. Thorndyke's leading counsel. Well, well. What an odd thing
that you should happen to come upon this affair by mere chance. It's
quite in your own line.'

'I don't know about that,' said I. 'It looks to me rather more in yours.
If they have got these fingerprints in the files at Scotland Yard you
won't have much trouble in finding your man or getting a conviction.'

As I spoke, I drew his attention to the fingerprints on the broken glass,
saying nothing, however, about those on the upper drawer.

The two officers examined the incriminating marks with deep interest, and
the inspector proceeded carefully and skilfully to pack several of the
fragments for subsequent examination, remarking, as he laid them tenderly
on the top of a cabinet: 'This looks like a regular windfall, but it's
almost too good to be true. The professional crook, nowadays, knows too
much to go dabbing his trade-marks about in this fashion. These prints
and the knife rather suggest a casual or amateur of some kind. The fellow
not only didn't wear gloves, he didn't even trouble to wipe his hands.
And they wanted wiping pretty badly. Are all these cabinets full of
jewellery?'

'I really don't know what they contain, but they are pretty insecure if
their contents are valuable.'

'Yes,' he agreed. 'A single locked batten to each cabinet. One wrench of
a jemmy and the whole cabinet is open. Well, we'd better have a few words
with the housekeeper before we go over the room in detail. And she won't
want to talk to us in here.'

With this he led the way back to the hall, and I could not but admire the
diplomatic way in which he managed to get me away from the scene of his
intended investigation.

As we entered the hall, we met the doctor, who was repacking his
emergency bag at the door of the room.

'I think,' said he, 'my patient is well enough to give you a few
necessary particulars. But don't tire her with needless questions.'

'She is not seriously hurt, then?' said I, with considerable relief.

'No. But she has had a mighty narrow escape. The brute must have aimed
badly, for he struck viciously enough, but the point of the knife glanced
off a rib and came out farther back, just transfixing a fold of skin and
muscle. It is a nasty wound, but quite superficial and not at all
dangerous.'

'Well, I'm glad it's no worse than that,' said the inspector, and with
this he pushed open the door of the room and we all entered, though I
noticed that the sergeant regarded me with a somewhat dubious eye. And
now, for the first time, I observed the injured lady with some attention,
which I was able to do at my leisure while the examination was
proceeding. And a very remarkable-looking girl she was. Whether she would
have been considered beautiful by the majority of persons I cannot say;
she certainly appeared so to me. But I have always felt a great
admiration of the pictures of Burne-Jones and of the peculiar type of
womanhood that he loved to paint; and this girl, with her soft aureole of
reddish-gold hair, her earnest grey eyes, her clear, blonde skin--now
pale as marble--the characteristic mouth and cast of features, might have
been the model whose presentment gave those pictures, to me, their
peculiar charm. She seemed not of the common, everyday world, but like
some visitor from the regions of legend and romance. And the distinction
of her appearance was supported by her speech--by a singularly sweet
voice, an accent of notable refinement, and a manner at once gentle,
grave, and dignified.

'Do you feel able to tell us what you know of this terrible affair,
Madam?' the inspector asked.

'Oh yes,' she replied. 'I am quite recovered now.'

'Was Mr Drayton a friend of yours?'

'No. I never met him until this evening. But perhaps I had better tell
you how I came to be here and exactly what happened.'

'Yes,' the inspector agreed, 'that will be the shortest way.'

'Mr Drayton,' she began, 'was, as you probably know, the owner of a
collection of what he called "inscribed objects"--jewels, ornaments, and
small personal effects bearing inscriptions connecting them with some
person or event or period. I saw a description of the collection in the
Connoisseur a short time ago, and as I am greatly interested in inscribed
jewels, I wrote to Mr Drayton asking if I could be allowed to see the
collection; and I asked, since I am occupied all day, if he could make it
convenient to show me the collection one evening. I also asked him some
questions about the specimens of jewellery. In reply he wrote me a most
kind letter--I have it in my pocket if you would like to see
it--answering my questions and not only inviting me most cordially to
come and look at his treasures, but offering to meet me at the station
and show me the way to the house. Of course I accepted his very kind
offer and gave him a few particulars of my appearance so that he should
be able to identify me, and this evening he met me at the station and we
walked up here together. There was no one in the house when we
arrived--at least he thought there was not, for he mentioned to me that
his housekeeper had gone out for an hour or so. He let himself in with a
key and showed me into this room. Then he went away, leaving the door
ajar. I heard him walk down the corridor and I heard a door open. Almost
at the same moment, he called out loudly and angrily. Then I heard the
report of a pistol, followed immediately by a heavy fall.'

'A pistol!' exclaimed the inspector 'I thought it was a knife wound. But
I mustn't interrupt you.'

'When I heard the report I ran out into the hall and down the corridor.
As I went, I heard a sound as of a scuffle, and when I reached the door
of the museum, which was wide open, I saw Mr Drayton lying on the floor,
quite still, and a man climbing out of the window. I ran to the window to
try to stop him, but before I could get there he was gone. I waited an
instant to look at Mr Drayton, and noticed that he seemed to be already
dead and that the room was full of the reek from the pistol, then I ran
back to the hall and out through the garden and along the fence to where
I supposed the window to be. But for a few moments I could not see any
one. Then, suddenly, a man sprang over the fence and dropped quite near
me, and before he could recover his balance, I had run to him and seized
him by both wrists. He struggled violently, though he did not seem very
strong, but he dragged me quite a long way before he got free.'

'Did he say anything to you?' the inspector asked.

'Yes. He used most horrible language, and more than once he said:

"Let go, you fool. The man who did it has got away."

'That might possibly be true,' I interposed, 'for, just before I heard
this lady call for help, a man passed me at a little distance, running so
hard that I was half inclined to follow him.'

'Did you see what he was like?' the inspector demanded eagerly.

'No. I hardly saw him at all. He passed me at a distance of about thirty
yards and was gone in an instant. Then I heard this lady call out and, of
course, ran towards her.'

'Yes,' said the inspector,' naturally. But it's a pity you didn't see
what the man was like. 'Then, once more addressing the lady, he asked:

'Did this man stab you without warning, Miss--'

'Blake is my name,' she replied. 'No. He threatened several times to
"knife" me if I didn't let go. At last he managed to get his left hand
free. I think he was holding something in it, but he must have dropped
it, whatever it was, for the next moment I saw him draw a knife from
under his coat. Then I got hold of his arm again, and that is probably
the reason that he wounded me so slightly. But when he stabbed me I
suddenly went quite faint and fell down, and then he escaped.'

'He held the knife in his left hand, then?' the inspector asked. 'You are
sure of that?'

'Quite sure. Of course it happened to be the free hand, but-'

'But if he had been a right-handed man he would probably have got his
right hand free. Did you see which side he carried his knife?'

'Yes. He drew it from under his coat on the left side.'

'Can you give us any description of the man?'

'I am afraid I can't. I am sure I should recognise him if I were to see
him again, but I can't describe him. It was all very confused, and, of
course, it was very dark. I should say that he was a smallish man, rather
slightly built. He wore a cloth cap and his hair seemed rather short but
bushy. He had a thin face, with a very peculiar expression--but, of
course, he was extremely excited and furious--and large, staring eyes,
and a rather pronounced, curved nose.'

'Oh, come,' said the inspector approvingly, 'that isn't such a bad
description. Can you say whether he was dark or fair, clean shaved or
bearded?'

'He was clean shaved, and I should say decidedly dark.'

'And how was he dressed?'

'He wore a cloth cap, and, I think, a tweed suit. Oh, and he wore
gloves-thin, smooth gloves--very thin kid, I should say--'

'Gloves!' exclaimed the inspector. 'Then the fingerprints must be the
other man's. Are you sure he had gloves on both hands?'

'Yes, perfectly sure. I saw them and felt them.'

'Well,' said the inspector,' this is a facer. It looks as if the other
man had really done the job while this fellow kept watch outside. It's a
mysterious affair altogether. There's the extraordinary time they chose
to break into the house. Eight o'clock in the evening. It would almost
seem as if they had known about Mr Drayton's movements.'

'They must have done,' said the housekeeper. 'Mr Drayton went out
regularly every evening a little after seven. He went down to the village
to play chess at the club, and he usually came back between half-past
nine and ten. And I generally sat and worked in the kitchen on the other
side of the house from the museum.'

'And did he take no sort of precautions against robbery?'

'He used to lock the museum when he went out. That was all. He was not at
all a nervous man, and he used to say that there was no danger of robbery
because the things in the museum were not the kind of things that
burglars go for. They wouldn't be of any value to melt or sell.'

'We must just look over the museum presently and see what the collection
consists of,' said the inspector. 'And we must see how they got in and
what they have taken. I suppose there is a catalogue?'

'No, there isn't,' replied the housekeeper. 'I did suggest to Mr Drayton
that he ought to draw up a list of the things, but he said it was not a
public collection, and as he knew all the specimens himself, there was no
need to number them or keep a catalogue.'

That is unfortunate,' said the inspector. 'We shan't be able to find out
what is missing or circulate any descriptions unless you can remember
what was in the cabinets. By the way, did Mr Drayton ever show his
collection to visitors other than his personal friends?'

'Occasionally. After the Connoisseur article that Miss Blake was speaking
of, two or three strangers wrote to Mr Drayton asking to be allowed to
see the jewellery, and he invited them to come and showed them
everything.'

'Did Mr Drayton keep a visitors' book, or record of any kind?'

'No. I don't remember any of the visitors, excepting a Mr Halliburton,
who wrote from the Baltic Hotel in the Marylebone Road. I remember him
because Mr Drayton was so annoyed about him. He put himself to great
inconvenience to meet Mr Halliburton and show him the jewellery that he
had asked to see, and then, he told me, when he came, it was quite
obvious that he didn't know anything at all about jewellery, either
ancient or modern. He must have come just from idle curiosity.'

'I'm not so sure of that,' said the inspector. 'Looks a bit suspicious.
We shall have to make some inquiries at the Baltic. And now we had better
go and have a look at the museum, and perhaps, doctor, you would like to
make a preliminary examination of the body before it is moved.'

On this we all rose, and the inspector was just moving towards the hall
when there came a sharp sound of knocking at the outer door, followed by
a loud peal of the bell.



CHAPTER TWO - SIR LAWRENCE DECLARES A VENDETTA


At the first stroke of the knocker we all stood stock still, and so
remained until the harsh jangling of the bell gradually died away. There
was nothing abnormal in either sound, but I suppose we were all somewhat
overstrung, for there seemed in the clamorous summons, which shattered
the silence so abruptly, something ominous and threatening. Especially
did this appear in the case of the housekeeper, who threw up her hands
and whimpered audibly.

'Dear Lord!' she ejaculated. 'It is Sir Lawrence--his brother! I know his
knock. Who is to tell him?'

As no one answered, she crept reluctantly across the room, murmuring and
shaking her head, and went out into the hall. I heard the door open and
caught the sound of voices, though not very distinctly. Then the
housekeeper re-entered the room quickly, and a man who was following her
said in a brisk, somewhat bantering tone:

'You are very mysterious, Mrs Benham.' The next moment the speaker came
into view; and instantly he stopped dead and stood staring into the room
with a frown of stern surprise.

'What the devil is this?' he demanded, glaring first at the two officers
and then at me. 'What is going on, Anstey?'

For a few moments I was tongue-tied. But an appealing glance from the
housekeeper seemed to put the duty on me.

'A dreadful thing has happened, Drayton,' I replied. 'The house has been
broken into and your brother has been killed.'

Sir Lawrence turned deathly pale and his face set hard and rigid, until
it seemed the very counterpart of that white, set face that I had looked
on but a few minutes age. For a while he stared at me frowningly, neither
moving nor uttering a word. Then he asked gruffly: 'Where is he?'

'He is lying where he fell, in the museum,' I replied.

On this he turned abruptly and walked out of the room. I heard him pass
quickly down the corridor and then I heard the museum door shut. We all
looked at one another uncomfortably, but no one spoke. The housekeeper
sobbed almost inaudibly and now and again uttered a low moan. Miss Blake
wept silently, and the two officers and the doctor stood looking gloomily
at the floor.

Presently Sir Lawrence came back. He was still very pale. But though his
eyes were red, and indeed were still humid, there was no softness of
grief in his face. With its clenched jaw and frowning brows, it was grim
and stern and inexorable as Fate.

'Tell me,' he said, in a quiet voice, looking from me to the inspector,
'exactly how this happened.'

'I don't think any one knows yet,' I replied. 'This lady, Miss Blake, is
the only person who saw the murderer. She tried to detain him and held on
to him until he stabbed her.'

'Stabbed her!' he exclaimed, casting a glance of intense apprehension at
the recumbent figure on the sofa and stepping softly across the room.

'I am not really hurt,' Miss Blake hastened to assure him. 'It is only
quite a trifling wound.'

He bent over her with a strange softening of the grim face, touching her
hand with his and tenderly adjusting the rug that the housekeeper had
spread over her.

'I pray to God that it is as you say,' he replied. Then, turning to me,
he asked: 'Has this brave young lady been properly attended to?'

'Yes,' I answered. 'The doctor here--Dr--'

'Nichols,' said the medicus. 'I have examined the wound thoroughly and
dressed it, and I think I can assure you that no danger is to be
apprehended from it. But, having regard to the shock she has sustained, I
think she ought to be got home as soon as possible.'

'Yes,' Sir Lawrence agreed, 'and if she is fit to be moved, I will convey
her to her home. My car is waiting in the road. And I will ask you.
Anstey, to come with me, if you can.'

Of course I assented, and he continued, addressing the inspector:

'When I have taken this lady home I shall go straight to Dr Thorndyke and
ask him to assist the police in investigating this crime. Probably he
will return here with me at once, and I will ask you to see that
nothing--not even the body--is disturbed until he has made his
inspection.'

At this the officer looked a little dubious, but he answered courteously
enough: 'So far as I am concerned. Sir Lawrence, your wishes shall
certainly be attended to. But I notified Scotland Yard before I came on
here, and this case will probably be dealt with by the Criminal
Investigation Department, and, of course, I can enter into no
undertakings on their behalf.'

'No,' Sir Lawrence rejoined, 'of course you can't. I will deal with the
Scotland Yard people myself. And now we had better start. Is Miss Blake
able to walk to the car, Doctor? It is only a few yards to the road.'

'I am quite able to walk,' said Miss Blake; and as Dr Nichols assented,
we assisted her to rise, and Sir Lawrence carefully wrapped her in the
rug that Mrs Benham had thrown over her. Then I picked up the shawl, and
tucking it under my arm, followed her as she walked slowly out supported
by Sir Lawrence.

At the garden gate we turned to the left, and passing along the path,
came very shortly to a road on which two cars were standing, a large
closed car, which I recognised as Sir Lawrence's, and a smaller one,
presumably Dr Nichols'. Into the former Miss Blake was assisted, and when
the carriage rug had been wrapped around her, I entered and took the
opposite seat.

'What address shall I tell the driver, Miss Blake?' Sir Lawrence asked.

'Sixty-three Jacob Street, Hampstead Road,' she replied; and then, as
neither the driver nor either of us could locate the street, she added:

'It is two or three turnings past Mornington Crescent on the same side of
the road.'

Having given this direction to the driver, Sir Lawrence entered and took
the vacant seat and the car moved off smoothly, silently, and with
unperceived swiftness.

During the journey hardly a word was spoken. The darkness of the heath
gave place to the passing lights of the streets, the rural quiet to the
clamour of traffic. In a few minutes, as it seemed, we were at the wide
crossing by the Mother Red-Cap, and in a few more were turning into a
narrow, dingy, and rather sordid by-street. Up this the car travelled
slowly as the driver threw the light of a powerful lamp on the shabby
doors, and at length drew up opposite a wide, wooden gate on which the
number sixty-three was exhibited in large brass figures. I got out of the
car and approached the gate in no little surprise, for its appearance and
the paved truckway that led through it suggested the entrance to a
factory or builders yard. However, there was no doubt that it was the
right house, for the evidence of the number was confirmed by a small
brass plate at the side, legibly inscribed 'Miss Blake' and surmounted by
a bell-pull. At the latter I gave a vigorous tug and was immediately
aware of the far-away jangling of a large bell, which sounded as if it
were ringing in an open yard.

In a few moments I detected quick footsteps which seemed to be
approaching along a paved passage; then a wicket in the gate opened and a
boy of about twelve looked out.

'Whom did you want, please?' he asked in a pleasant, refined voice and
with a courteous, self-possessed manner which 'placed' him instantly in a
social sense. Before I had time to reply, he had looked past me and
observed Miss Blake, who, having been helped out of the car, was now
approaching the gate; on which he sprang through the wicket and ran to
meet her.

'You needn't be alarmed, Percy,' she said in a cheerful voice. 'I have
had a little accident and these gentlemen have very kindly brought me
home. But it is nothing to worry about.'

'You look awfully white and tired, Winnie,' he replied; and then,
addressing me, he asked: 'Is my sister hurt much, sir?'

'No,' I answered. 'The doctor who attended to her thought that she would
soon be quite well again, and I hope she will. Is there anything that we
can do for you, Miss Blake?'

'Thank you, no,' she replied. 'My brother and a friend will look after me
now, but I can't thank you enough for all your kindness.'

'It is I,' said Sir Lawrence, 'who am in your debt--deeply in your debt.
And I do pray that you may suffer no ill consequences from your heroism.
But we mustn't keep you standing here. Goodbye, dear Miss Blake, and God
bless you.'

He shook her hand warmly and her brother's with old-fashioned courtesy. I
handed the boy the folded shawl, and having shaken hands with both,
followed my friend to the car.

'Do you think Thorndyke will be at home?' he asked as the car turned
round and returned to the Hampstead Road.

'I expect so,' I replied. 'But I don't suppose there will be very much
for him to do. There were plenty of fingerprints in evidence. I should
think the police will be able to trace the man without difficulty.'

'Police be damned!' he retorted gruffly. 'I want Thorndyke. And as to
fingerprints, weren't you the leading counsel in that Hornby case?'

'Yes, but that was exceptional. You can't assume--'

'That case,' he interrupted, 'knocked the bottom out of fingerprint
evidence. And these fingerprints may not be on the files at the registry,
and if they are not, the police have no clue to this man's identity, and
are not likely to get any.'

It seemed to me that he was hardly doing the police justice, but there
was no use in discussing the matter, as we were, in fact, going to put
the case in Thorndyke's hands. I accordingly gave a colourless assent,
and for the rest of the short journey we sat in silence, each busy with
his own reflections.

At length the car drew up at the Inner Temple gate. Drayton sprang out,
and signing to the driver to wait, passed through the wicket and strode
swiftly down the narrow lane. As we came out at the end of Crown Office
Row, he looked eagerly across at King's Bench Walk.

'There's a light in Thorndyke's chambers,' he said, and quickening his
pace almost to a run, he crossed the wide space, and plunging into the
entry of number 5A, ascended the stairs two at a time. I followed, not
without effort, and as I reached the landing the door opened in response
to his peremptory knock and Thorndyke appeared in the opening.

'My dear Drayton!' he exclaimed, 'you really ought not, at your age--' he
stopped short, and looking anxiously at our friend, asked: 'Is anything
amiss?'

'Yes,' Drayton replied quietly, though breathlessly. 'My brother
Andrew--you remember him, I expect--has been murdered by some accursed
housebreaker. He is lying on the floor of his room now. I told them to
leave him there until you had seen him. Can you come?'

'I will come with you immediately,' was the reply; and as with grave face
and quick but unhurried movements, he made the necessary preparations, I
noticed that--characteristically--he asked no questions, but concentrated
his attention on providing for all contingencies. He had laid a small,
green, canvas-covered case upon the table, and opening it, was making a
rapid inspection of the apparatus that it contained, when suddenly I
bethought me of the pieces of glass in my pocket.

'Before we start,' said I, 'I had better give you these. The fingerprints
on them are almost certainly those of the murderer. 'As I spoke, I
carefully unwrapped the two pieces of glass and handed them to Thorndyke,
who took them from me, holding them daintily by their edges, and
scrutinising them closely.

'I am glad you brought these, Anstey,' he said. 'They make us to some
extent independent of the police. Do they know you have them?'

'No,' I replied. 'I took possession of them before the police arrived.'

'Then, in that case,' said he 'it will be as well to say nothing about
them.' He held the pieces of glass up against the light, examining them
closely and comparing them, first with the naked eye and then with the
aid of a lens. Finally he lifted the microscope from its shelf, and
placing it on the table, laid one of the pieces of glass on the stage and
examined it through the instrument. His inspection occupied only a few
seconds, then he rose, and turning to Drayton, who had been watching him
eagerly, said: 'It may be highly important for us to have these
fingerprints with us. But we can't produce the originals before the
police, and besides, they are too valuable to carry about at the risk of
spoiling them. But I could make rough, temporary photographs of them in
five minutes if you will consent to the delay.'

'I am in your hands, Thorndyke,' replied Drayton. 'Do whatever you think
is necessary.'

'Then let us go to the laboratory at once,' said Thorndyke; and taking
the two pieces of glass, he led the way across the landing and up the
stairs to the upper floor on which the laboratory and workshop were
situated. And as we went, I could not but appreciate Thorndyke's tact and
sympathy in taking Drayton up with him, so that the tedium of delay might
be relieved by the sense of purposeful action.

The laboratory and its methods were characteristic of Thorndyke.
Everything was ready and all procedure was prearranged. As we entered,
the assistant, Polton, put down the work on which he was engaged, and at
a word, took up the present task without either hesitation or hurry.
While Thorndyke fixed the pieces of glass in the copying frame of the
great standing camera, Polton arranged the light and the condensers and
produced a dark-slide loaded with bromide paper. In less than a minute
the exposure was made; in another three minutes the print had been
developed, roughly fixed, rinsed, squeegeed, soaked in spirit, cut in
two, and trimmed with scissors, and the damp but rapidly drying halves
attached with drawing pins to a small hinged board specially designed for
carrying wet prints in the pocket.

'Now,' said Thorndyke, slipping the folded board into his pocket and
taking from a shelf a powerful electric inspection lamp, 'I think we are
ready to start. These few minutes have not been wasted.'

We returned to the lower room, where Thorndyke, having bestowed the lamp
in the canvas-covered 'research-case,' put on his hat and overcoat and
took up the case, and we all set forth, walking quickly and in silence up
Inner Temple Lane to the gate, and taking our seats in the waiting car
when Drayton had given a few laconic instructions to the driver.

Up to this point Thorndyke had asked not a single question about the
crime. Now, as the car started, he said to Drayton: 'We had better be
ready to begin the investigation as soon as we arrive. Could you give me
a short account of what has happened?'

'Anstey knows more about it than I do,' was the reply. 'He was there
within a few minutes of the murder.'

The question being thus referred to me, I gave an account of all that I
had seen and heard, to which Thorndyke listened with deep attention,
interrupting me only once or twice to elucidate some point that was not
quite clear.

'I understand,' said he when I had finished, 'that there is no catalogue
or record of the collection and no written description of the specimens?'

'No,' replied Drayton. 'But I have looked over the cabinets a good many
times, and taken the pieces out to examine them, so I think I shall be
able to tell roughly what is missing, and give a working description of
the pieces. And I could certainly identify most of them if they should be
produced.'

'They are not very likely to be traced,' said Thorndyke. 'It is highly
improbable that the murderer will attempt to dispose of things stolen in
such circumstances. Still, the possibility of identifying them may be of
the greatest importance, for the folly of criminals is often beyond
belief.'



CHAPTER THREE - THORNDYKE TAKES UP THE INQUIRY


The outer door of the house was shut, although the lower rooms were all
lighted up, but at the first sound of the bell it was opened by a
uniformed constable who regarded us stolidly and inquired as to our
business. Before there was time to answer, however, a man whom I at once
recognised as Inspector Badger of the Criminal Investigation Department
came out into the hall and asked sharply: 'Who is that, Martin?'

'It is Sir Lawrence Drayton, Dr Thorndyke, and Mr Anstey,' I replied; and
as the constable backed out of the way we all entered.

'This is a terrible catastrophe, Sir Lawrence,' said Badger 'Dreadful,
dreadful. If sincere sympathy would be any consolation--'

'It wouldn't,' interrupted Drayton, 'though I thank you all the same. The
only thing that would console me--and that little enough--would be the
sight of the ruffian who did it dangling at the end of a rope. The local
officer told you, I suppose, that I was asking Dr Thorndyke to lend his
valuable aid in investigating the crime?'

'Yes, Sir Lawrence,' replied Badger, 'but I don't know that I am in a
position to authorise any unofficial--'

'Tut, tut, man!' Drayton broke in impatiently, 'I am not asking you to
authorise anything. I am the murdered man's sole executor and his only
brother. In the one capacity his entire estate is vested in me until it
has been disposed of in accordance with the will; in the other capacity,
the duty devolves on me of seeing that his murderer is brought to
account. I give you every liberty and facility to examine these premises,
but I am not going to surrender possession of them. Has any discovery
been made?'

'No, sir.' Badger replied a little sulkily. 'We have only been here a
few minutes. I was taking some particulars from the housekeeper.'

'Possibly I can give you some information while Dr Thorndyke is making
his inspection of my poor brother's body,' said Drayton. 'When he has
finished and the body has been laid decently in his bedroom, I will come
with you to the museum and we will see if anything is missing.'

Badger assented, with evident unwillingness, to this arrangement. He and
Drayton entered the drawing-room, from which the inspector had just come,
while I conducted Thorndyke to the museum.

The room was just as I had seen it last, excepting that the open drawer
had been closed. The stark, rigid figure still lay on the floor, the set,
white face still stared with stern fixity at the ceiling. As I looked,
the events of the interval faded from my mind and all the horror of the
sudden tragedy came back.

Just inside the door Thorndyke halted and slowly ran his eye round the
room, taking in its arrangement, and no doubt fixing it in his memory.
Presently he stepped over to where the body lay, and stood a while
looking down on the dead man. Then he stopped and closely examined a spot
on the right breast.

'Isn't there more bleeding than is usual in the case of a bullet-wound?'
I asked.

'Yes,' he replied, 'but that blood hasn't come from the wound in front.
There must be another at the back, possibly a wound of exit. 'As he
spoke, he stood up and again looked searchingly round the room, more
especially at the side in which the door opened. Suddenly his glance
became fixed and he strode quickly across to a cabinet that stood beside
the door; and as I followed him, I perceived a ragged hole in the front
of one of the drawers.

'Do you mean, Thorndyke,' I exclaimed, 'that the bullet passed right
through him?'

'That is what it looks like,' he replied. 'But we shall be able to judge
better when we get the drawer open--which we can't do until Badger comes.
But there is one thing that we had better do at once.' Stepping over to
the table on which he had placed the research-case, he opened the latter,
and taking from it a stick of blackboard chalk, went back to the body.
'We must assume,' said he, 'that he fell where he was standing when he
was struck, and if that is so he would have been standing here.' He
marked on the carpet two-rough outlines to indicate the position of the
feet when the murdered man fell, and having put the chalk back in the
case, continued: 'The next thing is to verify the existence of the wound
at the back. Will you help me to turn him over?'

We turned the body gently on to its right side, and immediately there
came into view a large, blood-stained patch under the left shoulder, and
at the centre of it a ragged burst in the fabric of the coat.

'That will do,' said Thorndyke. 'It is an unmistakable exit wound. The
bullet probably missed the ribs both in entering and emerging, and passed
through the heart or the great vessels. The appearances suggest almost
instantaneous death. The face is set, the eyes wide open, and both the
hands tightly clenched in a cadaveric spasm. And the right hand seems to
be grasping something, but we had better leave that until Badger has seen
it.'

At this moment footsteps became audible coming along the corridor, and
Badger entered the room accompanied by the local inspector. The two
officers looked inquiringly at Thorndyke, who proceeded at once to give
them a brief statement of the facts that he had observed.

'There can't be much doubt,' said Badger when he had examined the hole in
the drawer front, 'that this was made by a spent bullet. But we may as
well settle the question now. We shall want the keys in any case.'

He passed his hand over the dead man's clothes, and having located the
pocket which contained the keys, drew out a good-sized bunch, with which
he went over to the cabinet. A few trials with likely-looking keys
resulted in the discovery of the right one, and when this had been turned
and the hinged batten swung back, all the drawers of the cabinet were
released. The inspector pulled out the one with the damaged front and
looked in inquisitively. Its contents consisted principally of latten and
pewter spoons, now evidently disarranged and mingled with a litter of
splinters of wood; and in the bowl of a spoon near the back of the drawer
lay a distorted bullet, which Badger picked up and examined critically.

'Browning automatic, I should say,' was his comment, 'and if so we ought
to find the cartridge case somewhere on the floor. We must look for it
presently, but we'd better get the body moved first, if you have finished
your inspection, Doctor.'

'There is something grasped in the right hand,' said Thorndyke. 'It looks
like a wisp of hair. Perhaps we had better look at that before the body
is moved, in case it should fall out.'

We returned to the body, and the two officers stooped and watched eagerly
as Thorndyke, with some difficulty, opened the rigid hand sufficiently to
draw from it a small tuft of hair.

'The spasm is very marked,' he observed as he scrutinised the hair and
felt in his pocket for a lens; and when, with the aid of the latter, he
had made a further examination, he continued: 'The state of the
root-bulbs shows that the hair was actually plucked out--which, of course,
is what we should expect.'

'Can you form any opinion as to what sort of man he was?' Badger asked.

'No,' replied Thorndyke, 'excepting that he was not a recently released
convict. But the appearance of the hair agrees with Miss Blake's
description of the man who stabbed her. I understand that she described
him as a having rather short but bushy hair. This hair is rather short,
though we can't say whether it was bushy or not. Perhaps more complete
examination of it may tell us something further.'

'Possibly,' Badger agreed. 'I will have it thoroughly examined, and get a
report on it. Shall I take charge of it?' he added, holding out his hand.

'Yes, you had better,' replied Thorndyke, 'but I will take a small sample
for further examination, if you don't mind.'

'There is no need for that,' protested Badger. 'You can always have
access to what we've got if you want to refer to it.'

'I know,' said Thorndyke, 'and it is very good of you to offer. Still
this will save time and trouble.' And without more ado he separated a
third of the tuft and handed the remainder to the inspector, who wrapped
it in a sheet of note-paper that he had taken from his pocket and sourly
watched Thorndyke bestow his portion in a seed-envelope from his
pocket-book, and after writing on it a brief description, return it to
the latter receptacle.

'You were saying,' said Badger, 'that this hair agrees with Miss Blake's
description. But it was suggested that it was the other man who really
committed the murder. Isn't that rather a contradiction?'

'I don't think so,' replied Thorndyke. 'The probabilities seem to me to
point to the other man as the murderer.'

'But how can that be?' objected Badger. 'You say that this hair agrees
with Miss Blake's description of the man. But this hair is obviously the
hair of the murderer. And that man was left-handed and the wound is on
the right breast, suggesting that the murderer held his pistol in his
left hand.'

'Not at all,' said Thorndyke. 'I submit that this hair is obviously not
the hair of the murderer. Look at those chalk marks that I have made on
the floor. They mark the spot on which the deceased was standing when the
bullet struck him. Now go back to the cabinet and look at the chalk marks
and see what is in a direct line with them.'

The inspector did so. 'I see,' said he. 'You mean the window.'

'Yes, it was open, since the robber evidently came in by it, and the sill
is barely five feet from the ground. I suggest--but merely as a
probability, since the bullet may have been deflected--that the other man
was keeping guard outside, and that when he heard a noise from this room
he looked in through the window and saw his confederate on the point of
being captured by the deceased, that he then fired, and when he saw
deceased fall, he made his escape. That would account for the man who was
seen by Miss Blake making his appearance after the other man had gone. He
may have had to extricate himself from the dead man's grasp, and then he
had to climb out of the window. But the position of the empty
cartridge-case--if we find it--will settle the question. If the pistol was
fired into the room through the window, the cartridge-case will be on the
ground outside.'

He opened his research-case, and taking from it the electric lamp, walked
slowly to the window, throwing the bright light on the floor as he went.
The two officers followed, and all scrutinised the floor closely, but in
vain. Then Thorndyke leaned out of the window and threw the light of his
lamp on the ground outside, moving the bright beam slowly to and fro
while the inspector craned forward eagerly. Suddenly Badger uttered an
exclamation.

'There it is, Doctor! Don't move the light. Keep it there while I go out
and pick the case up.'

'One moment, Badger,' said Thorndyke. 'We mustn't be impetuous. There are
some other things out there more important than the cartridge-case. I can
see two distinct sets of footprints, and it is above all things necessary
that they should not be confused by being trodden into. Let us get the
body moved first. Then we can take some mats out and examine the
footprints systematically and recover the cartridge-case at the same
time. If we are careful we can leave the ground in such a condition that
it will be possible to go over it again by daylight.'

The wisdom of this suggestion was obvious, and the inspector proceeded at
once to act on it. The sergeant and the constable were sent for, and by
them the body of the murdered man was carried, under the inspector's
supervision, to the bedroom above. Then a couple of large mats were
procured from Mrs Benham and we all issued from the front door into the
garden. Here, however, a halt was called, and at Thorndyke's suggestion,
the party was separated into two, he and Badger to explore the grounds
inside the fence, while the local inspector and the others endeavoured to
follow the tracks outside.

I did not join either party, nor did Sir Lawrence. We both realised the
futility of any attempt to trace the fugitives, and recognised that the
suggestion was made by Thorndyke merely to get rid of the unwanted
supernumeraries. Accordingly we took up a position outside the fence,
which we could just look over, and watched the proceedings of Thorndyke
and Inspector Badger, as they passed slowly along the side of the house,
each with the light of his lantern thrown full on the ground.

They had gone but a few paces when they picked up on the soft, loamy path
the fairly clear impressions of two pairs of feet going towards the back
of the house. Both the investigators paused and stooped to examine them,
and Badger remarked: 'So they came in at the front gate-naturally, as it
was the easiest way. But they must have been pretty sure that there was
no one in the house to see them. And that suggests that they knew the
ways of the household and that they had lurked about to watch Mr Drayton
and Mrs Benham off the premises.'

'Is it possible to distinguish one man from the other?' Drayton asked.

'Yes, quite easily,' Badger replied. 'One of them is a biggish man--close
on six feet, I should say--while the other is quite a small man. That
will be the one that Miss Blake saw.'

They followed the tracks to the back of the house, and as we followed on
our side of the fence Thorndyke called out: 'Be careful, Anstey, not to
tread in the tracks where they came over the fence. We ought to get
specially clear prints of their feet where they jumped down. Could you
get a light?'

'I'll go and get one of the acetylene lamps from the car,' said Drayton.
'You stay where you are until I come back.'

He was but a short time absent, and when he returned he was provided with
a powerful lamp and a couple of small mats. 'I have brought these,' he
explained 'to lay on any particularly clear footprints to protect them
from chance injury. We mustn't lose the faintest shadow of a clue.'

With the aid of the brilliant light Drayton and I explored the ground at
the foot of the fence. Suddenly Sir Lawrence exclaimed:

'Why, these look like a woman's footprints!' and he pointed to a set of
rather indistinct impressions running parallel to the fence.

They will be Miss Blake's,' said I. 'She ran round this way. Yes, here is
the place where the man came over. What extraordinarily clear impressions
this ground takes. It shows the very brads in the heels.'

'Yes,' he agreed; 'this is the Hampstead sand, you know; one of the
finest foundry-sands in the country.'

He laid one of the mats carefully on the pair of footprints, and we
continued our explorations towards the back of the house. Here we saw
Thorndyke and the inspector, each kneeling on a mat, examining a confused
mass of footprints on the ground between the museum window and the fence.

'Have you found the cartridge-case?' I asked.

'Yes,' replied Thorndyke. 'Badger has it. It is a "Baby Browning." And I
think we have seen all there is to see here by this light. Can you see
where the big man came down from the fence? He went over where I am
throwing the light.'

We approached the spot cautiously, and at the place indicated perceived
the very clear and deep impression of a large right foot with a much less
distinct print of a left foot, both having the heels towards the fence;
and a short distance in front of them the soft, loamy earth bore a clear
impression of a left hand with the fingers spread out, and a fainter
print of a right hand.

I reported these facts to Thorndyke, who at once decided to come over and
examine the prints. Handing his lamp over a few paces farther along the
fence, he climbed up and dropped lightly by my side, followed almost
immediately by Inspector Badger.

'This,' said the inspector, gazing down at the foot and hand-prints,
'bears out what we saw from the inside. He wasn't any too active, this
chappie. Probably fat--a big, heavy, awkward man. Had to pull the garden
seat up to the fence to enable him to get over, though it was an easy
fence to climb with those big cross-rails; and here, you see, he comes
down all of a heap on his hands and knees. However, that doesn't help us
a great deal. He isn't the only fat man in the world. We had better go
indoors now and have a look at the room and see if we can find out what
has been taken.'

We turned to retrace our steps towards the gate, pausing on our way to
lift the mats and inspect the footprints of the smaller man; and as we
went Drayton asked if anything of interest had been discovered.

'No,' replied Badger. 'They got in without any difficulty by forcing back
the catch of the window--unless the window was open already. It isn't
quite clear whether they both got in. The big man walked part of the way
round the house and along the fence in both directions, and he pulled a
garden seat up to the fence to help himself up. The small man came out of
the window last, if they were both inside, and I expect it was he who
dropped this--must have had it in his hand when he climbed out'--and here
the inspector produced from his pocket a ring, set with a single round
stone, which he handed to Sir Lawrence.

'Ah,' said the latter, 'a posy-ring, one of the cat's eye series. There
were several of these and a set of moonstone rings in the same drawer.'

'You know the collection pretty well, then. Sir Lawrence?'

'Fairly well. I often used to look over the things with my poor brother.
But, of course, I can't remember all the specimens, though I think I can
show you the drawer that this came from.'

By this time we had entered the house and were making our way to the
museum. On entering the room, Drayton walked straight to the cabinet
which I remembered to have seen open, and pulled out the second drawer
from the top.

'This is the one,' said he. 'They have taken out the glass top--I suppose
those are the pieces of it on the floor.'

'Yes,' said Badger. 'We found it open, and it seems to be the only drawer
that has been tampered with.'

Drayton pulled out the top drawer, and having looked closely at the glass
cover, remarked: 'They have had this one open, too. There are distinct
fingerprints on the glass; and they have had the cover off for there are
finger-marks on the inside of the glass. I wonder why they did that.'

'I can't imagine.' said Badger. 'They don't seem to have taken
anything--there wasn't anything worth taking, for that matter. But they
could see that without lifting off the glass. However, it is all for the
best. We'll hand this glass cover to the Fingerprint Department and hope
they will be able to spot the man that the fingers belong to.'

As he spoke, he made as if he would lift off the cover, but he was
anticipated by Thorndyke, who carefully raised the glass by its leather
tab, and taking it up by the edges, held it against the light and
examined the fingerprints minutely both on the upper and under surfaces.

'The thumbs are on the upper surface,' he remarked, 'and the fingers
underneath; so the glass was lifted right out and held with both hands.'

He handed the glass to the inspector, who had been watching him uneasily,
and now took the cover from him with evident relief; and as Badger
proceeded to deposit it in a safe place, he pushed in the top drawer and
returned to the consideration of the second.

'There are evidently several pieces missing from this drawer,' said he,
'and it may be important to know what they are, though it is rather
unlikely that the thieves will try to dispose of them. Can you tell us
what they are, Drayton?'

'I can tell you roughly,' was the reply. 'This drawer contained the
collection of posy-rings, and most of them are there still, as you can
see. The front row were rings set with moonstone and cat's eye, and most
of those are gone. Then there was a group of moonstone and cat's eye
ornaments, mostly brooches and earrings, and one pendant. Those have all
disappeared. And there is another thing that was in this drawer that has
apparently been taken; a locket. It was shaped like a book and had a
Greek inscription on the front.'

'So far as you can see, Sir Lawrence,' said Badger, 'has anything of
value been taken--of real value, I mean?'

'Of negotiable value, you mean,' Drayton corrected. 'No. Most of the
things were of gold, though not all, but the stones were probably worth
no more than a few shillings each. The value was principally in the
associations and individual character of the pieces. All of them had
inscriptions, and several of them had recorded histories. But that would
be of no use to a thief.'

'Exactly,' said Badger. 'That was what was in my mind. There is something
rather amateurish about this robbery. It isn't quite like the work of a
regular hand. The time was foolish, and then all this shooting and
stabbing is more like the work of some stray foreign crooks than of a
regular tradesman; and as you say, the stuff wasn't worth the
risk--unless there's something else of more value. Perhaps we had better
go through the other cabinets.'

He produced the bunch of keys from his pocket and had just inserted one
into the lock of the next cabinet when Drayton interposed.

'There is no need for that, Inspector. If the cabinets are locked and
have not been broken open, their contents are intact; and I can tell you
that those contents are of no considerable intrinsic value.'

With this he drew the key from the lock and dropped the bunch in his
pocket, a proceeding whereat the inspector smiled sourly and remarked:
'Then in that case, I think I have finished for the present. I'll just
pack up this glass cover and see if those others were able to follow the
tracks of either of these men. And I'll wish you gentlemen goodnight.'

Sir Lawrence accompanied him to the drawing-room, and as I learned later,
provided the official party with refreshment, and when we were alone I
turned to Thorndyke.

'I suppose we have finished, too?'

'Not quite,' he replied. 'There are one or two little matters to be
attended to, but we will wait until the police are clear of the premises.
They will keep their own counsel and I propose to keep mine, unless I can
give them a straight lead.' He opened his research-case and was
thoughtfully looking over its contents when Drayton returned and
announced that the police had departed.

'Is there anything more that you want to do, Thorndyke?' he asked.

'Yes,' was the reply. 'For one thing, I should like to see if there are
any more fingerprints.' As he spoke, he pulled out the drawers of the
cabinet one after the other, and examined the glass covers. But
apparently they had not been touched. At any rate, there were no marks on
any of the glasses.

'They must have been disturbed soon after they got to work,' said Drayton
'as they opened only two drawers.'

'Probably,' Thorndyke agreed, taking from his case a little glass-jar
filled with a yellowish powder and fitted with two glass tubes and a
rubber bulb. With this apparatus he blew a cloud of the fine powder over
the woodwork of the rifled cabinet, and when a thin coating had settled
on the polished surface, he tapped the wood gently with the handle of his
pocket-knife. At each tap a portion of the coating of powder was jarred
on the surface, and then there appeared several oval spots to which it
still adhered. Then he gently blew away the rest of the powder, when the
oval spots were revealed as fingerprints, standing out white and distinct
against the dark wood. Thorndyke now produced from his pocket the hinged
board, and opening it, compared the photographs with these new
fingerprints, while Drayton and I looked over his shoulder.

'They are undoubtedly the same,' said I, a little surprised at the ease
with which I identified these curious markings. 'Absolutely the
same--which is rather odd, seeing that there are the marks of only two
digits of the left hand and four of the right. It almost looks as if
those particular fingers had got soiled with some greasy material and
that the other fingers were clean and had left no mark.'

'An admirable suggestion, Anstey,' said Thorndyke. 'The same idea had
occurred to me, for the prints of these particular fingers are certainly
abnormally distinct. Let us see if we can get any confirmation.' He blew
upon each of the fingerprints in turn until most of the powder was
dislodged and the markings had become almost invisible. Then, taking my
handkerchief, which was of soft silk, and rolling it into a ball, he
began to wipe the woodwork with a circular motion, at first very lightly
but gradually increasing the pressure until he was rubbing quite
vigorously. The result seemed to justify my suggestion, for as the
rubbing proceeded, I could see, by the light of Drayton's lamp, thrown on
at various angles, that the fingerprints seemed to have spread out into
oval, glistening patches, having a lustre somewhat different from that of
the polished wood.

Sir Lawrence looked on with keen interest, and as Thorndyke paused to
examine the woodwork, he asked: 'What is the exact purpose of this
experiment?'

'The point is,' replied Thorndyke, 'that whereas the fingerprint of the
mathematical theorists is a mere abstraction of form devoid of any other
properties, the actual or real fingerprint is a material thing which has
physical and chemical properties, and these properties may have
considerable evidential significance. These fingerprints, for instance,
contain some substance other than the natural secretions of the skin. The
questions then arise, What is that substance? How came it here? And is it
usually associated with any particular kind of person or activity? The
specimens that Anstey so judiciously captured may help us to answer the
first question, and our native wits may enable us to answer the others.
So we have some data for consideration. And that reminds me that there
are some other data that we must secure.'

'What are they?' Drayton asked eagerly.

'There are those impressions in the sand outside the fence. I must have
permanent records of them. Shall we go and do them now? I shall want a
jug of water and a light.'

While Drayton went to fetch the water Thorndyke and I took our way out
through the garden to the outside of the fence, he carrying his
research-case, and I bearing Drayton's lamp. At the spot where we had
laid down the mat we halted, and Thorndyke, having set down his case,
once more lifted the mat.

'They are small feet,' he remarked, glancing at the footprints before
stooping to open the case. 'A striking contrast to the other man's.'

He took from his case a tin of plaster of Paris, and dipping up a small
quantity in a spoon, proceeded very carefully to dust the footprints with
the fine, white powder until they were covered with a thin, even coating.
Then he produced a bottle of water fitted with a rubber ball-spray
diffuser, and with this blew a copious spray of water over the
footprints. As a result, the white powder gradually shrank until the
footprints looked as if they had received a thin coat of whitewash.

'Why not fill the footprints up with liquid plaster?' asked Drayton, who
came up at this moment carrying a large jug.

'It would probably disturb the sand,' was the reply, 'and moreover, the
water would soak in at once and leave the plaster a crumbling mass. But
when this thin layer has set it will be possible to fill up and get a
solid cast.'

He repeated the application of the spray once or twice, and then we went
on to the place where the other man had come over. Here the same process
was carried out, not only with the footprints but also with those of the
hands. Then we went back to the first place, and when Thorndyke had
gently touched the edge of the footprints and ascertained that the thin
coating of plaster had set into a solid shell, he produced a small rubber
basin, and having half filled it with water, added a quantity of plaster
and stirred it until it assumed the consistency of cream; when he
carefully poured it into the white-coated footprints until they were full
and slightly overflowing.

'You see the advantage of this?' said Thorndyke as he cleaned out the
basin and started to walk slowly back to the site of the second set of
prints.

'I do, indeed,' replied Drayton, 'and I am astonished that Badger did not
take a permanent record. These casts will enable you to put the actual
feet of the accused in evidence if need be.'

'Precisely; besides giving us the opportunity to study them at our
leisure, and refer to them if any fresh evidence should become
available.'

The second set of footprints and the impressions of the hands received
similar treatment, and when they had been filled, Thorndyke proceeded to
pack up his appliances.

'We ought to give the casts a good twenty minutes to set hard,' he said,
'though it is the best plaster and quite fresh and has a little powdered
alum mixed with it to accelerate setting and make the cast harder. But we
mustn't be impatient.'

'I am in no hurry,' said Drayton. 'I shall stay here tonight--one
couldn't leave Mrs Benham in the house all alone. The car can take you
back to your chambers and drop Anstey at his lodgings.

'Tomorrow we must make some arrangements of a more permanent kind. But the
great thing is to get on the track of these two villains. Nothing else
seems to matter. There is my poor brother's corpse, crying aloud to
Heaven for justice, and I shall never rest until his murderers have paid
their debt.'

'I sympathise with you most cordially, Drayton,' said Thorndyke, 'and it
is no mere verbal sympathy. I promise you that every resource at my
disposal shall be called in to aid, that no stone shall be left unturned.
It is not only the office of friendship; it is a public duty to ensure
that an inexcusable crime of this kind shall be visited with the most
complete retribution.'

'Thank you. Thorndyke,' Sir Lawrence said with gruff earnestness. And
then after a short pause, he continued: 'I suppose it is premature to ask
you, but do you see any glimmer of hope? Is there anything to lay hold
of? I can see for myself that it is a very difficult and obscure case.'

'It is,' Thorndyke agreed. 'Of course the fingerprints may dispose of the
whole difficulty, if they happen to be on the files at the Habitual
Criminals Registry. Otherwise there is very little evidence. Still, there
is some, and we may build up more by inference. I have seen more
unpromising cases come to a successful issue.'

By this time the stipulated twenty minutes had expired, and we proceeded
to the first set of footprints. The plaster, on being tested, was found
to be quite firm and hard, and Thorndyke was able, with great care, to
lift the two chalky-looking plates from their bed in the ground. And even
in the rather unfavourable light of the lamp their appearance was
somewhat startling, for, as Thorndyke turned them over, each cast
presented the semblance of a white foot, surprisingly complete in detail
so far as the sole was concerned.

But if the appearance of these casts was striking, much more so was that
of the second set; for the latter included casts of the handprints, the
aspect of which was positively uncanny, especially in the case of the
deeper impression, the effect of which was that of a snowy hand with
outspread, crooked, clutching fingers. And here again the fine loam had
yielded an unexpected amount of detail. The creases and markings of the
palm were all perfectly clear and distinct, and I even thought that I
could perceive a trace of the ridges of the fingertips.

Before leaving the spot we carefully removed all traces of piaster, for
it was certain that the footprints would be examined by daylight, and
Thorndyke considered it better that the existence of these casts should
be known only to ourselves. The footprints were left practically intact,
and it was open to the police to make casts if they saw fit.

'I think,' said Thorndyke when we had re-entered the house and were
inspecting the casts afresh as they lay on the table, 'it would be a wise
precaution to attach our signatures to each of them, in case it should be
necessary at any time to put them in evidence. Their genuineness would
then be attested beyond any possibility of dispute.'

To this Drayton and I agreed most emphatically, and accordingly each of
us wrote his name, with the date, on the smooth back of each cast. Then
the 'records' were carefully packed and bestowed in the research-case,
and Thorndyke and I shook our host's hand and went forth to the car.



CHAPTER FOUR - THE LADY OF SHALOTT


The modern London suburb seems to have an inherent incapacity for
attaining a decent old age. City streets and those of country towns
contrive to gather from the passing years some quality of mellowness that
does but add to their charm. But with suburbs it is otherwise. Whatever
charm they have appertains to their garish youth and shares its ephemeral
character. Cities and towns grow venerable with age, the suburb merely
grows shabby.

The above profound reflections were occasioned by my approach to the
vicinity of Jacob Street, Hampstead Road, and by a growing sense of the
drab--not to say sordid--atmosphere that enveloped it, and its
incongruity with the appearance and manner of the lady whose residence I
was approaching. However, I consoled myself with the consideration that
if 'Honesty lives in a poor house, like your fair pearl in your foul
oyster,' perhaps Beauty might make shift with no better lodging; and
these cogitations having brought me to the factory-like gateway, I gave a
brisk tug at the bell above the brass plate.

After a short interval the wicket was opened by my young acquaintance of
the previous night, who greeted me with a sedate smile of recognition.

'Good afternoon,' I said, holding out my hand. 'I have just called to
learn how your sister is. I hope she is not much the worse for her rather
terrifying experiences last night.'

'Thank you,' he replied with quaint politeness, 'she seems to be all
right today. But the doctor won't let her do any work. He's fixed her arm
in a sling. But won't you come in and see her, sir?'

I hesitated, dubious as to whether she would care to receive a stranger
of her own class in these rather mean surroundings, but when he added:
'She would like to see you, I am sure, sir,' my scruples gave way to my
very definite inclination and I stepped through the wicket.

My young friend--who wore a blue linen smock--conducted me down a paved
passage, the walls of which bore each a long shelf on which was a row of
plaster busts and statuettes, into an open yard in which a small, elderly
man was working with chisel and mallet on a somewhat ornate marble
tombstone, amidst a sort of miniature Avebury of blocks and slabs of
stone and marble. Across the yard rose a great barn-like building with
one enormous window high up the wall, a great double door, and a small
side door. Into the latter my conductor entered and held it open for me,
and as I passed in, I found myself in total darkness. Only for a moment,
however, for my young host, having shut the door, drew aside a heavy
curtain and gave me a view of huge, bare hall with lofty, whitewashed
walls, an open timber roof, and a plank floor relieved from absolute
nakedness by one or two rugs. A couple of studio easels stood opposite
the window, and in a corner I observed a spectral lay-figure shrouded in
what looked like a sheet. At the farther end, by a large, open fireplace,
Miss Blake sat in an easy-chair with a book in her hand. She looked up as
I entered, and then rose and advanced to meet me, holding out her left
hand.

'How kind of you, Mr Anstey, to come and see me!' she exclaimed. 'And how
good it was of you to take such care of me last night!'

'Not at all,' I replied. 'But I hope you are not very much the worse for
your adventures. Are you suffering much pain?'

'I have no pain at all,' she replied with a smile, 'and I don't believe
this sling is in the least necessary. But one must obey the doctor's
orders.'

'Yes,' interposed her brother, 'and that is what the sling is for. To
prevent you from getting into mischief, Winnie.'

'It prevents me from doing any work, if that is what you mean, Percy,'
said she, 'and I suppose the doctor is right in that.'

'I am sure he is,' said I. 'Rest is most essential to enable the wound to
heal quickly. What sort of night did you have?'

'I didn't sleep much,' she replied. 'It kept coming back to me, you
know--that awful moment when I went into the museum and saw that poor man
lying on the floor. It was a dreadful experience. So horribly sudden,
too. One moment I saw him go away, full of life and energy, and the next
I was looking on his corpse. Do you think those wretches will really
escape?'

'It is difficult to say. The police have the fingerprints of one of them,
and if that person is a regular criminal, they will be able to identify
him.'

'Will they really?' she exclaimed. 'It sounds very wonderful. How are
they able to do it?'

'It is really quite simple. When a man is convicted of a crime, a
complete set of his fingerprints is taken at the prison by pressing his
fingers on an inked slab and putting them down on a sheet of paper--there
is a special form for the purpose with a space for each finger. This form
is deposited, with photographs of the prisoner, in one of the files of
the Habitual Criminals Registry at Scotland Yard. Then, when a strange
fingerprint turns up, it is compared with those in the files, and if one
is found that is an exact facsimile, the name attached to it is the name
of the man who is wanted.'

'But how are they ever able to find the facsimile in such a huge
collection, for the numbers in the files must be enormous?'

'That also is more simple than it looks. The lines on fingertips form
very definite patterns-spirals, or whorls, closed loops like the end
grain of wood, open curves, or arches, and so on. Now each fingerprint is
filed under its particular heading--whorl, loop, arch, etc.--and also in
accordance with the particular finger that bears the pattern, so the
inquiry is narrowed down to a comparatively small number from the start.
Let us take an instance. Suppose we have found some fingerprints of which
the left little finger has a spiral pattern and the ring finger adjoining
has a closed loop. Then we look in the file which contains the spiral
left little fingers and in the file of looped left ring fingers, and we
glance through the lists of names. There will be certain names that will
appear in both lists, and one of those will be the name of the man that
we want. All that remains is to compare our prints with each of them in
turn until we come to the one that is an exact facsimile. The name
attached to that one is the name of our man. Of course, in practice, the
process is more elaborate, but that is the principle.'

'It is wonderfully ingenious,' said Miss Blake, 'and really simple, as
you say, and it sounds as if it were perfectly infallible.'

'That is the claim that the police make. But, as you see, the utility of
the system for the detection of crime is limited to the cases of those
criminals whose fingerprints have been registered. That is what our
chance depends on now. The man who murdered Mr Drayton left prints of his
fingers on the glass of the cabinet, and the police have taken the glass
away to examine. If they find facsimiles of those fingerprints in the
register, then they will know who murdered Mr Drayton. But if those
fingerprints are not in the register, they won't help us at all. And as
far as I know, there is no other clue to the identity of the murderer.'

Miss Blake appeared to reflect earnestly on what I had said, and in the
ensuing silence I continued my somewhat furtive observation of the great
studio and its occupants. Particularly did I notice a number of
paintings, apparently executed in tempera on huge sheets of brown paper,
pinned on the walls somewhat above the level of the eye; figure subjects
of an allegorical character, strongly recalling the manner of
Burne-Jones, and painted with something considerably beyond ordinary
competence. And from the paintings my eye strayed to the painter--as I
assumed and hoped her to be--and a very striking and picturesque figure
she appeared, with her waxen complexion, delicately tinged with pink, her
earnest grey eyes, a short, slightly retrousse nose, the soft mass of
red-gold hair and the lissom form, actually full and plump though with
the deceptive appearance of slimness that one notes in the figures of the
artist whose style she followed. I noted with pleasure--not wholly
aesthetic, I suspect--the graceful pose into which she seemed naturally to
fall, and when my roving eye took in a 'planchette' hanging on the wall
and a crystal ball reposing on a black velvet cushion on a little
altar-like table in a corner, I forbore to scoff inwardly as I should
have done in other circumstances, for somehow the hint of occultism, even
of superstition, seemed not out of character. She reminded me of the Lady
of Shalott, and the whispered suggestion of Merlinesque magic gave a note
of harmony that sounded pleasantly.

While we had been talking, her brother had been pursuing his own affairs
with silent concentration, though I had noticed that he had paused to
listen to my exposition on the subject of fingerprints. In the middle of
the studio floor was a massive stone slab--a relic of some former
sculptor tenant--and on this the boy was erecting, very methodically, a
model of some sort of building with toy bricks of a kind that I had not
seen before. I was watching him and noting the marked difference between
him and his sister--for he was a somewhat dark lad with a strong,
aquiline face--when Miss Blake spoke again.

'Did you find out what had been stolen?'

'Yes,' I answered, 'approximately. There was nothing missing of any
considerable value. Only a few pieces had been taken, and those were
mostly simple jewels set with moonstones or cat's eyes.'

'Cat's eyes!' she exclaimed.

'Yes, a few posy-rings, some earrings, and I think, one pendant.'

'Was the pendant stolen?'

'Yes, apparently. Sir Lawrence mentioned a cat's-eye pendant as one of
the things that he missed from the drawer. Does the pendant interest you
specially?'

'Yes.' she answered thoughtfully, 'it was this pendant that I went there
to see. It was illustrated in the Connoisseur article, and I wrote to
poor Mr Drayton because I wanted to examine it. And so,' she added in a
lower tone and with an expression of deep sadness, 'the pendant became,
through me, the cause of his death. But for it and me, he would not have
gone to the house at that time.'

'It is impossible to say whether he would or not,' said I, and then, to
change the subject, as this seemed to distress her, I continued: 'there
was another thing missing that was figured in the Connoisseur--a
locket--'

'Of course!' she exclaimed. 'How silly of me to forget it.' She rose
hastily, and stepping over to an old walnut bureau that stood under the
window, pulled out one of the little drawers and picked some small object
out of it.

'There,' she said, holding out her hand, in which lay a small gold
locket, 'this is the one. I recognised it instantly. And now see if you
can guess how it came into my possession.'

I was completely mystified, and said so, though I hazarded a guess that
it had in some way caught in her clothing.

'Yes,' said she, 'it was in my shawl. You remember I said that the man
whom I was trying to hold had something in his hand and that he must have
dropped it when he drew his knife. Now it happened that my shawl had just
then slipped off in the struggle and that he was standing on it. The
locket must have dropped on the shawl, and this little brass hook, which
some one has fastened to the ring of the locket, must have hooked itself
into the meshes of the shawl--which is of crocheted silk, you will
remember. Then you picked the shawl up and rolled it into a bundle, and
it was never unrolled until this morning. When I shook it out to hang it
up, the locket fell out, and most unfortunately, as it fell it opened and
the glass inside got broken. I am most vexed about it, for it is such an
extremely charming little thing. Don't you think so?'

I took the little bauble in my hand, and, to speak the literal truth, was
not deeply smitten with its appearance. But policy, and the desire to
make myself agreeable, bade me dissemble. 'It is a quaint and curious
little object,' I admitted.

'It is a perfectly fascinating little thing,' she exclaimed
enthusiastically. 'And so secret and mysterious, too. I am sure there is
some hidden meaning in those references inside, and then there is
something delightfully cabalistic and magical about that weird-looking
inscription on the front.'

'Yes,' I agreed, 'Greek capitals make picturesque inscriptions,
especially this uncial form of lettering, but there is nothing very
recondite in the matter; in fact it is rather hackneyed. "Life is short
but Art is long. "'

'So that is what it means. Percy couldn't quite make it out, and I don't
know any Greek at all. But it is a beautiful motto, though I am not sure
that I don't prefer the more usual form, "Art is long but Life is
short."'

'That is the Latin version, "Ars longa, Vita brevis". Yes, I think I
agree with you. The Latin form is rather more epigrammatic. But what
other inscription were you referring to?'

'There are some references to passages of Scripture inside. I have looked
them out, all but one. Shall I get my notes and let you see what the
references are?' She looked at me so expectantly and with such charming
animation that I assented eagerly. Not that I cared particularly what the
references were, but the occupation of looking them out promised to put
us on a delightfully companionable footing. And if I was not profoundly
interested in the locket, I found myself very deeply interested in the
Lady of Shalott.

While she was searching for her notes, I examined the little bauble more
closely. It was a simple trinket, well made and neatly finished. The
workmanship was plain, though very solid, and I judged it to be of some
considerable age, though not what one would call antique. It was
fashioned in the form of a tiny book with a hinge at the back and a
strong loop of gold on each half, the two loops forming a double
suspension ring. To one of the loops a small brass hook had been
attached, probably to hang it in a show-case. On the front was engraved
in bold Greek uncials 'O BIOC BPAXYO H AE TEXNH MAKPH' without any other
ornament, and on turning the locket over I found the back--or under-side
as a bookbinder would say--quite plain save for the hallmark near the top.
Then I opened the little volume. In the back half was a circular cell,
framed with a border of small pearls and containing a tiny plait of black
hair coiled into a close spiral. It had been enclosed by a glass cover,
but this was broken and only a few fragments remained. The interior of
the front half was covered with extremely minute engraved lettering
which, on close inspection, appeared to be references to certain passages
of Holy Scripture, the titles of the books being given in Latin.

I had just concluded these observations when Miss Blake returned with a
manuscript book, a Bible, and a small reading-glass.

'This,' she said, handing me the latter, 'will help you to make out the
tiny lettering. If you will read out the references one at a time, I will
read out the passages that they refer to. And if any of them suggest to
you any meaning beyond what is apparent, do, please, tell me, for I can
make nothing of them.'

I promised to do so, and focusing the glass on the microscopic writing,
read out the first reference: '"Leviticus 25. 41."'

'That verse,' she said, 'reads: "And then shall he depart from thee, both
he and his children with him, and shall return unto his own family, and
unto the possession of his fathers shall he return."'

'The next reference,' said I, 'is "Psalms 121. 1"'

'The reading is: "I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence
cometh my help." What do you make of that?'

'Nothing,' I replied, 'unless one can regard it as a pious exhortation,
and it is extraordinarily indefinite at that.'

'Yes, it does seem vague, but I feel convinced that it means more than it
seems to, if we could only fathom its significance.'

'It might easily do that,' said I, and as I spoke I caught the eye of her
brother, who had paused in his work and was watching us with an indulgent
smile, and I wondered egotistically if he was writing me down a
consummate ass.

'The next,' said I, 'is "Acts 10. 5."'

'The reading is: "And now send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon,
whose surname is Peter."'

'I begin to think you must be right,' said I, 'for that passage is sheer
nonsense unless it covers something in the nature of a code. Taken by
itself, it has not the faintest bearing on either doctrine or morals. Let
us try the next one, "Nehemiah 8. 4."'

'That one is just as cryptic as the others,' said she. 'It reads: "And
Ezra the scribe stood upon a pulpit of wood, which they had made for the
purpose; and beside him stood Mattithiah, and Shema, and Anaiah, and
Urijali, and Hilkiah, and Maaseiah, on his right hand; and on his left
hand, Pedaiah, and Mishad, and Malchiah, and Hashum, and Hashbadana,
Zechariah, and Meshullam."'

At this point an audible snigger proceeding from the direction of the
builder revived my misgivings. There is something slightly alarming about
a schoolboy with an acute perception of the ridiculous.

'What is the joke, Percy?' his sister asked.

'Those fellows' names, Winnie. Do you suppose there really was a chap
called Hashed Banana?'

'Hashbadana, Percy,' she corrected.

'Very well. Hashed Badada then. But that only makes it worse. Sounds as
if you'd got a cold.'

'What an absurd boy you are, Percy,' exclaimed Miss Blake, regarding her
brother with a fond smile. Then, reverting to her notes, she said: 'The
next reference appears to be a mistake, at least I don't understand it.
It says "3 Kings 7. 41." Isn't that so?'

'Yes. "3 Lib. Regum 7. 41." But what is wrong with it?'

'Why, there are only two Books of Kings.'

'Oh, I see. But it isn't a mistake. In the Authorised Version the two
books of Samuel have the alternative title of the First and Second Books
of Kings, and the First Book of Kings has the subtitle "Commonly called
the Third Book of the Kings." But at the present day the books are
invariably referred to as the First and Second Books of Samuel and the
First and Second Books of Kings. Shall we look it up?'

She opened the Bible and turned over the leaves to the First Book of
Kings.

'Yes,' she said, 'it is as you say. How odd that I should never have
noticed it, or at any rate, not have remembered it. Then this reference
is really "1 Kings 7. 41." And yet it can't be. What sense can you possibly
make of this: "The two pillars, and the two bowls of the chapiters that
were on the top of the two pillars; and the two networks, to cover the
two bowls of the chapiters which were upon the top of the pillars." It
seems quite meaningless, separated from its context.'

'It certainly is rather enigmatical,' I agreed. 'This is an excerpt from
what was virtually an inventory of Solomon's Temple. If the purpose of
this collection of Scripture texts was to inculcate some religious or
moral truths, I don't see the bearing of this quotation at all. But we
may take it that these passages had some meaning to the original owner of
the locket.'

'They must have had,' she replied earnestly. 'Perhaps we may be able to
find the key to the riddle if we consider the whole series together.'

'Possibly,' I agreed, not very enthusiastically. 'The next reference is
"Psalms 31. 7."'

'The verse is: "I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou hast
considered my trouble; thou hast known my soul in adversities."'

'That doesn't throw much light on the subject,' said I. 'The last
reference is "2 Timothy 4. 13."'

'It reads: "The cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou comest,
bring with thee, and the books, but especially the parchments."'

She laid down her notes, and looking at me with the most intense gravity,
exclaimed: 'Isn't that extraordinary? It is the most astonishing of them
all. You see, it is perfectly trivial, just a message from St Paul to
Timothy on a purely personal matter of no importance to anybody but
himself. But the whole collection of texts is very odd. They seem utterly
unconnected with one another, and, as you say, without any significance
in respect of either faith or morals. What is your opinion of them?'

'I don't know what to think,' I replied. 'They may have had some
significance to the original owner of the locket only, something personal
and reminiscent. Or they may have been addressed to some other person in
terms previously agreed on. That is to say, they may have formed
something in the nature of a code.'

'Exactly,' she agreed eagerly. 'That is what I think. And I am just
devoured by curiosity as to what the message was that they were meant to
convey. I shan't rest until I have solved the mystery.'

I smiled, and again my glance wandered to the planchette on the wall and
the crystal ball on the table. Evidently my new and charming friend was
an inveterate mystic, an enthusiastic explorer of the dubious regions of
the occult and the supernormal. And though my own matter-of-fact
temperament engendered little sympathy with such matters, I found in this
very mysticism an additional charm. It seemed entirely congruous with her
eminently picturesque personality.

But at this moment I became suddenly aware that I had made a most
outrageously long visit and rose with profuse apologies for my disregard
of time.

'There is no need to apologise,' she assured me cordially. 'It is most
kind of you to have given so much time to a mere counterfeit invalid. But
won't you stay and have tea with us? Can't you really? Well, I hope you
will come and see us again when you can spare an hour. Oh, and hadn't I
better give you this locket to hand to Sir Lawrence Drayton?'

'Certainly not,' I replied. 'You had better keep it until you see him,
and perhaps in the interval you may be able to extract its secret. But I
will tell him that it is in safe hands.' I shook her hand warmly, and
when I had made a brief inspection of Master Percy's building, that
promising architect piloted me across the yard and finally launched me,
with a hearty farewell and a cordial invitation to 'come again soon,'
into the desert expanse of Jacob Street.



CHAPTER FIVE - MR HALLIBURTON'S MASCOT


Emerging into the grey and cheerless street I sauntered towards the
Hampstead Road, and having reached that thoroughfare, halted at the
corner and looked at my watch. It was barely four o'clock, and as I had
arranged to meet Thorndyke at the Euston Road corner at half-past four, I
had half an hour in which to cover something less than half a mile. I
began to be regretful that I had refused the proffered tea, and when my
leisurely progress brought me to the door of an establishment in which
that beverage was dispensed, I entered and called for refreshment.

And as I sat by the shabby little marble-topped table, my thoughts
strayed back to the great bare studio in Jacob Street and the strange,
enigmatical but decidedly alluring personality of its tenant. To say that
I had been favourably impressed by her would be to understate the case. I
found myself considering her with a degree of interest and admiration
that no other woman had ever aroused in me. She was--or, at least, she
appeared to me--a strikingly beautiful girl, but that was not the whole,
or even the main, attraction. Her courage and strength of character, as
shown in the tragic circumstances of the previous night; her refinement
of manner and easy, well-bred courtesy, her intelligence and evident
amiability, and her frank friendliness, without any sacrifice of dignity,
had all combined to make her personality gracious and pleasant. Then
there were the paintings. If they were her work, she was an artist of
some talent. I had meant cautiously to inquire into that, but the
investigation of the locket had excluded everything else. And the thought
of the locket and the almost childish eagerness that she had shown to
extract its (assumed) secret, led naturally to the planchette and the
crystal globe. In general I was disposed to scoff at such things, but on
her the mysticism and occultism--I would not call it superstition--seemed
to settle naturally and to add a certain piquancy to her mediaeval grace.
And so reflecting, I suddenly bethought me of the cat's eye pendant. What
was the nature of her interest in that? At first I had assumed that she
was a connoisseur in jewels, and possibly I was right. But her curious
interest in the locket suggested other possibilities, and into these I
determined to inquire on my next visit--for I had already decided that
the friendly invitations should not find me unresponsive. In short, the
Lady of Shalott had awakened in me a very lively curiosity.

My speculations and reflections very effectively filled out the spare
half-hour and brought me on the stroke of half-past four to the corner of
the Euston Road; and I had barely arrived when I perceived the tall,
upright figure of my colleague swinging easily up Tottenham Court Road.
In a few moments he joined me, and we both turned our faces westward.

'We needn't hurry,' said he. 'I said I would be there at five.'

'I don't quite understand what you are going for,' said I. 'This man,
Halliburton, seems to have been no more than a chance stranger. What do
you expect to get out of him?'

'I have nothing definite in my mind,' he replied. 'The whole case is in
the air at present. The position is this: a murder has been committed and
the murderers have got away almost without leaving a trace. If the
fingerprint people cannot identify the one man, we may say that we have
no clue to the identity of either. But that murder had certain
antecedents. Halliburton's visit was one of them, though there was
probably no causal relation.'

'You don't suspect Halliburton?'

'My dear fellow, I suspect nobody. We haven't got as far as that. But we
have to investigate every thing, person, or circumstance that makes the
smallest contact with the crime. But here is our destination, and I need
not remark, Anstey, that our purpose is to acquire information, not to
give it.'

The 'Baltic' Hotel was a large private house not far from the Great
Central Station, distinguished from other private houses only by an open
street door and by the name inconspicuously inscribed on the fanlight. As
we ascended the steps and entered the hall, a short, pleasant-faced man
emerged from an office and looked inquiringly from one of us to the
other. 'Dr Thorndyke?' he asked.

'Yes,' replied my colleague, 'and I assume that you are the manager, Mr
Simpson. I must thank you for making the appointment and hope I am not
inconveniencing you.'

'Not at all,' rejoined the other. 'I know your name very well, sir, and
shall be delighted to give you any assistance that I can. I understand
that you want Mr Halliburton's address.'

'If you have no objection, I should like to have it. I want to write to
him.'

'I can give it to you off-hand,' said the manager. 'It is "Oscar
Halliburton, Esquire, Wimbledon."'

'That doesn't seem a very sufficient address,' remarked Thorndyke.

'It is not,' said the manager. 'I had occasion to write to him myself and
my letter was returned, marked "insufficiently addressed."'

'Then, in effect, you have not got his address?'

'That is what it amounts to. Would you like to see the visitors' book? If
you will step into my private office I will bring it to you.'

He showed us into his office, and in a few moments entered with the book,
which he laid on the table and opened at the page on which the signature
appeared.

'This does not appear to have been written with the hotel pen,' Thorndyke
remarked when he had glanced at the adjoining signatures.

'No,' the manager agreed. 'Apparently he used his own fountain pen.'

'I see that this entry is dated the 13th of September. How long did he
stay?'

'He left on the 16th of September--five days ago.'

'And he received at least one letter while he was here?'

'Yes, one only, I believe. It came on the morning of the 16th, I
remember, and he left in the evening.'

'Do you know if he went out much while he was here?'

'No, he stayed indoors nearly all day, and he spent most of his time in
the billiard-room practising fancy strokes.'

'What sort of man was he--in appearance, for instance?'

'Well,' said Simpson rather hesitatingly, 'I didn't see much of him, and
I see a good many people. I should say he was a biggish man, medium
colour and rather sunburnt.'

'Any beard or moustache?'

'No, clean shaved and a good deal of hair--rather long, wanted a crop.'

'Any distinctive accent or peculiarity of voice?'

'I didn't have much talk with him--nor did anybody else, I think. He was
a gruffish, taciturn man. Nothing peculiar about his voice, and as to his
accent, well, it was just ordinary, very ordinary, with perhaps just a
trace of the cockney, but only a trace. It wasn't exactly the accent of
an English gentleman.'

'And that is all that you remember about him?'

'That is all.'

'Would you have any objection to my taking a photograph of this
signature?'

The manager looked rather dubious. 'It would hardly do for it to be
known--' he began, when Thorndyke interrupted:

'I suggest, Mr Simpson, that whatever passes between us shall be regarded
as strictly confidential on both sides. The least said, the soonest
mended, you know.'

'There's a good deal of truth in that; said the manager with a smile,
'especially in the hotel business. Well, if that is understood, I don't
know that I have any objection to your taking a photograph. But how are
you going to manage it?'

'I have a camera; replied Thorndyke, 'and I see that your table lamp is a
sixty Watt. It won't take an unreasonably long exposure.'

He propped the book up in a suitable position, and having arranged the
lamp so as to illuminate the page obliquely, produced from his pocket a
small folding camera and a leather case of dark slides, at which Mr
Simpson gazed in astonishment. 'You'll never get a useful photograph with
a toy like that,' said he.

'Not such a toy as you think,' replied Thorndyke as he opened the little
instrument. 'This lens is specially constructed for close range work, and
will give me the signature the full size of the original.' He laid a
measuring tape on the table, and having adjusted the camera by its
engraved scale, inserted the dark slide, looked at his watch, and opened
the shutter.

'You were saying just now, Mr Simpson,' he resumed as we sat round the
table watching the camera, 'that you had occasion to write to Mr
Halliburton. Should I be indiscreet if I were to ask what the occasion
was?'

'Not at all,' replied the manager. 'It was a ridiculous affair. It seems
that Mr Halliburton had a sort of charm or mascot which he wore suspended
by a gold ring from a cord under his waistcoat; a silly little bone
thing, of no value whatever, though he appears to have set great store by
it. Well, after he had left the hotel he missed it. The ring had broken
and the thing had dropped off the cord--presumably, he supposed, when he
was undressing. So a couple of days later--on the eighteenth--back he
came in a rare twitter to know if it had been picked up. I asked the
chambermaids if any of them had found the mascot in his room or
elsewhere, but none of them had. Then he was frightfully upset and begged
me to ask them again and to say that he would give ten pounds to any one
who should have found it and would hand it to him. Ten pounds!' Mr
Simpson repeated with contemptuous emphasis. 'Just think of it! The price
of a gold watch for a thing that looked like a common rabbit bone! Why, a
man like that oughtn't to be at large.'

I could see that my colleague was deeply interested, though his impassive
face suggested nothing but close attention. He put away his watch, closed
the lens-shutter and the dark slide, and finally bestowed the little
apparatus in his pocket. Then he asked the manager: 'Can you give us
anything like a detailed description of this mascot?'

'I can show you the thing itself,' replied Simpson. 'That is the irony of
the affair. Mr Halliburton hadn't been out of the house half an hour
when the boy who looks after the billiard-room came bursting into my
office in the devil's own excitement. He had heard of the ten pounds
reward and had proceeded at once to take up all the rugs and mats in the
billiard-room, and there, under the edge of a strip of cocoa-nut matting,
he had found the precious thing. No doubt the ring had broken when
Halliburton was leaning over the table to make a long shot. So I took it
from the boy and put it in the safe, and I wrote forthwith to the address
given in the book to say that the mascot had come to light, but, as I
told you just now, the letter was returned marked "insufficiently
addressed." So there it is, and unless he calls again, or writes, he
won't get his mascot, and the boy won't get his ten pounds. Would you
like to see the treasure?'

'I should, very much,' replied Thorndyke; whereupon the manager stepped
over to a safe in the corner of the room, and having unlocked it, came
back to the table holding a small object in the palm of his hand.

'There it is,' said he, dropping it on the table before Thorndyke, 'and I
think you will agree with me that it is a mighty dear ten pounds' worth.'

I looked curiously at the little object as my colleague turned it about
in his hand. It was evidently a bone of some kind, roughly triangular in
shape and perforated by three holes, one large and two smaller. In
addition to these, a fourth hole had been drilled through near the apex
to take a gold suspension ring, and this was still in position, though it
was broken, having chafed quite thin with wear in one part and apparently
given way under some sudden strain. The surface of the bone was covered
with minute incised carving of a simple and rather barbaric type, and the
whole bone had been stained a deep, yellowish brown, which had worn
lighter in the parts most exposed to friction; and the entire surface had
that unmistakable polish and patina that comes with years of handling and
wear.

'What do you make of it, sir?' asked Mr Simpson.

'It is the neck bone of some small animal,' Thorndyke replied. 'But not a
rabbit. And, of course, the markings on it give it an individual
character.'

'Would you give ten pounds for it?' the manager asked with a grin.

'I am not sure that I wouldn't,' Thorndyke replied 'though not for its
intrinsic value. But yours is not a "firm offer." You are not a vendor.
But I should like very much to borrow it for a few hours.'

'I don't quite see how I could agree to that,' said Simpson. 'You see,
the thing isn't mine. I'm just a trustee. And Mr Halliburton might call
and ask for it at any moment.'

'I would give you a receipt for it and undertake to let you have it back
by ten o'clock tomorrow morning,' said Thorndyke.

'M'yes,' said Simpson reflectively and with evident signs of weakening.
'Of course, I could say I had deposited it at my bank. But is it of any
importance? Would you mind telling me why you want to borrow the thing?'

'I want to compare it carefully with some similar objects, the existence
of which is known to me. I could do that tonight, and, if necessary, send
the specimen back forthwith. As to the importance of the comparison, who
can say? If Halliburton should turn up and give a practicable address
there would be nothing in it. But if he should never reappear and it
should become necessary to trace him, the information gathered from an
exhaustive examination of this object might be of great value.'

'I see,' said Simpson. 'In a sense it is a matter of public policy. Of
course that puts a different complexion on the affair. And having regard
to your position and character, I don't see why I shouldn't agree to your
having a short loan of the thing. But I should like to have it back by
nine o'clock tomorrow morning, if you could manage it.'

'I promise you that it shall be delivered into your hand by a responsible
person not later than nine o'clock,' said Thorndyke. 'I will now give you
a receipt, which I will ask you to hand to my messenger in exchange for
your property; and again, Mr Simpson, I would suggest that we make no
confidences to anyone concerning this transaction.'

To this the manager assented with decided emphasis, and our business
being now concluded, we thanked Mr Simpson warmly for his courtesy and
his very helpful attitude and took our departure.

'You seem extraordinarily keen about that precious bone, Thorndyke,' I
remarked as we walked back along the Marylebone Road, 'but I'm hanged if
I see why. It won't tell you much about Halliburton. And if it would, I
don't quite see what you want to know. He is obviously a fool. You don't
need much investigation to ascertain that, and like most fools, he seems
easily parted from his money. What more do you want to know?'

'My learned friend,' replied Thorndyke, 'is not profiting sufficiently by
his legal experience. One of the most vital principles that years of
practice have impressed on me is that in the early stages of an inquiry,
no fact, relevant or irrelevant, that is in any way connected with the
subject of the inquiry should be neglected or ignored. Indeed, no such
fact can be regarded as irrelevant, since, until all the data are
assembled and collated, it is impossible to judge the bearing or value of
any one of them.

'Take the present case. Who is Mr Halliburton? We don't know. Why did he
want to examine Mr Drayton's collection? We don't know. What passed
between him and Mr Drayton when he made his visit? Again we don't know.
Perhaps there is nothing of any significance to know. The probability is
that Halliburton has no connection with this case at all. But there is no
denying that he is in the picture.'

'Yes, as a background figure. His name has been mentioned as one of the
visitors who had come to see the collection. There were other visitors,
you remember.'

'Yes, and if we knew who they were we should want to know something about
them, too. But Halliburton is the only one known to us. And your
presentation of his position in relation to what has happened does not
state the case fairly at all. The position is really this: Halliburton--a
complete stranger to Drayton--took considerable trouble to obtain an
opportunity to examine the collection. Why did he do this? You have
quoted Mrs Benham as saying that he apparently knew nothing about
jewellery, either ancient or modern. He was not a connoisseur. Then, why
did he want to see the collection? Again, he wrote for the appointment,
not from his own residence but from an hotel; and when we come to that
hotel we find that he has left no verifiable address, and the vague
locality that he gave may quite possibly be a false address. And further,
that this apparent concealment of his place of abode coincides with a
very excellent reason for giving a correct address, the fact that he has
lost--and lost in the hotel, as he believes--certain property on which he
sets a high value. And if you add to this the facts that within four days
of his visit to Drayton the collection was robbed; that the robbers
clearly knew exactly where it was kept and had some knowledge of the
inmates of the house and their habits, you must admit that Halliburton is
something more than a background figure in the picture.'

I was secretly impressed by the way in which Thorndyke had 'placed' Mr
Halliburton in respect of the inquiry, but, of course, it wouldn't do to
say so. It was necessary to assert my position.

'That,' I replied, 'is the case for the prosecution, and very
persuasively stated. On the other hand it might be said for the defence:
"Here is a gentleman who lives in the country and who comes up to spend a
few days in town--"'

'For the apparent purpose,' Thorndyke interrupted, 'of practising the art
of billiards, a sport peculiar to London.'

'Exactly. And while he is in London he takes the opportunity of
inspecting a collection which has been described in the Press. A few days
after his visit the collection is robbed by some persons who have
probably also seen the published description. There is no positive fact
of any kind that connects him with those persons, and I assert that the
assumption that any such connection exists is entirely gratuitous.'

Thorndyke smiled indulgently. 'It seems a pity,' he remarked, 'that my
learned friend should waste the sweetness of his jury flourishes on the
desert air of Marylebone Road. But we needn't fash ourselves, as I
believe they say in the North. There was a lady named Mrs Glasse whose
advice to cooks seems to be applicable to the present case. We had better
catch our hare before we proceed to jug him--the word "jug" being used
without any malicious intent to perpetrate a pun.'

'And do I understand that the capture is to be accomplished by the agency
of the rabbit-bone that my learned senior carries in his reverend
pocket?'

'If you do,' replied Thorndyke, 'your understanding is a good deal in
advance of mine. I am taking this little object to examine merely on the
remote chance that it may yield some information as to this man's
antecedents, habits, and perhaps even his identity. The chance is not so
remote as it looks. There are very few things which have been habitually
carried on a man's person which will not tell you something about the
person who has carried them. And this object, as you probably noticed, is
in many respects highly characteristic.'

'I can't say that I found the thing itself particularly characteristic.
The fact that the man should have carried it and have set such a
ridiculous value on it is illuminating. That writes him down a
superstitious ass. But superstitious asses form a fairly large class. In
what respects do you find this thing so highly characteristic, and what
kind of information do you expect to extract from it?'

'As to the latter question,' he replied, 'an investigator doesn't form
expectations in advance; and as to the former, you will have an
opportunity of examining the object for yourself and of forming your own
conclusions.'

I determined to make a minute and exhaustive inspection of our treasure
trove as soon as we arrived home. For obviously I had missed something.
It was clear to me that Thorndyke attached more importance to this object
than would have been warranted by anything that I had observed. There was
some point that I had overlooked and I meant to find out what it was.

But the opportunity did not offer immediately, for, on our arrival at his
chambers, Thorndyke proceeded straight up to the laboratory, where we
found his assistant, Polton, seated at a jeweller's bench, making some
structural alterations in a somewhat elaborate form of pedometer.

'I've got a job for you, Polton,' said Thorndyke, laying the mascot on
the bench. 'Quite a nice, delicate little job, after your own heart. I
want a replica of this thing--as perfect as you can make it. And I have
to return the original before nine o'clock tomorrow morning. And,' he
added, taking the camera and dark slides from his pocket, 'there is a
photograph to be developed, but there is no particular hurry for that.'

Polton picked the mascot up daintily, and laying it in the palm of his
hand, stuck a watchmaker's glass in his eye and inspected it minutely.

'It's a queer little thing, sir,' he remarked. 'Seems to have been made
out of a small cervical vertebra. I suppose you want the copy of the same
colour as this and as hard as possible?'

'I want as faithful a copy as you can make, similar in all respects,
excepting that the reproduction can scarcely be as hard as the original.
Will there be time to make a gelatine mould?'

'There'll have to be, sir. It couldn't be done any other way, with these
undercuttings. But I shan't lose any time on that. If I have to match the
colour I shall have to make some experiments, and I can do those while
the gelatine is setting.'

'Very well, Polton,' said Thorndyke. 'Then I'll leave the thing in your
hands and consider it as good as done. Of course the original must not be
damaged in any way.'

'Oh, certainly not, sir'; and forthwith the little man, having carefully
deposited the mascot in a small, glass-topped box on the bench, fell to
work on his preparations beaming with happiness. I have never seen a man
who enjoyed his work so thoroughly as Polton did.

'I am going round to the College of Surgeons now,' said Thorndyke. 'No
callers are expected, I think, but if any one should come and want to see
me, I shall be back in about an hour. Are you coming with me, Anstey?'

'Why not? I've nothing to do, and if I keep an eye on you I may pick up a
crumb or two of information.'

Here I caught Polton's eye, and a queer, crinkly smile overspread that
artificer's countenance. 'A good many people try to do that, sir,' he
remarked. 'I hope you will have better luck than most of them have.'

'It occurs to me' Thorndyke observed as we descended the stairs, 'that if
the scribe who wrote the Book of Genesis had happened to look in on
Polton he would have come to the conclusion that he had grossly
overestimated the curse of labour.'

'He was not much different from most other scribes,' said I. 'A bookish
man--like myself, for instance--constantly fails to appreciate the joy of
manual work. I find Polton an invaluable object lesson.'

'So do I,' said Thorndyke. 'He is a shining example of the social
virtues--industry, loyalty, integrity, and contentment--and as an artificer
he is a positive genius.' With this warm appreciation of his faithful
follower he swung round into Fleet Street and crossed towards the Law
Courts.



CHAPTER SIX - INTRODUCES AN ANT-EATER AND A DETECTIVE


As we entered the hall of the College of Surgeons Thorndyke glanced at
the board on which the names of the staff were painted and gave a little
grunt of satisfaction.

'I see,' he said, addressing the porter, 'that Mr Saltwood hasn't gone
yet.'

'No, sir,' was the reply. 'He is working up at the top tonight. Shall I
take you up to him?'

'If you please,' answered Thorndyke, and the porter accordingly took us
in charge and led the way to the lift. From the latter we emerged into a
region tenanted by great earthenware pans and jars and pervaded by a
curious aroma, half spirituous, half cadaveric, on which I commented
unfavourably.

'Yes,' said Thorndyke, sniffing appreciatively, 'the good old museum
bouquet. You smell it in all curators' rooms, and though, I suppose, it
is not physically agreeable, I find it by no means unpleasant. The
effects of odours are largely a matter of association.'

'The present odour,' said I, 'seems to suggest the association of a very
overripe Duke of Clarence and a butt of shockingly bad malmsey.'

Thorndyke smiled tolerantly as we ascended a flight of stairs that led to
a yet higher storey, and abandoned the discussion. At the top, we passed
through several long galleries, past ranges of tables piled up with
incredible numbers of bones, apparently awaiting disposal, until we were
finally led by our conductor to a room in which two men were working at a
long bench, on which were several partially articulated skeletons of
animals. They both looked up as we entered, and one of them, a
keen-faced, middle-aged man, exclaimed: 'Well, this is an unexpected
pleasure. I haven't seen you for donkey's years, Thorndyke. Thought you
had deserted the old shop. And I wonder what brings you here now.'

'The usual thing, Saltwood. Self-interest. I have come to negotiate a
loan. Have you got any loose bones of the Echidna?'

Saltwood stroked his chin and turned interrogatively to his assistant.
'Do you know if there are any, Robson?' he asked.

'There is a set waiting to be articulated, sir. Shall I fetch them?'

'If you would, please, Robson,' replied Saltwood. Then turning to my
colleague, he asked: 'What bones do you want, Thorndyke?'

'The middle cervical vertebrae--about the third or fourth,' was the
reply, at which I pricked up my ears.

In a few minutes Robson returned carrying a cardboard box on which was a
label inscribed 'Echidna hystrix.'

Saltwood lifted the lid, disclosing a collection of small bones,
including a queer little elongated skull.

'Here you are,' said he, picking out a sort of necklace formed of the
joints of the backbone; 'here is the whole vertebral column, minus the
tail, strung together. Will you take it as it is?'

'No,' replied Thorndyke, 'I will just take the three vertebrae that I
want--the third, fourth, and fifth cervical, and if I let you have them
back in the course of the week, will that do?'

'Perfectly. I wouldn't bother you to return them at all if it were not
for spoiling the set.' He separated the three little bones from the
string, and having wrapped them in tissue paper and handed them to
Thorndyke, asked; 'How is Jervis? I haven't seen him very lately,
either.'

'Jervis,' replied Thorndyke, 'is at present enjoying a sort of
professional holiday in New York. He is retained, in an advisory
capacity, in the Rosenbaum case, of which you may have read in the
papers. My friend Anstey here is very kindly filling his place during his
absence.'

'I'm glad to hear that I'm filling it,' said I, as Saltwood bowed and
shook hands. 'I was afraid I was only half filling it, being but a mere
lawyer destitute of medical knowledge.'

'Well,' said Saltwood, 'medical knowledge is important, of course, but
you've always got Thorndyke to help you out. Oh--and that reminds me,
Thorndyke, that I've got some new preparations that I should like you to
see, a series of tumours from wild animals. Will you come and have a look
at them? They are in the next room.'

Thorndyke assented with enthusiasm, and the two men went out of the room,
leaving me to the society of Robson and the box of bones. Into the latter
I peered curiously, again noting the odd shape of the skull; then I
proceeded to improve the occasion by a discreet question or two.

'What sort of beast in an Echidna?' I asked.

'Echidna hystrix,' replied Robson in a somewhat pompously didactic tone,
'is the zoological name of the porcupine ant-eater.'

'Indeed,' said I, and then tempted by his owlish solemnity to ask foolish
questions, I inquired: 'Does that mean that he is an eater of porcupine
ants?'

'No, sir,' he replied gravely (he was evidently a little slow in the
uptake). 'It is not the ants which are porcupines. It is the ant-eater.'

'But,' I objected, 'how can an ant-eater be a porcupine? It is a
contradiction in terms.'

This seemed to floor him for a moment, but he pulled himself together and
explained: 'The name signifies a porcupine which resembles an ant-eater,
or perhaps one should say, an ant-eater, which resembles a porcupine. It
is a very peculiar animal.'

'It must be,' I agreed. 'And what is there peculiar about its cervical
vertebrae?'

He pondered profoundly, and I judged that he did not know but was not
going to give himself away, a suspicion that his rather ambiguous
explanation tended to confirm.

'The cervical vertebrae,' he expounded, 'are very much alike in most
animals. There are exceptions, of course, as in the case of the porpoise,
which has no neck, and the giraffe, which has a good deal of neck. But in
general, cervical vertebrae seem to be turned out pretty much to one
pattern, whereas the tail vertebrae present great differences. Now, if
you look at this animal's tail--' here he fished a second necklace out of
the box and proceeded to expound the peculiarities of its constituent
bones, to which exposition I am afraid I turned an inattentive ear. The
Echidna's tail had no bearing on the identity of Mr Halliburton.

The rather windy discourse had just come to an end when my two friends
reappeared and Saltwood conducted us down to the hall. As we stepped out
of the lift he shook our hands heartily, and with a cheery adieu, pressed
the button and soared aloft like a stage fairy.

From the great portico of the College we turned eastward and walked
homewards across Lincoln's Inn, each of us wrapped in his own
reflections. Presently I asked:

'Supposing this mascot of Halliburton's to be the neck bone of an
Echidna, what is the significance of the fact?'

'Ah!' he replied. 'There you have me, Anstey. At present I am concerning
myself only with the fact, hoping that its significance may appear later.
To us it may have no significance at all. Of course there is some reason
why this particular bone should have been used rather than some other
kind of bone, but that set of circumstances may have--probably has--no
connection with our inquiry. It is quite probable that Halliburton
himself has no such connection. On the other hand, the circumstances
which determined the use of an Echidna's vertebra as a mascot may have an
important bearing on the case. So we can only secure the fact and wait
for time and further knowledge to show whether it is or is not a relevant
fact.'

'And do you mean to say that you are taking all this trouble on the mere
chance that this apparently trivial and meaningless circumstance may
possibly have some bearing?'

'That is so. But your question, Anstey, exhibits the difference between
the legal and the scientific outlook. The lawyer's investigations tend to
proceed along the line of information wanted: the scientists tend to
proceed along the line of information available. The business of the man
of science is impartially to acquire all the knowledge that is
obtainable; the lawyer tends to concern himself only with that which is
material to the issue.'

'Then the scientist must accumulate a vast number of irrelevant facts.'

'Every fact,' replied Thorndyke, 'is relevant to something, and if you
accumulate a great mass of facts, inspection of the mass shows that the
facts can be sorted out into related groups from which certain general
truths can be inferred. The difference between the lawyer and the
scientist is that one is seeking to establish some particular truth while
the other seeks to establish any truth that emerges from the available
facts.'

'But,' I objected 'surely even a scientist must select his facts to some
extent. Every science has its own province. The chemist, for instance, is
not concerned with the metamorphoses of insects.'

'That is true; he admitted. 'But then, are we not keeping within our own
province? We are not collecting facts indiscriminately, but are selecting
those facts which make some sort of contact with the circumstances of
this crime and which may therefore conceivably be relevant to our
inquiry. But methinks I perceive another collector. Isn't that our friend
Superintendent Miller crossing to King's Bench Walk and apparently
bearing down on our chambers?'

I looked at the tall figure, indistinctly seen by the light of a lamp,
and even as I looked, it ascended the steps and vanished into our entry;
and when, a couple of minutes later, we arrived on our landing, we found
Polton in the act of admitting the Superintendent.

'Well, gentlemen,' the officer said genially, as he subsided into an
armchair and selected a cigar from the box which Thorndyke handed to him
'I've just dropped in to give you the news--about this Drayton case, you
know. I thought you'd be interested to hear what our people are doing.
Well, I don't think you need trouble yourselves about it any more. We've
got one of the men, at any rate.'

'In custody?' asked Thorndyke.

'No, we haven't actually made the arrest, but there will be no difficulty
about that. We know who he is. I just passed those fingerprints in to Mr
Singleton and he gave me the name straight away. And who do you think it
is? It is our old friend, Moakey--Joe Hedges, you know.'

'Is it really!' said Thorndyke.

'Yes, Moakey it is. You're surprised. So was I. I really did think he had
learned a little sense at last, especially as he seemed to be taking some
reasonable precautions last time. But he always was a fool. Do you
remember the asinine thing that he did on that last job?'

'No,' replied Thorndyke, 'I don't remember that case.'

'It was a small country house job, and Moakey did it all on his own. And
it did look as if he had learned his lesson, for he undoubtedly wore
gloves. We found them in his bag and there was not a trace at the house.
But would you believe it, when he'd finished up, all neat and ship-shape,
he must stop somewhere in the grounds to repack the swag--after he had
taken his gloves off. Just then the alarm was raised and a dog let loose,
and away went Moakey, like a hare, for the place in the fence where he
had hidden his bicycle. He nipped over the fence, mounted his bike, and
got clear away, and all trace of him seemed to be lost. But in the
morning, when the local police came to search the grounds, they found a
silver tray that Moakey had evidently had to drop when he heard the dog,
with a most beautiful set of fingerprints on it. The police got a pair of
photographs at once--there happened to be a dark room and a set of
apparatus in the house--and sent a special messenger with them to
Scotland Yard. And then the murder was out. They were Moakey's prints,
and Moakey was arrested the same day with all the stuff in his
possession. He hadn't had time to go to a fence with it. So the
fingerprints didn't have to be put in evidence.'

'Did Moakey ever hear about the fingerprints?' Thorndyke asked.

'Yes. Some fool of a warder told him. And that's what makes this case so
odd; to think that after coming a cropper twice he should have gone
dabbing his trademarks over the furniture as he has, is perfectly
incredible. And that isn't the only queer feature in the case. There's
the stuff. I got Sir Lawrence to show it to me this morning, and I assure
you that when I saw what it was, you could have knocked me down with a
feather. To say nothing of the crockery and wineglasses and rubbish of
that sort and the pewter spoons and brass spoons and bone bobbins, the
jewellery was a fair knockout. There was only one cabinet of it, and
you'll hardly believe me. Doctor, when I tell you that the greater part
of it was silver, and even pinchbeck and brass--or latten, as Sir Lawrence
calls it--set with the sort of stones that you can buy in Poland Street
for ten bob a dozen. You never saw such trash!'

'Oh come. Miller,' Thorndyke protested, 'don't call it trash. It is one
of the most interesting and reasonable collections that I have ever
seen.'

'So it may be,' said the Superintendent, 'but I am looking at it from the
trade point of view. Why, there isn't a fence outside Bedlam who'd give a
fiver for the whole boiling. It's perfectly astonishing to me that an
experienced tradesman like Moakey should have wasted his time on it. He
might just as well have cracked an ironmonger's.'

'I expect,' said I, 'he embarked on the job under a mistake. Probably he
saw, or heard of, that article in the Connoisseur and thought that this
was a great collection of jewels.'

'That seems likely,' Miller agreed. 'And that may account for his having
worked with a chum this time instead of doing the job single-handed as he
usually does. But it doesn't account for his having used a pistol. That
wasn't his way at all. There has never been a charge of violence against
him before. I always took him for the good old-fashioned, sporting crook
who played the game with us and expected us to play the game with him.'

'Is it clear that it was Moakey who fired the shot?' asked Thorndyke.

'Well, no, I don't know that it is. But he'll have to stand the racket
unless he can prove that somebody else did it. And that won't be so very
easy, for even if he gives us the name of the other man--the small man--and
Miss Blake can identify him, still it will be difficult for Moakey to
prove that the other man fired the shot, and the other chap isn't likely
to be boastful about it.'

'No,' said Thorndyke, 'he will pretty certainly put it on to Moakey, But
between the two we may get at the truth as to what happened.'

'We will hope so,' said Miller, rising and picking up his hat. 'At any
rate, that is how the matter stands. I understand that Sir Lawrence wants
you to keep an eye on the case, but there's really no need. It isn't in
your line at all. We shall arrest Moakey and he will be committed for
trial. If he likes to make a statement we may get the other man, but in
any case there is nothing for you to do.'

For some minutes after the Superintendent's departure, Thorndyke sat
looking into the fire with an air of deep reflection. Presently he looked
up as if he had disposed of some question that he had been propounding to
himself and remarked: 'It's a curious affair, isn't it?'

'Very,' I agreed. 'It seems as if this man, Moakey, had thrown all
precaution to the winds. By the way, do you suppose those fingerprint
people ever make mistakes? They seem pretty cocksure.'

'They would be more than human if they never made a mistake,' Thorndyke
replied. 'But, on the other hand, the identification of a whole set of
fingerprints doesn't leave much room for error. You might get two prints
that were similar enough to admit of a mistake, but you would hardly get
two sets that could be mistaken for one another.'

'No, I suppose not. So the mystery remains unexplained.'

'It remains unexplained in any case,' said Thorndyke.

'How do you mean?' I asked. 'If they had made a mistake and these were
really the fingerprints of some unknown person, that person might be a
novice and there would be no mystery about his having taken no
precautions.'

'Yes, but that is not the mystery. The real mystery is the presence of a
third man who has left no other traces.'

'A third man!' I exclaimed. 'What evidence is there of the presence of a
third man?'

'It is very obvious,' replied Thorndyke. These fingerprints are not those
of the small man, because he wore gloves. And they are not the
fingerprints of the tall man.'

'How do you know that?' I asked.

Thorndyke rose, and opening a cabinet, took out the plaster cast of the
tall man's left hand, which he had made on the previous night, and the
pair of photographs.

'Now,' said he, 'look at the print of the left forefinger in the
photograph. You see that the pattern is quite clear and unbroken. Now
look at the cast of the forefinger. Do you see what I mean?'

'You mean that pit or dent in the bulb of the finger. But isn't that due
to an irregularity of the ground on which the finger was pressed?'

'No, it is the puckered scar of an old whitlow or deep wound of some
kind. It is quite characteristic. And the print of this finger would show
a blank white space in the middle of the pattern. So it is certain that
those fingerprints did not belong to either of these two men.'

'Then, really,' said I, 'the fact that these are Moakey's fingerprints
serves to explain this other mystery.'

'To some extent. But you see, Anstey, that it introduces a further
mystery. If there were three men in that room, or on the premises, how
comes it that there were only two sets of footprints?'

'Yes, that is rather extraordinary. Can you suggest any explanation?'

'The only explanation that occurs to me is that one of these men may have
let Moakey into the house by the front door, that he may have been in the
room when Miss Blake entered--he might, for instance, have been behind
the door--and have slipped out when she ran to the window. He could then
have to run into the drawing-room and waited until she rushed out of the
house, when it would be easy for him to slip out at the front door and
escape.'

'Yes,' I said dubiously, 'I suppose that is possible, but it doesn't
sound very probable.'

'It doesn't,' he agreed. 'But it is the only solution that I can think of
at the moment. Of course there must be some explanation, for there are
the facts. Inside the house are traces of three men. Outside are traces
of only two. Have you any suggestion to offer?'

I shook my head. 'It is beyond me, Thorndyke. Why didn't you ask Miller?'

'Because I am not proposing to take the police into my confidence until I
have evidence that they are prepared to do the same by me. They will
probably assume that the tall man was Moakey--he is about the same
height. The information that we obtain from the cast of that man's hand
is not, you must remember, in their possession.'

'No, I had forgotten that. And now I begin to appreciate my learned
senior's foresight in taking a permanent record of that handprint.'

'Yes,' said Thorndyke. 'A permanent record is invaluable. It allows of
reference at one's leisure and in connection with fresh evidence, as in
the present case. And, moreover, it allows of study under the most
favourable conditions. That scar on the finger was not noticeable in the
impression in the sand, especially by the imperfect light of the lamp.
But on the cast, which we can examine at our ease, by daylight if
necessary, it is plainly visible. And we have it here to compare with the
finger, if ever that finger should be forthcoming. I now make a rule of
securing a plaster cast of any object that I cannot retain in my
possession.'

Here, as if in illustration of this last statement, Polton entered the
room bearing a small tray lined with blotting paper, on which lay three
objects--a diminutive glass negative and two mascots. He laid the tray on
the table and invited us to inspect his works, tendering a watchmakers
eyeglass to assist the inspection.

Thorndyke picked up the two mascots and examined them separately through
the glass, then with a faint smile, but without remark, he passed the
tray to me. I stuck the glass in my eye and scrutinised first one and
then the other of the mascots, and finally looked up at Polton, who was
watching me with a smile that covered his face with wrinkles of
satisfaction.

'I suppose, Polton,' I said, 'You have some means of telling which is
which, but I'm hanged if I can see a particle of difference.'

'I can tell 'em by the feel, sir,' he replied 'but I took the precaution
to weigh the original in the chemical balance before I made the copy. I
think the colour matches pretty well.'

'It is a perfect reproduction, Polton,' said Thorndyke. 'If we were to
show it to Superintendent Miller he would want to take your fingerprints
right away. He would say that you were not a safe person to be at large.'

At this commendation Polton's countenance crinkled until he looked like a
species of human walnut, and when the photograph of the signature had
been examined and pronounced fit for the making of an enlargement, he
departed, chuckling audibly.

When he had gone, I picked up one of the mascots and again examined it
closely while Thorndyke made a similar inspection of its twin.

'Had you any definite purpose in your mind,' I asked 'when you instructed
Polton to make this indistinguishable copy?'

'No,' he replied. 'I thought it wise to preserve a record of the thing,
but, for my own information, a plain plaster cast would have answered
quite well. Still, as it would not take much more trouble to imitate the
colour and texture, I decided that there might be some advantage in
having a perfect replica. There are certain imaginable circumstances in
which it might be useful. I shall get Polton to make a cast of the
Echidna's vertebra, so that we may have the means of demonstrating the
nature of the object to others, if necessary; and by the way, we may as
well make the comparison now and confirm my opinion that the animal
really was an Echidna.'

He produced the little packet that Saltwood had given him, and laying the
little bones on the table, compared them carefully with the mascot.

'Yes,' he said at length, 'I was right. Mr Halliburton's treasure is the
third cervical vertebra of a young but full-grown Echidna.'

'How did you recognise this as an Echidna's vertebra?' I asked, recalling
Mr Robson's rather obscure exposition on the subject. 'Aren't neck
vertebrae a good deal alike in most animals?'

'In animals of the same class they are usually very much alike. But the
Echidna is a transitional form. Although it is a mammal, it has many
well-marked reptilian characters. This vertebra shows one of them. If you
look at those corner-pieces--the transverse processes--you will see that
they are separate from the rest of the bone, that they are joined to it
by a seam or suture. But in all other mammals, with a single exception,
the transverse processes are fused with the rest of the bone. There is no
separating line. That suture was the distinguishing feature which
attracted my attention.'

'And does the fact of its being an Echidna's bone suggest any particular
significance to your mind?'

'Well,' he replied, 'the Echidna is far from a common animal. And this
particular bone seems to have been worked on by some barbarian artist,
which suggests that it may have been originally a barbaric ornament or
charm or fetish, which again suggests personal connections and a
traceable history. You will notice that the two letters seem to have been
impressed on the ornament and have no connection with it, which suggests
that the bone was already covered with these decorations when it came
into the late owner's possession.'

I took up the glass and once more examined the mascot. The whole surface
of the little bone, on both sides, was covered with an intricate mass of
ornament consisting principally of scrolls or spirals, crude and barbaric
in design but very minutely and delicately executed. In the centre of the
solid part of the bone an extremely small 'o' had been indented on one
side and on the same spot on the reverse side an equally minute 'h'. And
through the glass I could see that the letters cut into the pattern,
whereas the hole for the suspension ring was part of the original work
and was incorporated into the design.

'I wonder why he used small letters for his initials instead of
capitals,' said I.

'For the reason, I imagine, that they were small letters. He wanted them
merely for identification, and no doubt wished them to be as
inconspicuous as possible. Any letters are a disfigurement when they are
not part of the design, and capitals would have been much worse than
small letters.'

'These seem to have been punched, on with printer's types.' I remarked.

'They have been punched, not cut, but not, I should say, with printer's
types. Type metal--even the hard variety which would be used for casting
these little "Pearl" or "Diamond" types--is comparatively soft, and the
harder varieties are brittle. It would scarcely be strong enough to bear
hammering into bone. I should say these letters were indented with steel
punches.'

'Well,' I said 'we have got a vast amount of entertainment out of Mr
Halliburton and his mascot. But it looks rather as if that were going to
be the end of it, for if Moakey is one of the robbers, we may take it
that the others are just professional crooks. And thereupon Mr
Halliburton recedes once more into the background. Isn't that the
position?'

'Apparently it is,' replied Thorndyke. 'But we shall see what happens at
the inquest. Possibly some further evidence may be forthcoming when the
witnesses give their accounts in detail. And possibly Moakey himself may
be able to throw some further light on the matter. They will probably
have him in custody within a day or two.'

'By the way,' I said, 'have you examined the hair that poor Drayton had
grasped in his hand?'

'Yes. There is nothing very characteristic about it. It is dark in colour
and the hairs are rather small in diameter. But there was one slightly
odd circumstance. Among the tuft of dark hairs there was one light
one--not white--a blonde hair. It had no root and no tip. It was just a
broken fragment. What do you make of that?'

'I don't know that I make anything of it. I understand that a man may
sometimes find a woman's hair sticking to his coat in the neighbourhood
of the shoulder or chest, though I have no personal experience of such
things. But if on the coat, why not on the head? My learned senior's
powerful constructive imagination might conceive circumstances in which
such a transfer of hair might occur. Or has he some more recondite
explanation?'

'There are other possible explanations,' Thorndyke replied. 'And as the
hour seems to preclude a return to Hampstead tonight, and seems to
suggest a temporary tenancy of Jervis's bedroom, I would recommend the
problem for my learned friend's consideration while awaiting the approach
of Morpheus or Hypnos, whichever deity he elects to patronize.'

This gentle hint, enforced by a glance at my watch, brought our
discussion to an end, and very shortly afterwards we betook ourselves to
our respective sleeping apartments.



CHAPTER SEVEN - THE VANISHED HEIRLOOM


The tragic events at 'The Rowans' had excited a considerable amount of
public interest, and naturally that interest was manifested in a
specially intense form by the residents in the locality. I realised this
when, in obedience to the summons which had been left at my lodgings, I
made my way to the premises adjoining the High Street in which the
inquest was to be held. As I approached the building I observed that
quite a considerable crowd had gathered round the doors awaiting their
opening, and noticed with some surprise the proportion of well-dressed
women composing it.

Observing that the crowd contained no one whom I knew, I began to suspect
that there was some other entrance reserved for authorised visitors, and
was just looking round in search of it when the doors were opened and the
crowd began to surge in; and at that moment I saw Miss Blake approaching.
I waited for her to arrive, and when we had exchanged greetings I
proceeded to pilot her through the crowd, which passed in with increasing
slowness, suggesting that the accommodation was already being somewhat
taxed.

I was not the only person who observed the symptoms of a 'full house.' A
woman whom I had already noticed making her way through the throng with
more skill and energy than politeness, came abreast of me just as I had
struggled to the door and made a determined effort to squeeze past.
Perhaps if she had been a different type of woman I might have accepted
the customary masculine defeat, but her bad manners, combined with her
unprepossessing appearance, banished any scruples of chivalry. She was a
kind of woman that I dislike most cordially; loudly dressed, flashy,
scented like a civet cat; with glaring golden hair--manifestly peroxided,
as was evident by her dark eyebrows--pencilled eyelids, and a coat of
powder that stared even through her spotted veil. My gorge rose at her,
and as she stuck her elbow in my ribs and made a final burst to get in
before me, I maintained a stolid resistance.

'You must excuse me,' I said, 'but I am a witness, and so is this lady.'

She cast a quick glance at me, and from me to Miss Blake; then--with a
bad enough grace and without replying--she withdrew to let us pass, and
ostentatiously turned her back on us.

The room was already crowded, but that was no concern of ours. We were
present, and when our names should be called, the coroner's officer would
do all that was necessary.

'I suppose,' said Miss Blake, 'we ought to have come in by another door.
I see Sir Lawrence and Mrs Benham are sitting by the table; and isn't
that Dr Thorndyke next to Sir Lawrence?'

'Yes,' I replied. 'I don't think he has been summoned, but, of course, he
would be here to watch the case. I see Inspector Badger, too. I wonder if
he is going to give evidence. Ah! You were right. There is another door.
Here come the coroner and the jury. They will probably call you first as
you are the principal witness, unless they begin with the medical
evidence or Sir Lawrence. I see Dr Nichols has just come in.'

As the coroner and the jury took their seats at the table, the loud hum
of conversation died away and an air of silent expectancy settled on the
closely-packed audience. The coroner looked over a sheaf of type-written
papers, and then opened the proceedings with a short address to the jury
in which he recited the general facts of the case.

'And now, gentlemen,' he said in conclusion, 'we will proceed to take the
evidence, and we had better begin with that of the medical witness.'

Hereupon Dr Nichols was called, and having been sworn, described the
circumstances under which he was summoned to 'The Rowans' on the night of
the 20th of September, and the result of his subsequent examination of
the body of the deceased. 'The cause of death,' he stated, 'was a
bullet-wound of the chest. The bullet entered on the right side between
the third and fourth ribs, and passed completely through the chest,
emerging on the left side of the back between the fourth and fifth ribs.
In its passage it perforated the aorta--the greater central artery--and
this injury might have produced almost instantaneous death.'

'Could the wound have been self-inflicted?' the coroner asked.

'Under the circumstances, it could not, for although death was
practically instantaneous, no weapon was discovered. If the injury had
been self-inflicted, the weapon would have been found either grasped in
the hand or lying by the body.'

'Was the weapon fired at close quarters?'

'Apparently not. At any rate there was no singeing of the clothes or any
other sign indicating a very close range.'

That was the sum of Dr Nichols' evidence, and on its conclusion the local
inspector was called. His evidence, however, was of merely formal
character, setting forth the time at which he received the alarm call
from Mrs Benham and the conditions existing when he arrived. When it was
finished there was a short pause. Then the next witness was called. This
was Sir Lawrence Drayton, who, after giving evidence as to the identity
of the deceased, answered a few questions respecting the collection and
his brother's manner of life, and the articles which had been stolen.

'The report, then,' said the coroner, 'that this was a collection of
valuable jewellery was erroneous?'

'Quite erroneous. Deceased never desired, nor could he afford, to
accumulate things of great intrinsic value.'

'Do you know if many strangers came to see the collection?'

'Very few. In fact I never heard of any excepting those who came after an
article on the collection had appeared in the Connoisseur.'

'Do you know how many came then?'

'There was a small party of Americans who came by appointment and were
introduced by one of the staff of the South Kensington Museum. And there
was a Mr Halliburton who wrote from some hotel for an appointment. All I
know about him is that he was apparently not specially interested in
anything in the collection excepting the pieces that were illustrated in
the magazine. I believe he wanted to buy one of those, but I don't
remember which it was.'

That was the substance of Drayton's evidence, and when he had returned to
his seat, the next witness was called.

'Winifred Blake.'

Miss Blake rose, and having made her way to the table, took the oath and
proceeded to give her evidence. After one or two preliminary questions,
the coroner allowed her to make her statement without interruption, while
the jury and the audience listened with absorbed interest to her clear
and vivid account of the events connected with the crime. When she had
finished her narration--which was substantially the same as that which I
had heard from her on the night of the tragedy--the coroner thanked her
for the very lucid manner in which she had given her evidence and then
proceeded to enlarge upon one or two points relating to the possible
antecedents of the tragedy.

'You have mentioned, Miss Blake, that you were led to communicate with
deceased by a certain article which appeared in the Connoisseur. Did that
article give you the impression that the collection described was an
important collection of valuable jewellery?'

'No. The article explicitly stated that the chief value of the pieces was
in their history and associations.'

'Are you an expert or connoisseur in jewellery?'

'No. As an artist I am, of course, interested in goldsmith's and
jewellers work, but I have no special knowledge of it. My interest in
this collection was purely personal. I wished to examine one of the
pieces that was illustrated.'

'Would you tell us exactly what you mean by a personal interest?'

'The Connoisseur article was illustrated with two photographs, one of a
locket and the other of a pendant. The pendant appeared to me to resemble
one which was an heirloom in my own family and which disappeared about a
hundred and fifty years ago and has never been seen since. I wanted to
examine that pendant and see if it really was the missing jewel.'

'Was the missing pendant of any considerable value?'

'No. It was a small, plain gold pendant set with a single cat's eye, and
the pendant shown in the photograph appeared to answer the description
exactly so far as I could judge. Its actual value would be quite small.'

'You say that the actual, or intrinsic, value of this jewel would be
trifling. Had it, so far as you know, any special value?'

'Yes. It appears to have been greatly prized in the family, and I believe
a good many efforts have been made to trace it. There was a tradition, or
superstition, connected with it which gave it its value to members of the
family.'

'Can you tell us what was the nature of that tradition?'

'It connected the possession of the jewel with the succession to the
estates. The custom had been for the head of the family to wear the
jewel, usually under the clothing, and the belief was that so long as he
wore the jewel, or at any rate had it in his possession, the estates
would remain in the possession of the branch of the family to which he
belonged; but if the jewel passed into the possession of a member of some
other branch of the family, then the estates would also pass into the
possession of that branch.'

The coroner smiled. 'Your ancestors,' he remarked, 'appear to have taken
small account of property law. But you say that efforts have been made to
trace this jewel and that a good deal of value was set on it. Now, do you
suppose that this tradition was taken at all seriously by any of the
members of your family?'

'I cannot say very positively, but I should suppose that any one who
might have a claim in the event of the failure of the existing line,
would be glad to have the jewel in his possession.'

'Is there, so far as you know, any probability of a change in the
succession to this property?'

'I believe that the present tenant is unmarried and that if he should die
there would be several claimants from other branches of the family.'

'And then,' said the coroner with a smile, 'the one who possessed the
cat's eye pendant would be the successful claimant. Is that the
position?'

'It is possible that some of them entertain that belief.'

'Have you any expectations yourself?'

'Personally I have not. But my brother Percival is, properly speaking,
the direct heir to this estate.'

'Then why is he not in possession? And what do you mean exactly by the
"direct heir"?'

'I mean that he is the direct descendant of the head of the senior branch
of the family. Our ancestor disappeared at the same time as the jewel--he
took it with him, in fact. The reason that my brother is not in
possession is that we cannot prove the legality of our ancestor's
marriage. But it is always possible that the documents may be
discovered--they are known to exist; and then, if a change in the
succession should occur, my brother's claim would certainly take
precedence of the others.'

'This is very interesting,' said the coroner, 'and not without importance
to this inquiry. Now tell us, Miss Blake, would you yourself attach any
significance to the possession of this jewel?'

Miss Blake coloured slightly as she replied: 'I don't suppose it would
affect the succession to the property, but I should like to know that the
jewel was in my brother's possession.'

'In case there might be some truth in the belief, h'm? Well, it's not
unnatural. And now, to return for a moment to the man whom you tried so
pluckily to detain. You have given us a very clear description of him. Do
you think you would be able to recognise him?'

'I feel no doubt that I could. As an artist with some experience as a
portrait painter I have been accustomed to study faces closely and
quickly and to remember them. I can form quite a clear mental picture of
this man's face.'

'Do you think you could make. I drawing of it from memory?'

'I don't think my drawing would be reliable for identification. It is
principally the man's expression that I remember so clearly. I might be
wrong as to the details of the features, but if I were to see the man
again I am sure I should know him.'

'I hope you will have an opportunity,' said the coroner. Then, turning to
the jury, he asked: 'Do you wish to ask this witness any questions,
gentlemen?' and on receiving a negative reply, he thanked Miss Blake and
dismissed her with a bow.

My own evidence was taken next, but I need not repeat it since it was
concerned only with those experiences which I have already related in
detail. I was followed by Mrs Benham, who, like the preceding witnesses,
was allowed to begin with a statement describing her experiences.

'How did it happen,' the coroner asked when she had finished her
statement, 'that there was no one in the house when the thieves broke
in?'

'I had to take a message for Mr Drayton to a gentleman who lives at North
End. It is quite a short distance, but I was detained there more than a
quarter of an hour.'

'Was the house often left?'

'No, very seldom. During the day I had a maid to help me. She went home
at six, and after that I hardly ever went out.'

'Were you alone in the house in the evenings when Mr Drayton was at the
club?'

'Yes. From about seven to between half-past nine and ten. Mr Drayton used
to lock the museum and take the key with him.'

'Did many persons know that deceased was away from the house every
evening?'

'A good many must have known, as he was a regular chess-player. And
anybody who cared to know could have seen him go out and come back.'

'On the night of the murder did he go out at his usual time?'

'Yes, a little after seven. But, unfortunately, he came back nearly two
hours earlier than usual. That was the cause of the disaster.'

'Exactly. And now, Mrs Benham, I want you to tell us all you know about
the visitors who came to see the collection after the article had
appeared in the Connoisseur. There were some Americans, I believe?'

'Yes. A small party--four or five--who came together in a large car. They
sent a letter of introduction, and I think Mr Drayton knew pretty well
who they were. Then about a week later Mr Halliburton wrote from the
Baltic Hotel to ask if he might look over the collection, and naming a
particular day--the sixteenth of this month--and Mr Drayton made the
appointment, although it was very inconvenient.'

'Was Mr Halliburton known to deceased?'

'No, he was a complete stranger.'

'And did he come and inspect the collection?'

'Yes; he came, and Mr Drayton spent a long time with him showing him all
the things and telling him all about them. I remember it very well
because Mr Drayton was so very vexed that he should have put himself to
so much inconvenience for nothing.'

'Why "for nothing"?' asked the coroner.

'He said that Mr Halliburton didn't seem to know anything about jewellery
nor to care about any of the things but the two that had been shown in
the photographs. He seemed to have come from mere idle curiosity. And
then he rather offended Mr Drayton by offering to buy one of the pieces.
He said that he wanted to give it for a wedding present.'

'Do you know which piece it was that he wanted to buy?'

'The pendant. The other piece--the locket--didn't seem to interest him at
all.'

'Did you see Mr Halliburton?'

'I only saw his back as he went out. Mr Drayton let him in and took him
to the museum. I could see that he was rather a big man, but I couldn't
see what he was like.'

'And are these the only strangers that have been to the house lately?'

'Yes; the only ones for quite a long time.'

The coroner reflected for a few moments, then, as the jury had no
questions to ask, he thanked the witness and dismissed her.

The next witness was Inspector Badger, and a very cautious witness he
was, and like his namesake, very unwilling to be drawn. To me, who knew
pretty well what information he held, his evasive manoeuvres and his
portentous secrecy were decidedly amusing, and the foxy glances that he
occasionally cast in Thorndyke's direction made me suspect that he was
unaware of Superintendent Miller's visit to our chambers. He began by
setting forth that, in consequence of a telephone message from the local
police, he proceeded on the evening of the twentieth instant to 'The
Rowans' to examine the premises and obtain particulars of the crime. He
had obtained a rough list of the stolen property from Sir Lawrence
Drayton. It included the pendant and the locket which had been
illustrated in the article referred to.

'Should you say there was any evidence of selection as to the articles
stolen?' the coroner asked.

'No. Only two drawers had been opened, and they were the two upper ones.
The top drawer contained nothing of any value, and I infer that the
thieves had only just got the second drawer open when they were
disturbed.'

'Did you ascertain how many men were on the premises?'

'There were two men. We found their footprints in the grounds, and
moreover, both of them were seen. And certain other traces were found.'

'Dr Nichols has mentioned that some hair was found grasped in the hand of
deceased. Has that been examined?'

'I believe it has, but hair isn't much use until you have got the man to
compare it with.'

'I suppose not. And with regard to the other traces. What were they?'

The inspector pursed up his lips and assumed a portentous expression.

'I hope, sir,' said he, 'that you will not press that question. It is not
desirable in the interests of justice that the information that is in our
possession should become public property.'

'I quite agree with you,' said the coroner. 'But may we take it that you
have some clue to the identity of these two men?'

'We have several very promising clues,' the inspector replied with some
disregard, I suspected, for the exact wording of the oath that he had
just taken.

'Well,' said the coroner, 'that is all that really concerns us'; and I
could not but reflect that it was all that really concerned Mr Joseph
Hedges, alias Moakey, and that the inspector's secrecy was somewhat
pointless when the cat had been let out of the bag to this extent. 'I
suppose,' he continued, 'it would be indiscreet to ask if any information
is available about the Mr Halliburton whose name has been mentioned.'

'I should rather not make any detailed statement on the subject,' replied
Badger, 'but I may say that our information is of a very definite kind
and points very clearly in a particular direction.'

'That is very satisfactory,' said the coroner. 'This is a peculiarly
atrocious crime, and I am sure that all law-abiding persons will be glad
to hear that there is a good prospect of the wrongdoers being brought to
justice. And I think if you have nothing more to tell us, Inspector, that
we need not trouble you any further.' He paused, and as Badger resumed
his seat, he took a final glance over his notes; then, turning to the
jury, he said: 'You have now, gentlemen, heard all the evidence,
excepting those details which the police have very properly reserved and
which really do not concern us. For I may remind you that this is not a
criminal court. It is not our object to fix the guilt on any particular
persons but to ascertain how this poor gentlemen met with his most
deplorable death; and I am sure that the evidence which you have heard
will be sufficient to enable you, without difficulty, to arrive at a
verdict.'

On the conclusion of the coroner's address, the jury rapidly conferred
for a few moments; then the foreman rose and announced that they had
agreed unanimously on a verdict of wilful murder committed by some person
or persons unknown, and they desired to express their deep sympathy with
the brother of the deceased, Sir Lawrence Drayton; and when the latter
had briefly thanked the jury, through the coroner, the proceedings
terminated and the court rose.

As the audience were slowly filing out, Sir Lawrence approached Miss
Blake, and having shaken hands cordially and inquired as to her
convalescence, said: 'That was a very remarkable story that you told in
your evidence; I mean the simultaneous disappearance of your ancestor and
this curious heirloom. As a Chancery barrister, unusual circumstances
affecting the devolution of landed property naturally interest me. In the
court in which I practise one sees, from time to time, some very odd
turns of the wheel of Fortune. May I ask if any claim has ever been
advanced by your branch of the family?'

'Yes. My father began some proceedings soon after my brother was born,
but his counsel advised him not to go on with the case. He considered
that without documentary evidence of my ancestor's marriage, it was
useless to take the case into court.'

'Probably he was right,' said Drayton. 'Still, as a matter of
professional interest--to say nothing of the interest that one naturally
feels in the welfare of one's friends--I should like to know more about
this quaint piece of family history. What do you think, Anstey?'

'I think it would be interesting to know just at what point the evidence
of the relationship breaks off, and how large the gap is.'

'Precisely,' said Drayton. 'And one would like to know how the other
parties are placed. What, for instance, would be the position if the
present tenant were to die without issue, who are the heirs, and so on.'

'If it would interest you,' said Miss Blake, 'I could give you fairly
full particulars of all that is known. My grandfather, who was a lawyer,
wrote out an abstract for the guidance of his descendants; quite a full
and very clear narrative. I could let you have that or a copy of it, if I
didn't feel ashamed to take up your time with it.'

'Let me have the copy,' said Drayton. 'I don't suppose anything will come
of it from your point of view, but it strikes me as an interesting case
which is at least worth elucidating. Do you know Dr Thorndyke?'

'We know one another by repute,' said Thorndyke. 'Miss Blake used to
board with Polton's sister. You were speaking of the curious
circumstances that Miss Blake mentioned in reference to the cat's eye
pendant.'

'Yes,' said Drayton. 'I was saying that it would be worth while to get
the facts of the case sorted out.'

'I quite agree with you,' said Thorndyke. 'The same idea had occurred to
me when Miss Blake was giving her evidence. Do I understand that there
are documents available?'

'I have a full resume of the facts relating to the change in the
succession,' said Miss Blake, 'and a copy which I am going to hand to Sir
Lawrence.'

'Then,' said Thorndyke, 'I shall crave your kind permission to look
through that copy. I am not much of an authority on property law, but--'

'Nihil quod tetigit non ornavit,' I murmured, quoting Johnson's famous
epitaph on the versatile 'Goldie.'

'Quite right, Anstey,' Drayton agreed warmly. 'All knowledge is
Thorndyke's province. Then you will let me have that copy at your
convenience, Miss Blake?'

'Thank you, yes, Sir Lawrence,' she replied. 'You shall have it by
tomorrow. Oh, and there is something else that I have to give you, and I
may as well give it to you now. Did Mr Anstey tell you that I had found
the missing locket? I have brought it tied round my neck for safety. Has
any one got a knife?' As she spoke she unfastened the top button of her
dress and drew out the little gold volume which was attached to a silken
cord.

'Don't cut the cord,' said Drayton. 'I want you to keep the locket as a
souvenir of my poor brother. Now don't raise objections. Anstey has told
me that the little bauble has found favour in your eyes, and I very much
wish you to have it. It was a great favourite of my brother's. He used to
call it "the little Sphinx" because it always seemed to be propounding a
riddle; and it will be a great satisfaction to me to feel that it has
passed into friendly and sympathetic hands instead of going to a museum
with the other things.'

'It is exceedingly kind of you, Sir Lawrence,' she began, but he
interrupted: 'It is nothing of the kind. I am doing myself a kindness in
finding a good home for poor Andrew's little favourite. Are you going by
train or tram?'

'I shall wait for the tram,' she replied.

'Then we part here. Dr Thorndyke and I are taking the train to Broad
Street. Goodbye! Don't forget to send me that copy of the documents.'

The two men swung off down the road to the station, and as a tram
appeared in the offing, a resolution which had been forming in my mind
took definite shape.

'I don't see,' said I, 'why I should be left out in the cold in regard to
this family romance of yours. Why shouldn't I come and collect the copy
to deliver to Sir Lawrence and have a surreptitious read at it myself?'

'It would be very nice of you if you could spare the time,' she replied.
'I will even offer special inducements. I will give you some tea, which
you must be wanting by this time, I should think, and I will show you not
only the copy but the original documents. One of them is quite curious.'

'That settles it then,' said I. 'Tea and documents, combined with your
society and that of your ingenious brother, form what the theatrical
people would call a galaxy of attractions. Here is our tram. Do we go
inside or outside?'

'Oh, outside, please. There is quite a crowd waiting.'

I was relieved at this decision, for I was hankering for a smoke; and as
soon as we had taken our places in a front seat on the roof, I began
secretly to feel in the pocket where the friendly pipe reposed and to
debate within myself whether I might crave permission to bring it forth.
At length the tobacco-hunger conquered my scruples and I ventured to make
the request.

'Oh, of course,' she replied. 'Do smoke. I love the smell of tobacco,
especially from a pipe.'

Thus encouraged, I joyfully produced the calumet and felt in my pocket
for my pouch. And then came a dreadful disappointment. The pouch was
there, sure enough, but its lean sides announced the hideous fact that it
was empty. There were not even a few grains wherewith to stave off
imminent starvation.

'How provoking!' my companion exclaimed tragically. 'I am sorry. But you
shan't be deprived for long. You must get down at a tobacconist's and
restock your pouch, and then after tea you shall smoke your pipe while I
show you the documents, as you call them.'

'Then I am comforted,' said I. 'The galaxy of attractions has received a
further addition.' Resignedly I put away the pipe and pouch, and
reverting to a question that had occurred to me while she was giving her
evidence, I said: 'There was one statement of yours that I did not quite
follow. It was with regard to the man whom you were trying to hold. You
said that you were quite confident that you would recognise him and that
you could call up quite a clear and vivid mental picture of his face, but
yet you thought that, if you were to draw a memory portrait of him, that
portrait might be misleading. How could that be? You would know whether
your portrait was like your recollection of the man, and if it was,
surely it would be like the man himself?'

'I suppose it would,' she replied thoughtfully. 'But there might be some
false details which wouldn't matter to me but which might mislead others
who might take those details for the essential characters.'

'But if the details were wrong, wouldn't that destroy the likeness?'

'Not necessarily, I think. Of course, a likeness is ultimately dependent
on the features, particularly on their proportion and the spaces between
them. But you must have noticed that when children and beginners draw
portraits, although they produce the most frightful caricatures--all
wrong and all out of drawing--yet those portraits are often unmistakable
likenesses.'

'Yes, I have noticed that. But don't you think the likeness is probably
due to the caricature? To the exaggeration of some one or two
characteristic peculiarities?'

'Very likely But that rather bears out what I said. For those
caricatures, though easily recognisable, are mostly false; and if one of
them got into the hands of a stranger who had never seen the subject of
the portrait, for purposes of identification, he would as probably as not
look for some one having those characteristics which had been quite
falsely represented.'

'Yes; and then he would be looking for the wrong kind of person
altogether.'

'Exactly. And then my drawing would probably be far from a correct
representation of my recollection of the face. It isn't as if one could
take a photograph of a mental image. So I am afraid that the idea of a
memory drawing for the purpose of identification must be abandoned.
Besides, it would be of no use unless we could get hold of the man.'

'No. But that is not impossible. The police have apparently identified
one of the men and expect to have him in custody at any moment. He may
give information as to the other, but even if he does not, the police may
be able to find out who his associates were, and in that case a memory
drawing which was far from accurate might help them to pick out the
particular man.'

'That is possible,' she agreed. 'But then if the police could get hold of
this man's associates and let me see them, I could pick out the
particular man with certainty and without any drawing at all. Isn't that
a tobacconist's shop that we are approaching?'

'It is. I think I will get off and make my purchase and then come along
to the studio.'

'Do,' she said, 'and I will run on ahead and see that the preparations
for tea are started.'

I ran down the steps and dropped off the tram without stopping it, but by
this time we had passed the shop by some little distance and I had to
walk back. I secured the new supply, and having stuffed it into my pouch,
came out of the shop just in time to see the tram stop nearly a quarter
of a mile ahead and Miss Blake get off, followed by a couple of other
passengers, and walk quickly into Jacob Street. I strode forward at a
brisk pace in the same direction, but when I reached the corner of the
street she had already disappeared. I was just about to cross to the side
on which the studio was situated when my attention was attracted by a
woman who was walking slowly up the street on my side. At the first
glance I was struck by something familiar in her appearance and a second
glance confirmed the impression. She was smartly--and something more than
smartly--dressed, and in particular I noted a rather large, elaborate, and
gaudy hat. In short, she was very singularly like the woman who had
jostled me in the doorway of the hall in which the inquest was held.

I slowed down to avoid overtaking her, and as I did so she crossed the
road and walked straight up to the gate of the studio. For an instant I
thought she was going to ring the bell, for after a glance at the number
on the gate she turned to the side and read the little nameplate, leaning
forward and putting her face close to it as if she were near-sighted. At
that moment the wicket opened and Master Percy stepped out on to the
threshold; whereupon the woman, after one swift, intense glance at the
boy, turned away and walked quickly up the street. I was half disposed to
follow her and confirm my suspicion as to her identity; but Master Percy
had already observed me, and it seemed, perhaps, more expedient to get
out of sight myself than to reveal my presence in attempting to verify a
suspicion of which I had practically no doubt, and which, even if
confirmed, had no obvious significance. Accordingly I crossed the road,
and having greeted my host, was by him conducted down the passage to the
studio.



CHAPTER EIGHT - A JACOBITE ROMANCE


In the minds of many of us, including myself, there appears to be a
natural association between the ideas of tea and tobacco. Whether it is
that both substances are exotic products, adopted from alien races, or
that each is connected with a confirmed and accepted drug habit, I am not
quite clear. But there seems to be no doubt that the association exists
and that the realisation of the one idea begets an imperative impulse to
realise the other. In conformity with which natural law, when the
tea-things had been, by the joint efforts of Miss Blake and her brother,
removed to the curtained repository--where also dwelt a gas ring and a
kettle--I proceeded complacently to bring forth my pipe and the bulging
tobacco-pouch and to transfer some of the contents of the latter to the
former.

'I am glad to see you smoking,' said Miss Blake as the first cloud of
incense ascended. 'It gives me the feeling that you are provided with an
antidote to the documents. I shall have less compunction about the
reading.'

'You think that the "tuneless pipe" is similar to the tuneful one in its
effects on the "savage breast." But I don't want any antidote. I am all
agog to hear your romance of a cat's eye, that is, if you are going to
read out the documents.'

'I thought I would read the copy aloud and get you to check it by the
originals. Then you can assure Sir Lawrence that it is a true copy.'

'Yes. I think that is quite a good plan. It is always well to have a copy
checked and certified correct.'

'Then I will get the books and we will begin at once. Do you want to hear
the reading, Percy, or are you going on with your building?'

'I should like to come and listen, if you don't mind, Winnie,' he
replied; and as his sister unlocked the cabinet under the window, he
seated himself on a chair by the now vacant table. Miss Blake took from
the cabinet three books, one of which--an ordinary school
exercise-book--she placed on the table by her chair.

'That,' she said, 'is the copy of both originals. This'--handing to me a
little leather-covered book, the pages of which were filled with small,
clearly-written, though faded, handwriting--'is the abstract of which I
spoke. This other little book is the fragmentary original which is
referred to in the abstract. If you are ready I will begin. We will take
the abstract first.'

I provided myself with a pencil with which to mark any errors, and having
opened the little book announced that I was ready.

'The abstract,' said she, 'was written in 1821, and reads as follows:

'"A SHORT HISTORY OF THE BLAKES OF BEAUCHAMP BLAKE NEAR WENDOVER IN THE
COUNTY OF BUCKINGHAMSHIRE, FROM THE YEAR OF OUR LORD 1708."

'"This history has been written by me for the purpose of preserving a
record of certain events for the information of my descendants, to whom a
knowledge of those events may prove of great importance; and its writing
has become necessary by the circumstance that, whereas the only existing
written record has been reduced by Time and ill-usage to a collection of
disconnected fragments, the traditions passed on orally from generation
to generation become year by year more indistinct and unreliable.

'"I shall begin with the year 1708, at which time the estate of Beauchamp
Blake was held by Harold Blake. In this year was born Percival Blake, the
only son of Harold aforesaid. Seven years later occurred a rising in
favour of the Royal House of the Stuarts, in which act of rebellion the
said Harold Blake was suspected (but never accused) of having taken part.
In the year 1743, Harold Blake died and his only son, Percival, succeeded
to the property.

'"In or about the year 1742, Percival Blake married a lady named Judith
Weston (or Western). For some unknown reason this marriage took place
secretly, and was, for a time at least, kept secret. Possibly the
marriage would not have been acceptable to Percival's father, or the lady
may have been a Papist. This latter seems the more probable, inasmuch as
the marriage was solemnised, not at the church of St Margaret at
Beauchamp Blake, but at a little church in London near to Aldgate, called
St Peter by the Shambles, the rector of which, the Reverend Stephen
Rumbold, an intimate friend of Percival's, became subsequently not only a
Papist but a Jesuit. In the next year, 1743, a son was born and was
christened James. No entry of this birth appears in the registers of St
Margaret's, so it is probable that it was registered at the London
church. Unfortunately, this register is incomplete. Several pages have
been torn out, and as these missing pages belong to the years 1742 and
1743, it is to be presumed that they contained the records of the
marriage and the birth.

'"About the year 1725 Percival came to London to study medicine; and
about 1729 or 1730 he completed his studies and took his degree at
Cambridge, of which University he was already a Bachelor of Arts. From
this time onwards he appears to have practised in London as a physician,
and it was probably at this period that he made the acquaintance of
Judith Western and Stephen Rumbold. Even after the death of his father
and his own succession to the property, he continued to practise his
profession, making only occasional visits to his estate in
Buckinghamshire.

'"Like his father, Percival Blake was an ardent supporter of the
Stuarts, and it is believed that he took an active part in the various
Jacobite plots that were heard of about this time; and when, in 1745, the
great rising took place, Percival was one of those who hastened to join
the forces of the young Pretender, a disastrous act, to which all the
subsequent misfortunes of the family are due.

'"On the collapse of the Jacobite cause, Percival took immediate
measures to avert the consequences of his ill-judged action from his own
family; and in these he displayed a degree of foresight that might well
have been exhibited earlier. From Scotland he made his way to Beauchamp
Blake and there, in one of the numerous hiding-places of the old mansion,
concealed certain important documents connected with the property. It is
not quite clear what these documents were. Among them appear to have been
some of the title-deeds, and there is no doubt that they included
documents proving the validity of his marriage with Judith and the
legitimacy of his son James. Meanwhile, he had sent his wife and child,
with a servant named Jenifer Gray, to Hamburg, where they were to wait
until he joined them. He himself made his way to a port on the East
Coast, believed to have been King's Lynn, where he embarked, under a
false name, on a small vessel bound for Hamburg; but while he was waiting
for the vessel to sail, he circulated a very circumstantial account of
his own death by drowning while attempting to escape in an open boat.

'"This was at once a fortunate and unfortunate act; fortunate inasmuch as
it completely achieved his purpose of preventing the confiscation of the
property; unfortunate inasmuch as it effectually shut out his own
descendants from the succession. On the report of his death (unmarried,
as was believed, and so without issue) a distant cousin, of
unquestionable loyalty to the reigning house, took possession of the
estate without opposition and without any suggestion of confiscation.

'"One thing only, appertaining to the inheritance, Percival took with
him. Among the family heirlooms was a jewel consisting of a small pendant
set with a single cymophane (vulgarly known as a cat's eye) and bearing
an inscription, of which the actual words are unknown, but of which the
purport was that whosoever should possess the jewel should also possess
the Blake estate; a foolish statement that seems to have been generally
believed in the family and to which Percival evidently attached
incredible weight. For not only did he take the jewel with him but, as
will presently appear, he made careful provision for its disposal.

'"From this time onward the history becomes more and more vague. It seems
that Percival joined his wife and child at Hamburg, and thereafter
travelled about Germany, plying his profession as a physician. But soon
he was overtaken by a terrible misfortune. It appears that a robbery had
been committed by a woman who was said to be a foreigner, and suspicion
fell upon Judith. She was arrested, and on false evidence, convicted and
sent, as a punishment, to labour in the mines somewhere in the Harz
Mountains. Percival made unceasing efforts to obtain her release, but it
was three years before his efforts were crowned with success. But then,
alas, it was too late. The poor lady came back to him aged by privation
and broken by long-standing sickness, only to linger on a few months and
then to die in his arms. On her release he carried her away to France,
and there, at Paris, about the year 1751, she passed away and is believed
to have been buried in the cemetery of Pere Lachaise.

'"The death of his wife, to whom he seems to have been devotedly
attached, left Percival a broken man; and about eighteen months later,
he himself died, and is believed to have been buried beside Judith. But
in these sad months he occupied himself in making provision for the
recovery of the family inheritance by his posterity when circumstances
should have become more favourable. To this end he wrote a summary of the
events connected with and following the Jacobite rising and had it sewn
into a little illustrated Book of Hours, which, together with the
cymophane jewel, he gave into the keeping of Jenifer Gray, to be by her
given to the child James when he should be old enough to be trusted with
them. The exact contents of the little book we can only surmise from the
fragments that remain, but they seem to have been a short account of his
own actions and vicissitudes, and no doubt gave at least a clue to the
place in which the documents were hidden. Nor can we tell what the exact
form of the jewel was or the nature of the inscription, for Percival's
references to the latter as 'a guide' to his descendants are not clearly
understandable. At any rate, the jewel has disappeared and the written
record is reduced to a few fragments. Jenifer Gray (who seems to have
been an illiterate and foolish woman) apparently gave the little book to
the child to play with, for the few leaves that remain are covered with
childish scrawls; and she may have sold the jewel to buy the necessaries
of life, for she and the boy were evidently but poorly provided for.

'"On reaching the age of fourteen, James was apprenticed to a
cabinetmaker in Paris and apparently became very skilful workman. When he
was out of his time (Jenifer Gray having died in the meantime) he came to
England and settled in London, where, in time, he established an
excellent business.

'"Into this his son William (my father), was taken, first as an
apprentice, then as partner and finally as principal. By my father the
prosperity of the house was so well maintained that he was able to
article me to an attorney, to whom I am chief clerk at this time of
writing.

'"This record, together with what remains of Percival Blake's
manuscript, will, I trust, be preserved by my descendants in the hope
that it may be the instrument by which Providence may hereafter reinstate
them in the inheritance of their forefathers.

'"JOHN BLAKE.

'"16 SYMOND'S INN, LONDON,

'"20th June 1821."'

As she finished reading, Miss Blake let the book fall into her lap and
looked at me as if inviting criticism. I closed the little original, and
laying it on the table, remarked: 'A very singular and romantic history,
and a very valuable record. The detailed narrative presents a much more
convincing case than one would have expected from the bare statement that
you gave in your evidence. Your great-grandfather was a wise man to
commit the facts to writing while the memory of the events was
comparatively recent. How much is there left of Percival's manuscript?'

'Very little, I am sorry to say,' she replied, picking up the remaining
volume and handing it to me; 'but I have made a copy of these fragments,
too. It follows the copy of John Blake's abstract, and I will read it out
to you if you will check it by the original.'

I turned the little book over in my hand and examined it curiously. It
was a tiny volume, bound in gold-tooled calf, now rusty and worn and
badly broken at the joints. The title-page showed it to be a Book of
Hours--Horae Beatae Mariae Virginis--printed at Antwerp by Bakhasar Moretus
and dated 1634, and on turning over the leaves I perceived that it was
illustrated with a number of quaint but decorative woodcuts. The inside
of the cover seemed to have been used as a sort of unofficial birth
register. At the top, in very faded writing, was inscribed 'Judith
Weston,' and underneath a succession of names beginning with 'James, son
of Percival and Judith Blake, born 3 April 1743,' and ending with
Winifred and Percival, the daughter and son of Peter and Agnes Blake.
Between the cover and the title-page a number of fly-leaves of very thin
paper had been stitched in, and those that remained were covered with
minute writing of a pale, ghostly brown, largely defaced by spots,
smears, scribblings and childish drawings. But most of them had
disappeared, and the few that were left hung insecurely to the loosened
stitches.

When I had completed my inspection, I opened the book at the first
fly-leaf, and adjusting the reading-glass which Miss Blake had placed on
the table, announced that I was ready; whereupon she resumed her reading.

'The first page reads: "...to my cousin Leonard, who, as the heir-at-law,
would, I knew, be watching the course of events. Indeed, I doubt not that
if he had known of my marriage, he would have used his influence at the
Court to oust me. But the news of my death I felt sure would bring him
forward at once, and his loyalty to the German King would make him secure
to the succession. So he and his brood should keep the nest warm until
the clouds had passed and the present troubles should be forgotten. Only
to my own posterity, the true heirs, must be provided a key wherewith to
re-enter on their inheritance, and to this end I searched the muniment
chest and took therefrom all the--"'

This was the end of the page, and as she broke off. Miss Blake looked up.

'Isn't it exasperating?' said she. 'There seems to be only one page
missing in this place, but it is the one that contains the vital
information.'

'It is not very difficult to guess what he took,' said I. 'Evidently he
abstracted the title-deeds. But the question is, what did he do with
them?'

'Yes,' said Miss Blake, 'that is the important question, and
unfortunately we cannot answer it. That he hid them in a secure
hiding-place is evident from the next two pages. The first reads: "Will
Bateman, the plumber, made me a tall leaden jar like a black-jack to hold
the documents, with a close-fitting lid, which we luted on with wax when
we had put the documents into it. And this jar I set in the hiding-place,
and on top of it the great two-handled posset-pot that old Martin, the
potter, made for my mother when I was born; which I prize dearly and
would not have it fall into the hands of strangers. When all was ready,
we sent for the carpenter, who is a safe man and loyal to the Prince, and
bade him close the chamber, which he did so that no eye could detect the
opening. So the writings shall be safe until such time--"

'The next page reads: "...and the other documents which I obtained from
Mr Halford, the attorney. I had feared that their absence might be a bar
to the succession, but he assured me it was not so, but only that it
would hinder the sale of the property. So I am satisfied; and I am
confident that Leonard will never guess the hiding-place in which they
are bestowed, nor will he ever dream what that hiding-place conceals."

'"When I had done this I began forthwith to spread the report of my death
among strangers, both in the coffee-houses and at the inn whereat I
lodged while I was waiting for the ship to sail from--" There the page
ends, and there seems to be quite a lot missing, for the next one speaks
of the disaster as having already occurred.

'"Nor, indeed, would they listen to her protestations (spoken, as they
were, in a strange tongue), and still less to my entreaties. And so she
was borne away from my sight, brave, cheerful, and dignified to the last,
as befitted an English gentlewoman, though it seemed then as if we should
never look on one another again. So I left with the child and Jenifer and
must needs continue to live at Eisenach (that I might be near my darling,
though I could never see her) and must minister for my daily bread to the
wretches who people that accursed land--"

'There seems to be only one or two pages missing here, for the next page
runs: "...this joyful day (as I had hoped it would be) and set forth from
Eisenach with the child and Jenifer to meet my poor darling on the road.
A few miles out we saw the cart approaching, filled with the prisoners
released from the mines. I looked among them, but at first saw her not.
Then a haggard old woman held out her arms to me and I looked again. The
old woman was Judith, my wife! But, O God, what a wreck! She was wasted
to a very skeleton, her skin was like old parchment, her hair, that had
been like spun gold, was turned to a strange black and her whole
aspect--"' Miss Blake paused and said in a low voice: 'It is a dreadful
picture. Poor Judith! And poor Percival! And the rest of the story is
just as sad. The next page takes up the thread just after Judith's death.

'"And when it was over and I saw them shovel in the earth, I felt moved
to beg them not to fill the grave but to leave room for me. I went away
through the snow with Jenifer and the boy. But I was alone. Judith had
been all to me, and my heart was under the new-turned sods. Yet I
bethought me, if it should please God to take me, I must not go without
leaving some chart to guide my son back to our home, should such return
be possible in his lifetime, or to guide his children or his children's
children. Therefore, that same sad day I began to write this history on
the fly-leaves that my dear wife had had sewn into her little book of--"

'There seems to be only one page missing before the next, but it was an
important one, so far as we can judge. Indeed, it almost appears as if
all the most significant pages were lost. The next page reads:

"...gave me a string from his bass viol, which he says will be the best
of all. So that matter is as secure as care and judgement can make it.
This book and the precious bauble I purpose to hold until I feel the hand
of death upon me, and then I shall give both into the keeping of Jenifer,
bidding her guard them jealously as treasures beyond price, until my son
attains the age of fourteen. Then she shall give them to him, adjuring
him to preserve the book in a safe place and never to lend or show it to
any person whatsoever, and to wear the trinket hung around his neck under
his clothing so that none shall know-"

'That is the last complete page. There remains a half-page, which seems
to have been the concluding one. It reads: "...and that is all that I can
do, since one cannot look into the future. When the time is ripe, my son,
or his descendants, can go forward with open eyes. This history and the
trinket shall guide them. Wherefore I pray that both may be treasured by
them to whom I thus pass on the inheritance. "'

As Miss Blake finished her reading she closed the book and sat looking
thoughtfully at her brother, who had listened with rapt attention to the
pathetic story. Half-reluctantly I shut the little Book of Hours and laid
it on the table.

'It is a tragic little history,' I said, 'and these soiled and tattered
leaves and the faded writing and the old-fashioned phraseology make it
somehow very real and vivid. I wonder what became of the cat's eye
pendant. Is nothing at all known of the way in which it was lost?'

'Nothing,' she replied. 'The boy James was only seven years old when his
father died, so he would hardly have remembered, even if he knew of the
existence of the jewel. It may have been lost or stolen, or, more
probably, Jenifer sold it to buy the necessaries of life. She must have
been pretty hard pressed at times.'

'She must have been a duffer,' said Percy, 'if she sold it after what she
had been told. Couldn't she have popped it and kept up the interest?'

'You seem to know a good deal about these matters, Percy,' his sister
remarked with a smile.

'Well,' said he, 'I should think everybody knows how to raise the wind if
they are hard up. There's no need to sell things when you've got an
uncle.'

'We don't know that she did sell it,' said Miss Blake. 'She may even have
"popped" it, to use your elegant expression. All that we know is that it
disappeared. And now it has disappeared again, if this pendant that was
stolen was really the Blake pendant.'

'Is there any reason to suppose that it was?' I asked.

Only that it agreed with what little we know of the missing jewel, and
cat's eye pendants must be very rare. Unfortunately, the Connoisseur
article doesn't help us much. It gives a photograph, from which we could
identify the pendant if we knew exactly what it was like, but the
description fails just at the vital point. It doesn't say anything about
the inscription on the back. It was in order to find out what that
inscription was that I asked poor Mr Drayton to let me see the jewel.
Would you like to see the photograph?'

'I should, very much, if you have a copy.'

She fetched from the cabinet a copy of the Connoisseur, and having found
the article, handed the open magazine to me. There were two photographs
on the page, one of the little book-locket and the other of a simple,
lozenge-shaped pendant of somewhat plain design, set with a single,
rather large stone, smooth-cut and nearly circular. The letterpress gave
no particulars and did not even mention the inscription.

'I suppose,' said I, 'there is no doubt that this pendant did bear an
inscription of some kind. There is no reference to it here.'

'No particular reference, unfortunately. But this was a collection of
inscribed objects. Every specimen bore an inscription if it was only a
name and a date. The article, you will see, says so, and Mr Drayton told
me so himself.'

'You didn't ask him what was written on this pendant?'

'No; I didn't want to tell him about our family tradition unless I found
that it really was the Blake pendant. Perhaps I might not have told him
even then, for the inscription might have told us all we wanted to know;
though I must confess to a certain superstitious hankering to possess the
jewel, or, at least, to see it in Percy's possession.'

'You were telling Sir Lawrence that proceedings to establish a claim were
actually begun by your father.'

'Yes, but our solicitor was not at all hopeful, and the counsel whom he
retained very strongly advised my father not to go on. He thought that,
with the apparently well-founded belief in Percival's death and the
absence of any real evidence of his marriage and survival, we had no
case. So the action was settled out of court and the tenant at the time
agreed to pay most of the costs.'

'Do you remember who was the solicitor for the tenant?'

'Yes. His name was Brodribb, and my father thought he treated us very
fairly.'

'He probably did. I know Mr Brodribb very well, and I have the highest
opinion of him as a lawyer and as a man. I have often been retained by
him, and I have usually been very well satisfied to be associated with
him. Do you know what the position was when your father began his action?
I mean as to the possible heirs. Was the present tenant then in
possession?'

'No; he was a Mr Arnold Blake, a widower with no surviving children. But
he knew the present tenant, Arthur Blake, although they were not very
near relatives, and was prepared to contest the claim on his behalf.
Arthur Blake was then, I think, in Australia.'

'And I gather that you don't know much about him?'

'No, excepting that I understand that he is unmarried, which is all that
really matters to us.'

'And did Brodribb know about this little book and John Blake's abstract?'

'I think my father must have told him that we had some authentic details
of the family history, but I don't know whether he actually showed him
the originals.'

'And with regard to the pedigree since Percival. Have the marriages and
births all been proved?'

'Yes. My father had them investigated, and obtained certificates of all
of them, and I have those certificates, though I am afraid they are never
likely to be called for.'

'Well,' I said, 'as a lawyer, I shouldn't like to hold out any hopes even
if the death of the present tenant without issue should seem to create a
favourable situation. But, of course, if it should ever become possible
to prove the marriage of Percival and Judith and the birth of James, that
would alter the position very materially. And now I must tear myself
away. I have been most keenly interested in hearing your romance, and I
have no doubt that Sir Lawrence will be equally so. If you will give me
the copy, I will leave it at his chambers tonight or tomorrow morning.'

She gave me the manuscript book, which I slipped into my pocket, and then
she and Percy escorted me across the yard and let me out at the wicket.



CHAPTER NINE - EXIT MOAKEY


From Jacob Street I made my way to the Temple with the intention of
letting Thorndyke look through Miss Blake's manuscript--since he had
expressed a wish to see it--before delivering it to Drayton. And as I sat
on the omnibus roof I reflected on the events of the afternoon. In spite
of my legal training and experience the romance of the lost inheritance
had taken a strong hold on me. The two narratives, and especially the
older one, diffused an atmosphere of reality that was very convincing. It
was practically certain that the two manuscripts were genuine, and if
they were, there could be no doubt that my young friend Percy was the
direct descendant of the Jacobite fugitive, Percival Blake. Nor could
there be much reasonable doubt that the descent was legitimate. Percival
plainly referred to Judith as his wife and there seemed to be no reason
for supposing that the marriage had not taken place at the time stated in
John Blake's abstract. In short, I found myself wondering whether Mr
Peter Blake's counsel had not been a little over-cautious, or whether he
might not have been influenced by a possible financial straitness on the
part of the said Peter unfavourable to a warmly-contested action at law.

If he had been over-cautious, it was unfortunate, for he had missed an
opportunity. The death of Arnold Blake without a direct successor would
have made things comparatively easy for a new claimant with a good case,
whereas now, with Arthur Blake in possession, the difficulties would be
much greater. It is one thing to maintain a claim against other
claimants, but quite another to oust a tenant who has established a title
by actual possession. And, to judge by their surroundings and mode of
life, my friends were but poorly equipped for any action at all.

From the manuscripts and their story my thoughts strayed to the woman
whom I had seen examining Miss Blake's nameplate. I did not like that
incident at all. It might mean nothing. The woman might happen to live in
the neighbourhood and have made her inspection from mere idle curiosity.
But that was not what the appearances suggested. The woman had been at
the inquest, and from Hampstead she must have travelled in the same
tramcar that had conveyed Miss Blake and me. Then she had seemed to have
followed Miss Blake, at some distance, on the opposite side of the road.
There was a suggestion of purpose in the whole proceeding that I found
disquieting and rather sinister, and it was not made less so by the very
unprepossessing appearance of the woman herself.

When I let myself into our chambers with my key--or rather Jervis'--I
found the sitting-room vacant; but as an inspection of the hat-rack in
the lobby suggested that Thorndyke was somewhere on the premises, I went
up to the laboratory, and there I found him in company with Polton and an
uncanny-looking apparatus consisting of a microscope with an attachment
of miniature hot-water pipes.

'This is a new form of magic,' said I, 'at least it is new to me. What is
going on?'

'This is just a microscope with a warm stage,' Thorndyke explained. 'We
are making it a hot stage for the purposes of the present experiment.'

'And what is the experiment?' I asked with sudden curiosity, for I had
just observed that the object on the microscope stage was an
irregular-shaped piece of glass on which I could distinguish a very clear
fingerprint.

'The experiment is connected with the fingerprints on the piece of glass
that you so very fortunately secured at "The Rowans." This is a portion
of it which I have cut off with a glazier's diamond and which bears a
duplicate print. You remember my pointing out to you that a real
fingerprint--as distinguished from a statistical or mathematical
fingerprint--has chemical and physical properties. Well, we are
endeavouring to determine the chemical nature of the substance of which
this fingerprint is composed by inference from its physical properties.
We are now ascertaining its melting-point; in fact I may say that we have
ascertained it. It is fifty-three degrees centigrade. And this fact, in
conjunction with its other observed physical properties, tells us that it
is Japanese wax.'

'Indeed,' said I. 'Then that goes to show that the man who made these
fingerprints had been handling Japanese wax.'

'That is the obvious inference.'

'Does that throw any light on the man's personality or occupation? What
is Japanese wax used for?'

'For a variety of purposes. Very largely for the manufacture of wax
polishes for boots and furniture, for the preparation of foundry wax and
the various waxes used by jewellers, engravers, and lapidaries. It is
also used in pharmacy in the making of certain plasters and cerates.'

'Do you think,' I asked, 'that this man could have got it on his fingers
by touching the furniture?'

'No,' replied Thorndyke. 'The cabinets were French-polished, and I saw no
trace of wax polish on them. Besides, there is more wax than would have
been taken up in that way.'

'Does the presence of this wax suggest anything to you?'

'Well,' replied Thorndyke, 'of course there are possibilities. But one
mustn't expect to apply a fact as soon as it is discovered. We have
ascertained what this substance is. Let us put this item of knowledge in
its proper mental pigeon-hole and hope that we shall find a use for it
presently.'

'I have a strong suspicion, Thorndyke,' said I, 'that you have found a
use for it already. However, I won't press you. I know my place. The
mantle of Jervis is on me--and trailing a few yards along the ground. I
am not permitted to cross-examine my reverend senior.'

'There really isn't any need for you to do so,' said he. 'I have no
exclusive information. You are in possession of all the facts that are
known to me.'

That is not strictly true, you know, Thorndyke,' I objected. 'We share
the mere observed facts of this case, I admit; but you have a body of
general knowledge which I have not, and which gives many of these
observed facts a significance that is hidden from me. However, we will
let that pass. You are the investigating wizard, I am only a sort of
familiar demon. Which reminds me that I have been devilling for you this
afternoon. I think you said that you would like to look over the
documents relating to Miss Blake's claim.'

'Yes, I should be interested to see them.'

'Well, I've got a copy, which I have compared with the originals, and
which I am to hand over Drayton. Would you like to have it now?'

'Yes; I have finished up here. Let us go downstairs and look over the
documents together.'

'You had better take the copy down with you and run through it while I am
having a wash. Then I will come down and hear your reverend
pronouncements on the case.' I produced the manuscript book from my
pocket and having handed it to him, retired to the bedroom of which I was
tenant ex officio, while he descended to the sitting-room with the
manuscript in his hand.

When I came down after a leisurely wash and brush up, I found Thorndyke
sitting with the open book before him and a slip of paper and a pencil in
his hand. Apparently he had finished the reading and was jotting down a
few dates and other particulars.

'This is a singularly interesting story, Anstey,' said he, 'and
extraordinarily picturesque in its setting. It enables us to understand
Miss Blake's view as to her brother's claim, which sounded a little
extravagant when baldly stated in her evidence. And, in fact, it looks as
if that claim were a perfectly sound one. If it were only possible to
produce satisfactory evidence of the marriage of Percival and Judith
Blake and of the legitimacy of James, I should take the case into Court
with perfect confidence--under suitable conditions, of course.'

'You mean, if there were any question as to the succession.'

'Yes. And such a question may arise at any moment if the present tenant
is unmarried. It seems to me a matter of vital importance to find out as
much as possible about this present tenant, Arthur Blake; I mean as to
his heir, his relatives and connections generally, and the chances of his
marrying. Miss Blake's brother is but a child, and many things may happen
before he is a middle-aged man.'

'Yes,' I agreed. 'It would be a good deal more to the point than fussing
about this ridiculous cat's eye. Miss Blake's keenness about that is a
mystery to me.'

'Don't forget,' said Thorndyke, 'that the pendant is believed to bear an
inscription that might be helpful to the possessor, though it is
difficult to imagine in what way it could be.'

'Very difficult,' said I. 'But it isn't the inscription that she is so
keen on, it is the thing itself. She has a sort of half-belief in some
occult quality inherent in this jewel, in fact she is infected by the
family superstition. It is incomprehensible to me.'

'It is always difficult for one temperament to understand another,' said
he. 'But this state of mind is quite a common one. That absurd little
bone of Halliburton's is a case in point, and quite a representative
instance. It was obviously a mascot--that is to say, an object credited
with occult properties and the power to influence events; and how many
people are there who, openly or secretly, cherish similar charms or
fetishes. The Stock Exchange, the Stage, and the Sporting Clubs are full
of them.'

'Yes,' that is true,' I agreed; and then, suddenly remembering the
mysterious woman, I said: 'By the way, a rather queer thing happened this
afternoon. I accompanied Miss Blake home from Hampstead, but I got off
the tram to get some tobacco and let her go on ahead. She had gone
indoors before I arrived at the studio, and as I was approaching her
house, I saw a woman cross the road and go deliberately up to the door
and read the name on the plate.'

'Yes,' said Thorndyke, looking at me interrogatively.

'Well, the point is that that woman had followed us from Hampstead.'

'Indeed!' he exclaimed with sudden gravity. 'You are sure of that?'

'Yes. I recognised her before she crossed. You may have noticed her at
the inquest, a brassy-haired baggage with a spotted veil and a face
powdered like a clown's.'

'Yes, I noticed her. She was sitting near to you, by the door. I took
particular note of her because she stood up while Miss Blake was giving
her evidence, and seemed deeply interested in her and in you.'

'Well, that is the woman.'

'But this is very serious, Anstey. What a pity you didn't follow her and
find out where she went to!'

'I had half a mind to, but Master Percy--Miss Blake's brother--came to
the door at that moment and saw me, so it was hardly possible.'

'It is very unfortunate,' said Thorndyke. 'You see the importance of the
matter? Miss Blake stood up in open Court and swore that she was
confident she could identify the man who stabbed her. Now that man is not
only a robber. He is, at least, an accessory to the murder of Andrew
Drayton, and his apprehension would probably reveal the identity of the
actual murderer--if he is not the murderer himself--to say nothing of the
charge against him of wounding with intent. Of course, if the police are
right about those fingerprints, there is not so much in it. They will
arrest Moakey and probably get the other man as well. But if the police
clue should fail--and I should not be surprised if it does--Miss Blake
represents the whole of the evidence against these two men. Apart from
her, a conviction would be impossible unless the men were taken with the
stolen property in their possession, which they are not likely to be.
Even if the men were arrested they could not be identified, excepting by
her, and would have to be released. I consider that her position is one
of extreme danger. Did you tell her of this incident?'

'No; I thought there was no use in making her uneasy.'

'She ought to be warned, Anstey. And she ought to be most cautious about
exposing herself to the possibility of an attack of any kind. I am
expecting a visit from Superintendent Miller--he sent me a note asking
for an interview at seven o'clock, so he will be here in a few minutes.
When we have seen him, we shall know how the case stands, but the fact of
his wanting an interview suggests that the police bark has got into shoal
water.'

Punctually at seven o'clock the Superintendent's characteristic official
rat-tat announced his arrival, and as I let him in, a subtle something in
his manner seemed to confirm Thorndyke's surmises.

'I suppose,' said he as he took the armchair and lighted the customary
cigar, 'you've guessed what I wanted to talk to you about? It's this
Drayton case, you know.'

Thorndyke nodded. 'Any new developments?' he asked.

'Well, yes, there are. We've got a bit of a setback. It seems that the
fingerprint people made a mistake. Never known them to do such a thing
before, but I suppose nobody is infallible. It turns out that those
fingerprints are not Moakey's after all.'

As the Superintendent made this statement, he fixed a stony gaze on the
opposite wall. Glancing at Thorndyke, I noted that my colleague's
countenance had taken on that peculiar woodenness that I had learned to
associate with intense attention not unmingled with suspicion.

'I can't think how they came to make such a stupid mistake,' the
Superintendent continued, still staring fixedly at the wall. 'Might have
got us into a horrid mess.'

'I should have thought,' said Thorndyke, 'that mistakes might easily be
made with such multitudes of records. Whose fingerprints are they?'

'Ah!' said Miller, 'there you are. We don't know. They don't seem to have
'em at the registry. So our only clue is gone.'

'Haven't you opened up in any other direction?' Thorndyke asked.

'We've notified all the likely fences, of course, but that's no good.
These coveys are not likely to try to plant the stuff with a murder
charge hanging over them. Then we made some inquiries about that man
Halliburton. But they turned out a frost. The chap has disappeared and
left no address. We've got his signature, and we've got a dam silly
rabbit bone that some fool has taken the trouble to cut a pattern on,
that he left behind at the hotel; and as he seemed to value the thing, we
put an advertisement in the papers saying that it had been found. But
there are no answers up to the present, and not likely to be. And then
Halliburton probably had nothing to do with the affair. So we're rather
up a tree. And it's annoying, after thinking it was all plain sailing,
and letting the papers give out that we were in full cry. Of course, they
are all agog for the next act--and, by the way, one of them has got a
portrait of you--I think I've got it. Yes, here it is.'

He produced from his pocket a copy of the Evening Courier and opened it
out. On the front page was an excellent portrait of my colleague, with
the descriptive title: 'Dr John Thorndyke, the famous criminal expert,
whose services are being retained in the case.'

'That ought to help you, sir,' said the Superintendent with a grin. 'You
won't be a stranger to our friends if you should happen to meet them. It
is a pity their photographs can't be given, too.'

'Yes, it would be more to the point. But now, Miller, what is it that you
want me to do? I assume that you have come to suggest some sort of
co-operation?'

'Well,' said Miller, 'you are retained in the case, and I rather suspect
that Sir Lawrence would like you to carry on independently. But there is
no sense in our getting at cross-purposes.'

'Not the least,' Thorndyke agreed. 'It is a criminal case, and our
objects are identical--to secure the offenders and recover the property.
Do I understand that you are prepared to offer me facilities?'

'What facilities do you want?'

'At this moment I am not wanting any, excepting that I should like to
look at the fingerprints. There would be no objection to that. I
suppose?'

The Superintendent looked uncomfortable. 'I don't know why there should
be,' said he, 'but you know what Singleton and his crowd are. They don't
like unofficial investigators in their department. And,' Miller added
with a grin, 'they aren't very fond of you, and no wonder; they haven't
forgotten that Hornby case. But it wouldn't help you a bit if you did
look at the prints. You can take it from me that Moakey is not the man.
There's no mistake this time. They have checked the fingerprints quite
carefully, and you can rely on what they say. So it would be no use your
examining them--unless,' he added with a shrewd look at Thorndyke,
'you've got a fingerprint registry of your own.'

As a matter of fact it was known to me that Thorndyke had a collection in
a card-index file, but it was a mere appendix to the reports of cases
dealt with, which had no bearing on the present case.

'I daresay you are right,' Thorndyke agreed 'One doesn't learn much from
stray fingerprints. And you've nothing more to tell us?'

'Nothing,' was the reply. 'And you, sir? I suppose you haven't struck
anything that would give us a lead?'

'I have not begun to work at the case,' said Thorndyke. 'I have been
waiting for your report, to see if the case was as simple as it appeared.'

'Yes,' said Miller, 'it did look simple. Seemed as if there was nothing to
do but make the arrest. And now we have nothing to go on at all. Well,'
here he rose and began to move towards the door, 'if we can help you in
anyway I hope you will let us know, and, of course, if you can put us on
to anything we shall thank you kindly.'

As our visitor's footsteps died away on the stairs, Thorndyke softly
closed the door and moved to the window, where he stood meditatively
regarding the retreating officer as the latter crossed to Crown Office
Row.

'That was a queer interview,' said he.

'Yes,' I agreed 'I don't see why he made the appointment. He hadn't much
to tell us.'

'I am not quite sure of that,' said Thorndyke. 'I have a sort of feeling
that he came here to tell us something and didn't tell it--at least he
thinks he didn't.'

'It seemed to me that he told us nothing,' said I.

'It probably seemed so to him,' replied Thorndyke. 'Whereas, if I am not
mistaken, he has made us a free gift of a really valuable piece of
information.'

'Well, it may be so,' said I, 'but for my part, I can't see that he gave
us a particle of information excepting that the case against Moakey has
fallen through. Perhaps it is a technical point that is outside my
range.'

'Not at all,' he replied. 'It is just a matter of observation and
comparison. You were present when Miller called last time and you have
been present today. You have heard all that passed and have had the
privilege of observing the Superintendent's by no means unexpressive
countenance. Just recall the conversation and consider it by the light of
all the known circumstances and see if it does not yield a very
interesting suggestion.'

I recalled without difficulty the brief conversation and reflected on it
in connection with the Superintendent's rather aggressively nonchalant
air. But from that reflection nothing emerged but wonder at my
colleague's amazing power of rapid inference. Finally I resolved to write
down the conversation and think it over at my leisure.

'I take it,' said I, 'that you don't believe Miller is in such a fog as
he professes to be?'

'On the contrary,' Thorndyke replied, 'I think that he is not only in a
fog but hard aground. The fact that he meant to conceal and in effect
disclosed (as I believe) is a leading fact. But I don't think he realises
whither it leads. And, of course, it may not be a fact, after all. I may
have drawn an erroneous inference. Obviously, the first thing to do is to
test my hypothesis rigorously. In twenty-four hours I shall know whether
it is true or false, since the means of verification are quite simple.'

'I am glad of that,' I said sourly, 'for the fog in which you assume that
Miller is enveloped is clear daylight compared to that which surrounds
me.'

'I think you will find that the fog will clear up under the influence of
a little reflection,' said Thorndyke. 'But we are forgetting Miss Blake.
You see the bearing of Miller's tidings on her position. Moakey is out of
the case. The fingerprints are unknown, and therefore practically
valueless. The police evidently have no clue at all. Miss Blake
represents the only danger that threatens these men, and we may be pretty
sure that they know it. If she could be eliminated their position would
be absolutely secure. And, remember, these are desperate men to whom a
human life is of no account when set against their own safety. It is an
unseemly hour at which to call on a lady, but I think she ought to be
warned without delay.'

'I entirely agree with you,' said I. 'We can't stand on ceremony; and
after all, it is barely eight o'clock. A taxi will take us there in
quarter of an hour.'

'Then let us start at once,' said he, stepping into the lobby for his hat
and stick. Leaving a slip of paper on the table for Polton's information,
we set forth together and walked rapidly up Inner Temple Lane to the
gate. As we emerged, a taxi-cab drew up to deposit a passenger and we
hurried forward to secure the reversion when the present tenant should
give up possession. A few moments later we had taken our seats and were
bowling up Chancery Lane to the soft hum of the taxi's engine.



CHAPTER TEN - A TIMELY WARNING


As the cab rolled swiftly through the quietening streets I turned over
once more the two statements that had been made by Superintendent Miller
and compared them. Together they had yielded to the amazingly quick
intelligence of my friend Thorndyke something that the speaker had not
intended to convey. What was the something? The first statement had set
forth that the fingerprints were those of Joseph Hedges--or Moakey, as
his associates had nicknamed him; the second had set forth that the
fingerprints were not his but those of some person who had yet to be
identified. The two statements contradicted one another, of course, but
the first was admittedly based upon a mistake. What was the fact that
emerged from the contradiction?

I revolved the question again and again without seeing any glimmer of
light. And then, suddenly, the simple explanation burst upon me. Of
course! The prints were those of fingers smeared with Japanese wax. But
Japanese wax is used for making furniture polish. There was the solution
of this profound mystery. They were Mrs Benham's fingerprints--or perhaps
those of the murdered man--made in the process of applying furniture
polish to the cabinet. This, the only clue, evaporated into a myth and
left Miss Blake's identification the only link with the vanished
murderer.

'I think I have found the solution to the fingerprint problem,
Thorndyke,' said I.

'Ah!' said he, 'I thought you would if you reflected on it. What is it?'

'They are Mrs Benham's fingerprints, or else Drayton's. They were made in
the course of polishing the furniture.'

'An excellent suggestion, Anstey,' he replied, 'which doesn't seem to
have occurred to the police. I suspected it as soon as I saw the waxy
material of the fingerprints. It doesn't happen to be the correct
explanation, I am glad to say, for it would be a singularly
unilluminating one. I took the fingerprints both of Mrs. Benham and the
deceased this morning before the inquest, but I didn't think it necessary
to mention the matter to the police. It is quite clear to me that they
are not laying their cards on the table. In point of fact, they have only
one card, and my impression is that they are mistaking the back of that
for the face. But here we are at our destination.'

We sprang out of the cab, and having dismissed it, gave a pull at the
studio bell. The wicket was opened by Miss Blake herself, and I hastened
to make the necessary apologies.

'I have come back again, you see, Miss Blake, and with reinforcements. It
is an unholy time for making a call, but we have come on a matter of
business. Dr. Thorndyke thought it advisable that you should be told
something and given certain advice without delay.'

'Well,' she said graciously, 'you are both very welcome, business or no
business. Won't you come in?'

'Is Percy in the studio?'

'Yes. He has finished his home lessons and is doing a little building
before going to bed.'

'Then we had better say what we have to say here, or perhaps in the
passage.'

We stepped through the wicket and closed it, and as we stood in the dark
entry, Miss Blake remarked: This is very secret and portentous. You are
filling me with curiosity.'

'Then we will proceed to satisfy it. To begin with, do you remember a
woman who jostled us rather rudely at the door when we were going in to
the inquest?'

'Yes, I remember the incident, but I didn't notice the woman
particularly, except that she gave me a rather impertinent stare and that
she was a horrid-looking woman.'

'Well, she either lives about here or she followed us deliberately from
Hampstead. She must have come on the same car as we did; for when I
turned into Jacob Street I saw her prowling up the opposite side of the
road, and when she came opposite this house, she crossed and looked at
the number on the door--and the name on your plate.'

'That was very inquisitive of her,' said Miss Blake. 'But does it
matter?'

'It may be of no significance at all,' said Thorndyke. 'But under the
special circumstances it would be unwise to ignore the warning that it
may convey.'

'What are the special circumstances?' she asked.

'They are these,' he replied. 'You heard Inspector Badger say in his
evidence this morning that the police have a very promising clue? Well,
that clue has broken off short. I believe the police have now no clue at
all, and the murderers pretty certainly know it. But you stated publicly
that you are confident that you could identify the man whom you saw. That
statement is certain to be known, or to become known, to these men; and
they will consequently know that you are a serious menace to their
safety, and the only one; that your ability to recognise one of them is
the only circumstance that stands between them and absolute, perfect
security. But for this one fact they could walk abroad, safe from any
possible recognition. They could stand outside Scotland Yard and snap
their fingers at the police. Now, I don't want to be an alarmist. But it
is necessary to recognise a danger and take the necessary means to guard
against it. You see what I mean?'

'I think so. You mean that if I were out of the way these men would be
safe from any possibility of discovery, and that it is consequently to
their interest to put me out of the way.'

'Yes, stated bluntly, that is the position. And you know what the
characters of these men are.'

'They are certainly not persons who would stick at trifles. Yes, I must
admit that your view of the position seems a reasonable one, though I
hope things are not as bad as you fear. But what precautions could I
take?'

'I suggest that, for the present, you don't go out after dark--at any
rate, not alone; that you avoid going about alone as far as is possible,
that you especially shun all unfrequented places where you might be
suddenly attacked, and that, on all occasions, you bear this danger in
mind in considering any unusual circumstances.'

'All this sounds rather alarming,' she said uneasily.

'It is alarming,' Thorndyke agreed, 'and I am extremely sorry to have to
impress it on you. But I would further impress on you that you have
friends--two of them are now present--who are deeply concerned as to your
safety and who would consider it a privilege to be called upon at any
time for help or advice. I am always at your service, and I am sure Mr.
Anstey is too, as well as Sir Lawrence Drayton.'

'Then,' said Miss Blake, 'the compensations are greater than the evil for
which they compensate. I welcome the danger if it brings me such kind
friends. And now you really must come in for a little while, or Percy
will accuse me of gossiping with "followers" at the gate.'

She led the way down the paved passage and I steered Thorndyke with an
expert hand past the scattered monoliths and the unfinished tombstone
until we reached the door, where Miss Blake stopped to hold aside the
curtain. As we entered Percy looked up from his work and then, in his
quaint, self-possessed way came forward to welcome us.

'How do you like my tower now it's finished, Mr. Anstey?' he asked,
regarding his work complacently, with his head on one side.

We stood by him looking at the building--a model of a church tower some
three feet in height-and I observed with a sort of proprietary pride that
Thorndyke was deeply impressed.

'This is really a remarkable piece of work,' said he. 'Where do you get
your bricks?'

'I make them of clay,' replied Percy, 'and let them dry hard. I make one
as a model and make a plaster mould of it. Then all the rest are just
squeezes from the mould. So I can get any shaped bricks that I like, and
as many of them as I want. It's much cheaper than buying them, and
besides, the bought bricks are no use for serious work.'

'No,' Thorndyke agreed, 'you couldn't build a tower like that with
ready-made bricks, at least with none that I have ever seen. Are you
going to be an architect?'

'Yes,' the boy replied gravely, 'if we can afford it. If not I shall be a
mason. Mr Wingrave--out in the yard, you know--lets me do a bit of
stone-cutting sometimes. I shouldn't mind being a mason, but I should
like to work on buildings, not on tombstones. I love buildings.'

Thorndyke looked at the boy with keen and sympathetic interest. 'It is a
good thing,' said he, 'to know what you want and to have a definite bent
and purpose in life. I should think you ought to be a happy man and a
useful one if you keep up your enthusiasm. Don't you think so, Miss
Blake?'

'I do indeed,' she replied. 'Percy has a real passion for buildings and
he knows quite a lot about them. His copy of Parker is nearly worn out.
And I don't see why he shouldn't be an architect and make his hobby his
living.'

As she was speaking, I looked at her and noticed that she was wearing the
locket suspended from a bead necklace.

'I see you have taken your new acquisition into wear,' I remarked.

'Yes,' she replied. 'I have just hooked it to this necklace, but I must
get some more secure attachment. Have you seen this locket, Dr
Thorndyke?'

'No,' he answered, and as she unhooked it and gave it to him to inspect,
he continued: 'This is what poor Mr Drayton used to call his "little
Sphinx," isn't it?'

'Yes, because it seemed always to be propounding riddles. But the riddles
are inside.'

'One of them is outside,' said Thorndyke, 'though it is not a very
difficult one. I mean the peculiar construction and workmanship.'

'What is there unusual about that?' she asked eagerly.

'Well,' he replied, 'it is not ordinary jeweller's construction. The
normal way to make a locket is to build it up of sheet metal. The sides
would be made first by bending a stout strip into a hoop of the proper
shape--nearly square, in this case--and joining the ends with solder.
Then the back and front would be soldered on to the hoop and the latter
cut through vertically with a fine saw, dividing the locket into two
exactly similar halves. Then the hinge and the suspension ring would be
soldered on, and the flange fastened in with solder. But in this case the
method has been quite different. Each half of the locket was a single
casting, which included half a hinge and one suspension ring. Probably
both halves were cast from a single half-model and the superfluous part
of the hinge filed off. Then each half was worked on the stake and
pitch-block to harden the metal and the final finishing and fitting done
with the file and stone. The engraving must have been done after
everything but the hinge was finished.'

'It must have been very awkward to engrave that small writing inside,
with the edges projecting,' said Miss Blake.

Thorndyke opened the locket, and taking his Coddington lens from his
pocket, examined the writing closely. 'If you look at it through the
lens,' said he, 'you will see that it is not engraved. It is etched,
which would have disposed of the difficulty to a great extent.'

Miss Blake and I examined the minute writing, and through the lens it was
easy to see that the delicate lines were bitten, not engraved.

'You were saying,' said Miss Blake, as the locket and lens were passed to
Percy (who, having examined the inscription, extended his investigations
to his fingertips and various other objects before reluctantly
surrendering the lens) 'that the riddle of the construction is not a
difficult one. What is the answer to it?'

'I think,' he replied, 'the inscription inside supplies the answer. That
inscription was clearly put there for some purpose to which the original
owner attached some importance. It apparently conveyed some kind of
admonition or instruction which was hardly likely to be addressed to
himself. But if the message was of importance it was worth while to take
measures to ensure its permanence. And that is what has been done. There
are no loose or separable parts, no soldered joints to break away. Each
half of the locket is a single piece of solid metal, including the hinge
and suspension ring. And you notice that the hinge is unusually massive,
and that each half of the locket has its own suspension ring, so that if
the hinge should break, both halves would still be securely suspended.
And there was no loose ring to chafe through and break.'

'Don't you think,' she asked, 'that there was originally a loose ring
passing through both of the eyes?'

'No,' he answered. 'If you look carefully at the two eyes you will see
that the holes through them have been most carefully smoothed and
rounded. Evidently the locket was meant to be suspended by a cord or
thong, and the position of the eyes with a hole through from back to
front shows that the cord was intended to be tied in a single knot where
it passed through--a much more secure arrangement than a chain, any one
link of which may, unnoticed, wear thin and break at any unusual strain.'

'And you think that the message or whatever it was that the inscription
conveyed was really something of importance?' As she asked the question,
Miss Blake looked at Thorndyke with a suppressed eagerness at which I
inwardly smiled. The Lady of Shallot evidently had hopes of Merlin.

'That is what the precautions suggest,' was his reply. 'It appeared
important to the person who took the precautions.'

'And do you suppose that it would be possible to guess what the nature of
the message was?'

'One could judge better,' he replied 'if one knew what passages the
reader is referred to.'

'I can show you the passages,' she said. 'I have looked them up, and Mr
Anstey and I went over them together and could make nothing of them.'

'That doesn't sound very encouraging,' said Thorndyke as she ran to the
cabinet and brought out her book of notes. 'However, we shall see if a
further opinion is of any help.' He took the note-book from her and read
through the entries slowly and with close attention. Then he handed the
book back to her.

'One thing is fairly evident,' said he. 'The purpose of the writer was
not pious instruction. Whatever was intended to be conveyed did not lie
on the surface, for the individual passages are singularly barren of
meaning, while the collection as a whole is a mere jumble of quotations
without any apparent sequence or connection. The passages must have had
some meaning previously agreed on, or, more probably, they formed the key
of a code or cipher used for secret correspondence.'

'If they form the key of a cipher,' said Miss Blake, 'do you think it
would be possible to work out the cipher by studying them?'

'I suppose it would be possible,' he replied, 'since a cipher must work
by some sort of rule. But people who make ciphers do not take great pains
to make them easily decipherable to the uninitiated. And then we are only
guessing that they are the key to a cipher. They may be something quite
different; some form of cryptogram that would be utterly unintelligible
without some key or counterpart that we haven't got. Do you think of
trying to decipher them or extract the hidden meaning?'

'I am rather curious about them,' she admitted, 'and rather interested in
ciphers and cryptograms.'

'Well,' said Thorndyke, 'you may succeed. More probably you will draw a
blank--but in any case I think you will get a run for your money.'

Once more with his lens he examined the locket inside and out, not
omitting the hallmark on the back, on which he dwelt for some time. Then,
still holding the locket in his hand, he said: 'You ought to have this
cover-glass replaced. The hair is part of the relic and ought not to be
exposed to loss or injury.'

'Yes,' said she, 'I ought to get it done, but I don't much like trusting
it to an unknown jeweller.'

'Would you like Polton to do it for you?' Thorndyke asked. 'He is not a
stranger, and you know he is a first-class workman.'

'Oh, if Mr Polton would do it I should be delighted and most grateful. Do
you think he would?'

'I think he would be highly flattered at being asked,' said Thorndyke. 'I
will take it back with me if you like, and get him to put in the fresh
glass at once.'

Miss Blake accepted this offer joyfully, and taking the locket from
Thorndyke, she proceeded, with great care and a quantity of tissue paper,
to make it into a little packet. While she was thus engaged, the bell in
the yard rang loudly and Percy ran out to open the gate. In less than a
minute he re-entered the studio carrying a brown-paper parcel.

'Miss Winifred Blake,' he announced. 'Shall I see what's in it, Winnie?'

'I suppose you won't be happy till you do,' she replied, whereupon he
gleefully cut the string and removed the paper, exposing a cardboard box,
of which he lifted the lid.

'My eye, Winnie!' he exclaimed. 'It's tuck. I wonder who it's from. And
it's for us both. "To Winifred and Percival Blake, with love." Whose
love, I wonder. Can you spot the handwriting?' He passed a slip of paper
to his sister and exhibited a shallow box filled with large chocolate
sweets on which he gazed gloatingly.

Thorndyke, who had just received the little packet from Miss Blake and
was putting it into his pocket, watched the boy attentively, interested,
as I supposed, by the sudden descent from the heights of architectural
design to frank, boyish gluttony.

'I don't recognise the writing at all,' said Miss Blake, 'and I can't
imagine who can have sent this.'

'Well, it doesn't matter,' said Percy. 'Let's sample them.' He passed
the box to his sister--still closely watched by Thorndyke, I noticed--and
as she put out her hand to pick up one of the sweets, my colleague asked
in a significant tone: 'Are you sure that you don't know the
handwriting?'

The tone in which the question was asked was so emphatic that she looked
at him in surprise. 'No,' she answered, 'the writing is quite strange to
me.'

'Then,' said he, 'the writer is possibly a stranger.'

She looked at him with a puzzled expression, and I noticed that he was
gazing at her with a strange fixity. After a pause he continued:

'We were speaking just now of unusual circumstances. Would not a gift of
food from a stranger be an unusual circumstance?'

In an instant his meaning flashed upon me, and upon her too, for she took
the box quickly from her brother and her face became deathly pale.

'I think, Percy dear,' she said, 'if you don't mind very much, we won't
touch these tonight. Do you mind?'

'Of course I don't,' he replied, 'if you would rather keep 'em till
tomorrow.'

Nevertheless the boy looked curiously at his sister, and it was clear to
me that he saw that there was 'something in the wind'. But he asked no
questions and made no comment, sauntering back to his tower and looking
it over critically.

'It's really time you went to bed, Percy,' Miss Blake said after a pause.

'Is it?' he asked. 'What's the time?'

'It is getting on for ten, and you have to be up at half-past six.'

'It's always "getting on" for ten, you know,' said he. 'The question is,
how far has it got? But there! It's no good arguing. I suppose I shall
get chucked out if I don't go peaceably.' He offered a friendly hand to
me and Thorndyke in succession, and having given his sister a hug and a
kiss, took his departure. And again I thought I detected in his manner a
perception of something below the surface that accounted for his sudden
dismissal.

'I suspect Master Percy smells a fox,' said I, 'but is too polite to
mention it.'

'It is very likely,' said Miss Blake. 'He is wonderfully quick and
observant, and he is extraordinarily discreet. In most respects he is
quite a normal boy, but in others he is more like a man.'

'And a very well-bred man, too,' said I.

'Yes, he is nice boy and the best of brothers. But now, Dr Thorndyke,
about these sweets. Do you really think there is anything wrong with
them?'

'I don't say that,' replied Thorndyke, 'but, of course, when you have
swallowed one, it is too late to inquire. May I look at that paper?'

Miss Blake took the slip of paper from the box and handed it to him, and
once more the lens came into requisition.

'Yes,' he said, after somewhat prolonged examination of the writing,
'this is not reassuring. It is quite clear that this writing was traced
over a previous writing in lead pencil. A hard rubber has been used to
take out the pencil marks, but the ink has fixed them in several places.
If you look at the writing carefully through the lens you can see the
fine, dark pencil line forming a sort of core to the broader ink line.
And you can also distinguish several minute crumbs of blackened
rubber--little black rolls with pointed ends.'

'But why should it have been written first in pencil?' Miss Blake asked.

'For the purpose of disguising the handwriting,' replied Thorndyke. 'It
is a common practice. Of course, in the case of a forger copying a
signature, its purpose is obvious. He takes a pencil tracing of the
original signature, goes over it in ink and rubs out the pencil--if he
can. But it is used in producing feigned handwriting as well. It is
difficult to write direct with a pen in a hand which is quite different
from one's own. But if a preliminary trial sketch is done in pencil, and
touched up if necessary, and then traced over deliberately with the pen,
the result may be quite unlike one's own handwriting. But, in any case,
this underlying pencil writing is manifestly abnormal and therefore
suspicious. Shall we see if there is anything unusual in the appearance
of the sweets?'

She passed him the box, which he placed on the table under the gaslight
and looked over systematically. Then he turned the sweets, one after the
other, on their sides, and when they were all in this position, he again
looked them over.

'It seems hardly possible,' said I, 'that the woman--if it is she whom
you suspect--could have prepared a set of poisoned sweets in such a short
time. It was past four o'clock when she came and looked at the plate, and
it is not ten yet. There doesn't seem to have been time.'

'There has been about five hours,' said Thorndyke, 'and I see by the
postmark on the wrapper that the parcel was posted in this neighbourhood
barely two hours ago. That leaves three hours, which would have been
sufficient. But she might have had the things prepared in advance, and
merely waited for the inquest to get the name and particulars. And the
sender may not be this woman at all. And again, there may be no poison in
the sweets. We are only taking precautions against a possibility. But
looking at these things all together, there seems to me to be a
suggestion of their having been patched with liquid chocolate round the
sides. If that is so, they will have been cut open horizontally and the
halves fitted together again, and the purpose of the patching will have
been to hide the join. Here is a very well-marked specimen. I think we
will take it as a test case.'

He picked out the sweet, and with his pocket-knife, began very delicately
to scrape away the outer coat of chocolate all round the sides, while we
drew up our chairs and watched him anxiously. Presently he paused and
silently held the sweet towards us, indicating a spot with the point of
his knife; and looking at that spot where the outer coating had been
scraped away, I could clearly make out an indented line. He then resumed
his scraping, following the line, until he had worked round the whole
circumference. And now it was quite obvious that the sweet had been
divided into an upper and a lower half and the two parts rejoined.

'I am afraid it is a true bill, Thorndyke,' said I.

'I think so,' he agreed, 'but we shall soon see.' He inserted his knife
into the encircling crevice, and giving it a gentle turn, raised the top
half, which he then lifted off. At once I could see that the exposed
surfaces of the white interior of the sweet were coated with a glistening
white powder, worked into the soft material of the filling. Thorndyke
produced his lens, and through it examined the cut surface for a few
moments. Then he passed the half sweet and the lens to me.

'What do you suppose this stuff is, Thorndyke?' I asked, when I had
inspected the sweet, and then passed it and the lens to Miss Blake. 'It
looks like finely powdered china or white enamel.'

'It looks like--and I have no doubt is--arsenious acid, or white arsenic,
as it is commonly called; and I should say there is rather more than two
grains in this sweet. It is a heavy substance.'

'Is that a fatal dose?' I asked.

'Yes. And it is extremely unlikely that only one sweet would have been
eaten. Two or three would contain a dose that would produce death very
rapidly.'

We were silent for a few moments. Suddenly Miss Blake burst into tears
and buried her face in her hands, sobbing almost hysterically. Thorndyke
looked at her with a curious expression, stern and even wrathful, and yet
with a certain softness of compassion, but he said nothing. As to me, I
was filled with fury against the wretch who had done this unspeakable
thing, but, like Thorndyke, I could find no words that were adequate.

Presently Miss Blake recovered her self-possession somewhat, and as she
wiped her eyes, she apologised for her outburst.

'Pray forgive me!' she exclaimed. 'But it is horrible--horrible! Just
think! But for the infinitely unlikely chance of your coming in tonight
Percy would have eaten at least two or three of those sweets. By now he
would have been dead, or dying in agony, and I unable to help him! It is
a frightful thought. Nobody would have known anything until Mrs Wingrave
came in the morning and found our bodies! And the wretch may try again.'

'That won't matter much,' said Thorndyke. 'You are now on your guard. It
will be best to think as little of this episode as you can. It has been a
narrow escape, but it is past. You must fix your attention on the
future.'

'But what can we do?' she asked despairingly.

'You must walk warily and never for one moment forget this implacable,
ruthless enemy. No opportunity must be given. Do not go out after dark
without efficient protection, and avoid going abroad alone at any time.
You had better not to go to the gate after nightfall, neither you nor
Percy. Can you not arrange for some one to answer the bell for you?'

'I could ask Mrs Wingrave, the sculptor's wife. Their rooms open on the
yard. But what could I tell her?'

'You will have to tell her as much as is necessary. And, of course, Percy
must be told. It is very unfortunate, but we can take no risks. You must
impress upon him that under no circumstances whatever must he eat or
drink anything that is given or sent to him by strangers or of which he
does not know the antecedents. Does he go to school?'

'Yes. He goes to the Elizabeth Woodville Grammar School, near Regents
Park. He usually gets home about five o'clock. Sometimes I go and meet
him, but he has some school-fellows who live near here and who generally
walk home with him.'

'Then let him come home with them. There is no reason to suppose that he
is in any danger apart from you. And let me impress upon you again that
Mr Anstey and I are always at your service. While this danger lasts--I
hope it will soon pass--don't scruple to make any use of us that
circumstances may require. If you have to go anywhere at night, we can
always arrange for you to have an escort. At a pinch, we could secure the
help of the police, but we don't want to do that unless we are compelled.
And--it seems contradictory advice to give you--but having taken all
precautions, try not to think about this incident of tonight, or to dwell
on the danger more than is necessary to keep your attention on the alert.
And now we must wish you good night, Miss Blake. I will take these sweets
with me for more complete examination.'

'I can never thank you enough for all your kindness,' she said, as he
wrapped the box in its original paper, 'and I shall have no hesitation in
treating you as the good and generous friends that you have proved
tonight. I feel that Percy and I are in your hands, and we shouldn't wish
to be in better.' She walked out with us to the gate, and at the wicket
shook our hands warmly, and indeed with no little emotion. And when we
had seen the wicket safely closed on her, and taken a look up and down
the street, we turned westward and started on our way home.



CHAPTER ELEVEN - THE BLUE HAIR


'What are you going to do, Anstey?' Thorndyke asked as we reached the
corner of Jacob Street. 'Are you going to Hampstead or are you coming
home with me?'

'What are you going to do tonight?' I asked in return.

'I shall make a rough qualitative test of the substance in that sweet,'
he replied, 'just to settle definitely whether it is or is not arsenic.'

'Have you any doubt on the subject?' I asked.

'No,' he answered. 'But still it is not a matter of fact until it has
been verified by analysis. My own conviction on the subject is only a
state of mind, which is not transferable as evidence. A chemical
demonstration is a fact which can be deposed to in sworn testimony.'

'Then,' said I, 'I shall come home with you and hear the result of your
analysis, although your certainty would be good enough for me.'

We walked down to the bottom of Hampstead Road where we boarded an
omnibus bound for Charing Cross. For some time nothing more was said,
each of us being immersed in reflection on the events of the evening.

'It is a horrible affair,' I said at length, assuming that we were still
thinking on the same subject, 'and a terrible thing to reflect that the
world we live in should contain such wretches.'

'It is,' he agreed. 'But the mitigating circumstance is that these
wretches are nearly always fools. That is the reassuring element in the
present case.'

'In what way reassuring?' I asked.

'I mean,' said he, 'the palpable folly of the whole proceeding. We have
here no subtle, wary criminal who works with considered strategy under
secure cover, but just the common arsenic fool who delivers himself into
your hands by his own stupidity.'

'But what is the evidence of the stupidity?'

'My dear Anstey!' he exclaimed. 'Look at the crudity of method. The
discharge, broadcast, of a boxful of poisoned food under manifestly
suspicious circumstances, with the poison barely concealed; the faked
writing, which a common policeman would have detected, the absence of any
plausible origin of the gift, and the nature of the poison itself. That
alone is diagnostic. Arsenic is typically a fool's poison. No competent
poisoner would dream of using such a material.'

Why not?' I asked.

'Because its properties are exactly the reverse of those which would make
a poison safe to use. The fatal dose is relatively large--not less than
two grains and for security, considerably more. The effects are extremely
variable and uncertain, making necessary the use of really large doses.
The material is rather conspicuous, it is only slightly soluble in water
and still less so in tea or coffee; it is easily recognised by simple
chemical tests, even in the minutest quantities. It is practically
indestructible, and its strong preservative effects on the dead body make
it easy to demonstrate its presence years after death. A man who poisons
a person with arsenic creates a record of the fact which will last, at
least, for the term of his own lifetime.'

'That isn't much benefit to the person who has been poisoned,' I
remarked.

'No,' he admitted. 'But we are considering the poisoner's point of view.
It is not enough for him to succeed in killing his victim. He has to
avoid killing himself at the same time. A poisoner sets out to commit a
secret murder, and the secrecy is the test of his efficiency. If his
methods are easily detectable, and if he leaves a record which stands
against him in perpetuity, he is an inefficient poisoner. And that is the
case of the arsenic practitioner. He runs a great present risk, since the
symptoms of arsenic poisoning are conspicuous and fairly characteristic;
and he leaves traces of his crime which nothing but cremation will
destroy.'

Our discussion had brought us to our chambers, where Thorndyke proceeded
straight up to the laboratory, breaking in upon Polton, who was seated at
his bench, putting the finishing touches to the large and elaborate
pedometer.

'We need not disturb you, Polton,' said Thorndyke. 'I am just going to
make a rough qualitative test for arsenic.'

Polton instantly laid down his watchmaker's glass and unlocked a cupboard
on the chemical side of the laboratory. 'You will want a Marsh's
apparatus and the materials for Reinsch's test, I suppose, sir?' said he.

'Yes. But we will begin with the liquid tests. I shall want a glass
mortar and some hydrochloric acid.'

Polton put the necessary appliances on the bench and added a large bottle
labelled 'Distilled Water,' while I seated myself on a stool and watched
the analysis with a slightly vague though highly interested recognition
of the processes that I had so often expounded to juries. I saw Thorndyke
open the box, take from it the two halves of the divided sweet, and drop
them into the little glass mortar, and having poured on them some
distilled water and a little acid, rub them with the glass pestle until
they were reduced to a muddy-looking liquid. This liquid he carefully
filtered into a beaker, when it became clear and practically colourless,
like water, and this watery-looking fluid formed the material for the
succeeding tests.

Of these the first three were performed in test-tubes into each of which
a small quantity of the clear solution was poured, and then to each was
added a few drops of certain other clear liquids. The result was very
striking. In two of the tubes the clear liquid instantly turned to a
dense, opaque yellow, somewhat like yolk of egg, while in the third it
changed to a bright, opaque emerald green.

'What are those precipitates?' I asked.

'The two yellow ones,' he replied, 'are arsenite of silver and arsenic
sulphide. The green one is arsenite of copper. As there is sugar and some
other organic matter in this solution, I shall not carry these tests any
farther, but they are pretty conclusive. How are you getting on, Polton?'

'I think we are ready, sir,' was the reply; on which I crossed to the
bench on which he had been at work. Here on a tripod over a Bunsen
gas-burner, was a beaker containing a number of little pieces of copper
foil and a clear, watery liquid which was boiling briskly.

'This is Reinsch's test,' Thorndyke explained. 'You see that this
copper-foil remains bright in the dilute acid, showing that both the
metal and the acid are free from arsenic. I shall now introduce a few
drops of the suspected liquid, and if it contains arsenic the copper-foil
will become grey or black according to the amount of arsenic present.' As
he spoke, he took the beaker containing the filtered liquid from the
mortar and poured about a tablespoonful into that containing the
copper-foil. I watched eagerly for the result, and very soon a change
began to appear. The ruddy lustre of the copper gradually turned to a
steely grey and from that to a glistening black.

'You see,' said Thorndyke, 'that the reaction is very distinct. The
quantity of arsenic present is, in an analytical sense, quite large. And
now we will try the most definite and conclusive test of all--Marsh's.'
He turned to the other apparatus which Polton had made ready, which
consisted of a squat bottle with two short necks, through one of which
passed a tall glass funnel, and through the other a glass tube fitted
with a tap and terminating in a fine jet. The contents of the
bottle--lumps of zinc immersed in sulphuric acid--were effervescing
briskly, and the tap was turned on to allow the gas to escape through the
jet. To the latter Polton now applied a lighted match, and immediately
there appeared a little pale violet flame. Picking up a white tile which
had been placed in readiness, Thorndyke held it for a moment in the flame
and then looked at it.

'You see,' said he, 'that the tile is quite unsoiled. If there had been
the smallest trace of arsenic in the bottle, a dark spot would have
appeared on the tile. So we may take it that our chemicals are free from
arsenic. Now let us try the solution of the sweet.'

He took up the beaker containing the solution of the disintegrated
chocolate, and poured very slowly, drop by drop, about a teaspoonful into
the funnel of the bottle. Then, after having given it time to mix
thoroughly with the other contents, he once more picked up the tile and
held it for an instant in the flame. The result was, to me, most
striking. In the very moment when the tile touched the flame, there
appeared on the white surface a circular spot, black, lustrous, and
metallic.

'That,' said Thorndyke, 'might be either antimony or arsenic. By its
appearance it is obviously metallic arsenic, but still we will make the
differential test. If it is arsenic it will dissolve in a solution of
chlorinated lime; if it is antimony it will not.' He removed the stopper
from a bottle labelled 'Chlorinated Lime,' and poured a little pool of
the solution on the tile. Almost immediately the black spot began to fade
at the edges, and to grow smaller and fainter until at length it
disappeared altogether.

'That completes our inquiry,' said Thorndyke as he laid down the tile.
'For the purposes of evidence in a court of law, a more searching and
detailed analysis would be necessary. To produce conviction in the minds
of a jury we should have to be able to say exactly how much arsenic was
in each of the sweets. That, however, is no concern of ours. The criminal
intention is all that matters to us. And now, Anstey, I must leave you
for a while to entertain yourself with a book. I have to do some work in
the office on another case. But we will take this ill-omened box down and
put it in a safe place.'

He took the box of sweets, with its original wrapper, and when we
descended to the sitting-room, he closed it up, sealed it, and signed and
dated it; and having made a note of the particulars of the postmark,
deposited it in the safe. Then he retired to the office, where I assumed
that he had in hand some work of compilation or reference, for the
'office' was in fact rather a miniature law library, in which was stored
a singularly complete collection of works bearing upon our special branch
of legal practice.

When he had gone, I ran my eye vaguely along the book-shelves in search
of a likely volume with which to pass the time. But the box of poisoned
sweets haunted me and refused to be ejected from my thoughts. Eventually
I brought out Miss Blake's manuscript from the drawer in which I had put
it when Miller had arrived, and drawing an easy-chair up to the fire, sat
listlessly glancing over the well-remembered pages, but actually thinking
of the writer; of the brave, sweet-faced girl and the fine, manly boy to
whom she was at once sister and mother. What, I wondered uncomfortably,
was to be the end of this? Only by the merest hairbreadth had she and the
boy, this very night, escaped a dreadful death. Soon the wretches who had
contrived this diabolical crime would discover that their plot had
miscarried in some way. What would they do next? It was hardly likely
that they would try poison again, but there are plenty of other ways of
committing murder. It was all very well to say that they were fools. So
they might be. But they were unknown fools. That was the trouble. They
could make their preparations unwatched, and approach unsuspected within
striking distance. If your enemy is unknown it is almost impossible to be
on your guard against him. In one direction only safety lay--in detection.
In the moment when the identity of the criminals should become known, the
danger would be at an end.

But when would that moment arrive? So far as the position was known to
me, it was not even in sight. The police admitted that their clue had
broken off short and apparently they had no other; at least that was
Thorndyke's opinion. But what of Thorndyke himself? Had he any clue? My
feeling was that he had not. It seemed impossible that he could have, for
these two men had, as it were, dropped down out of the sky and then
vanished into space. No one knew who they were, whence they had come, or
whither they had gone. And they seemed to have left not a trace for the
imagination to work on.

On the other hand, Thorndyke was Thorndyke; an inscrutable man; silent,
self-contained, and even secretive, in spite of his genial exterior. I
thought of him, at this very moment, sitting calmly in the office with
all his faculties quietly transferred to a fresh case, unmoved by the
thrilling events of the evening, though it was he who had instantly seen
the danger, he who had immediately suspected the 'Greek Gift.' And as I
thought of him poring over his reports, and marvelled at his detachment,
I recalled the many instances of his wonderful power of inference from
almost invisible data, and found myself hoping that even now, when to me
all seemed dark, some glimmer of light was visible to him.

It had turned half-past eleven when I heard a light but deliberate step
ascending the stair. Instantly I stole on tiptoe to the office, and had
just opened the door when a tapping-apparently with the handle of a stick
or umbrella--on our 'oak' announced the arrival of a visitor.

'Shall I open the door, Thorndyke?' I whispered.

'Yes,' he answered. 'It is Brodribb. I know his knock. Tell him I shall
have finished in a few minutes. And you might run up and tell Polton that
he is here. He will know what to do.'

I accordingly went out and threw open the 'oak,' and there, sure enough,
was Mr Brodribb, looking with his fine, rich complexion, his silky white
hair, and his sumptuous, old-fashioned raiment, as if he had stepped out
of the frame of some Georgian portrait.

'Good evening, Anstey,' said he, 'might even say "good night." It's a
devil of a time to come stirring you up, but I saw a light in your
windows, and I rather particularly wanted to have a word or two with
Thorndyke. Is he in?'

'Yes. He is in the office surrounded by a sort of landslide of
reports--assizes, Central Criminal, and various assorted. He will have
finished in a few minutes. Meanwhile I will run up and let Polton know
you are here.'

At the mention of Polton's name methought his bright blue eye grew
brighter, and by the way in which he murmured 'Ha!' and smiled as he
subsided into an armchair, I judged that--as our American cousins would
say--he 'had been there before;' and this impression was confirmed when I
made my announcement in the laboratory, where I found Polton dancing his
pedometer up and down and listening ecstatically to its measured tick.

'Mr Brodribb,' said he. 'Let me see, it is the sixty-three that he
likes. Yes; and Lord, he does like it! It's a pleasure to see him drink
it!'

'Well, Polton,' said I, 'it is an altruistic pleasure, and if it would
add to your enjoyment to see me drink some, too, I am prepared to make an
effort.'

'You couldn't do it as Mr Brodribb does,' said Polton, 'and you haven't
got the complexion. Still--I'll bring it down in a minute or two, when
I've got it filtered into the decanter.'

On this I descended and rejoined Mr Brodribb, and having offered him a
cigar, which he declined--no doubt with a view to preserving his
gustatory sense unimpaired--sat down and filled my pipe.

'I looked in,' said Mr Brodribb, 'on my way home to ask Thorndyke a
question. I met Drayton today--only saw him for a few moments--and he said
something about wanting some information respecting Arthur Blake of
Beauchamp Blake. I understood him to say that the matter arose out of the
inquest on his brother; can't see how the devil it could, but that is
what I gathered. Now, before I tell him anything, I should like to know
what's in the wind. What's he after? Do you happen to know?'

'I think I do, to some extent,' said I, and I gave him a brief account of
the circumstances and a summary of Miss Blake's evidence.

'I see,' said he. 'Then this young lady will be Peter Blake's daughter.
But what does Drayton want to know? And why does he want to know it? He
said something about Thorndyke, too. Now, where does Thorndyke come in?'

As if in answer to the question, my colleague emerged at this moment from
the office, slipping a large note-book into his pocket. As he greeted our
visitor, I found myself speculating on the contents of that note-book and
wondering what kind of information he had been disinterring from those
piles of arid-looking reports of assizes, quarter-sessions, and the
Central Criminal Court. The greetings were hardly finished when Polton
entered with a tray on which were a decanter, three glasses, and a
biscuit jar; and having placed a small table adjacent to Mr Brodribb's
chair, deposited the tray thereon with a crinkly smile of satisfaction,
and departed after an instantaneous glance of profound significance in my
direction.

Thorndyke filled the three glasses, and drawing a chair nearer to the
fire, sat down and began to fill his pipe; while Brodribb lifted his
glass, looked at it reflectively, took an experimental sip, savoured it
with grave attention, and again looked at the glass.

'A noble wine, Thorndyke,' he pronounced solemnly. 'I don't deserve this
after coming and routing you out at close upon midnight. But I haven't
come for mere gossip. I've just been putting my case to Anstey,' and here
he repeated what he had told me of his interview with Sir Lawrence. 'Now,
what I want to know,' he concluded, 'is, what is Drayton after? He seems
disposed to interest himself in Peter Blake's daughter--and his son, too,
I suppose.'

'Yes,' said Thorndyke, 'and for that matter, I may say that I feel a
benevolent interest in the young people myself, and so, I think, does
Anstey.'

'Then,' said Brodribb, 'I'm going to ask you a plain question. Is there
any idea of contesting the title of the present tenant of the Blake
property--Arthur Blake?'

'I should say certainly not,' replied Thorndyke. 'Drayton's object is, I
think, to ascertain whether there is any prospect of circumstances
becoming favourable in the future for the revival of Peter Blake's
claim--or rather Percival Blake's, as it would now be. He wants to know
who the present heir is, what is his relation to the present tenant, and
he would like to know as much as possible about Arthur Blake himself,
particularly in regard to the probability of his marrying. And, as I
said, Anstey and I are not uninterested in the matter.'

'Well, if that is all,' said Brodribb, 'I can answer you without any
breach of confidence to my client. As to the heir, his name is Charles
Templeton, but what his relationship to Arthur Blake is, I can't say at
the moment. He is a pretty distant relative, I know. With regard to
Arthur Blake, I can tell you all about him, for I have made some
inquiries on my own account. And I can tell you something that will
interest you more than the probability of his marrying--he is trying to
sell the property.'

'The deuce he is!' exclaimed Thorndyke. 'I suppose I mustn't ask why he
wants to sell?'

'I don't know that there is any secret about it. His own explanation is
that he doesn't care for England and would like to get back to Australia,
where he has lived nearly all his life; and I daresay there is some truth
in that, for he is like a fish out of water--doesn't understand the ways
of an English landowner at all. But I don't think that's the whole of it.
He knows about this claim of Peter Blake's, and he knows that Peter
Blake's son is living; and then--you know about the title-deeds, I
suppose?'

'Yes,' said Thorndyke. 'Miss Blake has told us the whole story.'

'Well, I suspect that, with this claim in the air and the mystery of the
whereabouts of the title-deeds, he feels that his tenure of the property
is a little insecure. So he would like to sell it and clear off with the
money. And, mind you, he is not entirely wrong. Peter Blake's claim was a
bona fide claim. It broke down from the lack of documentary evidence. But
it is always possible for documents to reappear, and if these documents
ever should, the position would be very different. And, to tell the
honest truth, I shouldn't be particularly afflicted if they did
reappear.'

'Why wouldn't you?' I asked.

'Well,' Brodribb replied, 'you know, one gets a sort of sentimental
interest in a historic estate which one has known all one's life. I am
Arthur Blake's solicitor, it is true. But I feel that I have
responsibilities towards the whole family and the estate itself. I have
much more sentiment about the old house and its lands than Blake himself
has. I hate the idea of selling an old place like that, which has been in
one family since the time of Henry the Eighth, as if it were a mere
speculative builder's estate. Besides, it isn't playing the game. An
inherited estate belongs to the family, and a man who has received it
from his ancestors has no right to dispossess his posterity. I told him
so, and he didn't like it a bit.'

'What sort of man is he?' I asked.

'He's a colonial, and not a good type of colonial. Gruff and short and
none too well-mannered, and, of course, he doesn't know anybody in the
county. And I should think he is a confirmed bachelor, for he lives--when
he is at home--in the new part of the house, with three servants and his
man, as if he were in a bachelor flat.'

'How did you manage to dig him up?' Thorndyke asked.

'I began to make inquiries as soon as it was certain that he would be
Arnold Blake's successor. That was years ago. I ascertained his
whereabouts and got into touch with him pretty easily, but I really
never knew much about him until a few weeks back, when I came across
a man who had just retired from the Australian Police. He knew all about
Blake, so I took the opportunity to get a pretty full history of him
and make out a little dossier to keep by me. You never know when a trifle
of information may come in useful.'

'No,' Thorndyke agreed as he refilled our visitor's glass. 'Knowledge is
power.'

'Quite so,' said Brodribb, 'and it is well to know whom you are dealing
with. But, in fact, this fellow Blake is quite an interesting character.'

'So the police seem to have thought,' I remarked.

'Oh, I don't think there was anything against Blake,' said he, 'excepting
that he kept rather queer company at times. My friend first heard of him
at a mining camp, where the society was not exactly select, and where he
ran a saloon or liquor bar. But he gave that up and took to digging, and
he seems to have had quite good luck for a time. Then his claim petered
out and he moved off to a new district and started a sawmill with some of
his mining pals. There, I think, some of his partners had trouble with
the police--I don't know exactly what it was, but he moved off again and
rambled about doing all sorts of odd jobs--boat-building, farming,
working as deck hand on a coaster, carpentering--he seems to have been
able to turn his hand to anything--and finally he came across his last
partner, a man named Owen, a fellow of his own type, who seemed to be
able to do anything but stick to one kind of job. Owen was a colonial--he
was born at Hobart--and by trade he was a photo-engraver, but he had
worked a small type-foundry, run a local newspaper, and done some other
jobs that weren't quite so respectable. Blake ran across him at a new
town in a mining district, and the circumstances were characteristic of
the two men. Owen had started a pottery, but he had just met with an
accident and broken his knee-cap. Thereupon Blake took him in hand and
fixed his knee-cap up in splints, and as it happened to be the left knee,
so that Owen would not be able to work the potter's wheel for a long
time, Blake took over the job, worked the wheel, and turned out the pots
and pans, while a woman who was associated with Owen--I don't know what
their relations were--helped with the kiln and sold the stuff in the
town.'

'Why can't you work a potter's wheel with your right foot?' I asked.

'I don't know,' replied Brodribb, 'but I understand that you can't.'

'In an ordinary "kick-wheel,"' said Thorndyke, 'the "kick-bar," or
treadle, is on the left side, and has to be if the potter is
right-handed, to enable him to steady himself with the right foot.'

'I see,' said I. 'And how long did the pottery last?'

'Not long,' replied Brodribb. 'When Owen got about again, as he couldn't
work the wheel, it seems that he got restless and began to hanker for
something fresh. Then Blake got a tip from some prospector about some
traces of gold in the hills in an outlying district, so they sold the
pottery and the three of them went off prospecting; and I think they were
engaged in some tentative digging when Blake got my letter telling him
that Arnold Blake was dead and that he had come into the property. A
deuce of a time he was, too, in getting that letter, for, of course,
there was no post out there and they only rode into the town at long
intervals.'

'And now,' said Thorndyke, 'he wants to sell the property and get back to
his cronies. I should think they would be very glad to see him.'

'I don't know that he wants to join his pals again,' said Brodribb. 'As a
man of property, I should think he would keep clear of people of that
sort. But in any case, he couldn't. Owen is dead. He must have died soon
after Blake left; must have met with an accident when he was alone, for
his body was found only a few months ago at the foot of a cliff-just a
heap of more or less damaged bones that must have been lying there for
several years. The skeleton was found by the merest chance by another
prospector.'

'How did he know it was Owen's body?' I asked.

'Well, he knew that Owen had been there and had not been seen for a long
time, and he found a signet-ring--a rough affair that Owen had made
himself and engraved with a representation of a yew-tree. That was
recognised as his.'

'Why a yew-tree?' I asked.

'That was his private mark, a sort of rebus or pun on his Christian name,
Hugh.'

'But how was it,' Thorndyke asked, 'that the woman hadn't reported his
death?'

'Oh, she had left him quite soon after Blake's departure. The police had
an idea that she had gone off with Owen to the South Sea Islands on one
of the schooners. At any rate, she disappeared, and they weren't sorry to
see the last of her. She was a shady character--and so, apparently, was
Owen, for that matter.'

'What was there against her?' I asked.

'Well, I don't know that there was anything very definite, though there
may have been. But she turned up rather mysteriously at Melbourne on a
Russian tramp steamer, and the police surmised that she had left her
country for her country's good and her own. So they entered her
name--Laura Levinsky--on their books and kept an eye on her until she went.
But, God bless me, what a damned old chatterbox I am! Here am I babbling
away at past midnight, and giving you a lot of gossip that is no more
your business than it is mine.'

'I think,' said Thorndyke, 'we have all enjoyed the gossip, and as to its
irrelevancy, who can tell? At any rate, we gather that there is no
immediate prospect of Blake's marrying, which really does concern us.'

'No,' said Brodribb, 'nor of his selling the property, though he has put
it into the hands of Lee and Robey, the estate agents. But he won't sell
it. Of course there's no magic in title-deeds, and his title is good
enough, but no one would buy an important property like that with the
title-deeds missing and liable to turn up in the wrong hands. And now I
must really be off. You've squeezed me dry if you were out for
information, and I've squeezed you dry,' he added with a complacent
glance at the decanter, 'and a devilish good bottle of port it was. You
can pass on what I've told you to Drayton, and I'll see if I can let you
know what relation the heir, Charles Templeton, is to Arthur Blake. So
goodnight and good luck, and my best respects to your wine merchant.'

When Brodribb had gone, I stretched myself and yawned slightly.

'Well,' I said, 'I don't feel sleepy, but I think I will turn in. One
must go to bed some time.'

'I don't feel sleepy either,' said Thorndyke, 'and I shall not turn in. I
think I will just jot down a few notes of what Brodribb has told us and
then have another look at Miss Blake's manuscript before handing it over
to Drayton.'

'Old Brodribb enjoyed the wine, didn't he?' I remarked. 'And, by Jove, it
did set his old chin wagging. But he didn't tell us much, after all.
Excepting the proposed sale, it was just mere personal gossip.'

'Yes. But the sale question is really important. We shall have to think
over that. He mustn't be allowed to sell the property.'

'Can we prevent him?' I asked.

'I think,' replied Thorndyke, 'from what Brodribb said, that a threat to
apply for an injunction pending an investigation of the title would make
him draw in his horns. But we shall see. Goodnight, if you are off.'

By the time I had undressed, washed, and turned into bed, I began to
suspect that Thorndyke had taken the wiser course. And as I lay in the
dark, at first quietly but then with increasing restlessness, the
suspicion deepened. The disturbing--indeed, alarming--events of the
evening came crowding back into my mind and grew, minute by minute, more
vivid. The scene in the studio arose before me with fearful reality, and
worse still, the horrible catastrophe, barely averted by Thorndyke's
watchfulness and wonderful prevision, actually seemed to befall before
my eyes. The dreadful picture that Miss Blake had drawn in a few words,
painted itself in my consciousness with the most frightful realism. I
saw the sculptor's wife peering into the dim and silent studio in the
early morning, and heard her shriek of horror as her glance fell on the
brother and sister, lying there stark and dead, and Thorndyke's analysis
in the laboratory took on a new and fearful significance. At last, after
tossing in bed for over an hour, I could bear it no longer, and rose to
go down to the sitting-room for a book.

As I entered the room, Thorndyke looked up from the note-book in which he
was writing. 'You had better have stayed up a little longer,' he
remarked. 'Now you are going to read yourself to sleep, I suppose.'

'Yes, I hope so,' I replied, and turned to the book-shelves to search for
a work of a calm and cheerful tendency. The Compleat Angler appearing to
fulfil these requirements most perfectly, I picked it out and was just
about to move away when my glance lighted on the rather curious
collection of objects on the table. They had made their appearance since
I retired, and were presumably connected with some kind of investigation
which my colleague had been pursuing while I was wooing Hypnos in vain. I
looked at them curiously, and speculated on the nature of the inquiry.
There was a microscope, and beside it lay the locket, opened and showing
the broken glass, and a little, fat, greasy volume which examination
showed to be a Latin Vulgate Bible.

I laid down the volume and glanced at Thorndyke, whom I found watching me
with a faint smile. Then I peered through the microscope and perceived
what looked like a thread of blue glass.

'Is this a thread of silk, Thorndyke?' I asked.

'No,' he replied, 'it is a hair. Apparently a woman's hair.'

'But,' I expostulated, 'it is blue--bright blue! Where on earth did you
get it?'

'Out of the locket,' he replied.

I stared at him in amazement. 'What an extraordinary thing!' I exclaimed.
'A blue hair! I never heard of blue hair before.'

'Then,' said Thorndyke, 'my learned friend has made an addition to his
already vast store of knowledge.'

'I suppose it was dyed?' said I.

'I think,' he replied, 'we may assume that the blue colour is
adventitious.'

'But why, in the name of Fortune, should a woman dye her hair blue?' I
demanded.

He shook his head. 'A curious question that, Anstey, a very curious
question. I suggest that when my learned friend has satisfied himself as
to the correct method of "daping or doping with a grasshopper for the
chavender or chub," he might with advantage bring his colossal intellect
to bear on it.'

'You are an aggravating old devil, Thorndyke,' I said with conviction.
'You know perfectly well what this thing means, and yet, when you are
asked a civil question, you sit there wagging your exasperating old head
like some confounded secretive effigy. I'd like to paint your cranium with
Stephen's blue-black ink and then put it under the microscope.'

He shook the threatened head conclusively. 'It would be futile, Anstey,'
he replied 'As a method of producing blue hair it would be a complete
failure. The effect of the tannate of iron--on exposure to oxygen--would
entirely mask that of the indigo-carmine. No, my friend. Physical
experiment is outside the range of a King's Counsel. Reflection is your
proper province. And now take your book and go to bed. Consider the
chavender or chub and also the possible connection between a blue hair
and a gold locket; shun needless and inky strenuosities, and "be quiet
and go a-angling."'

With this he returned to his note-book, and there being evidently nothing
more to be got out of him, I picked up my book, and having shaken my fist
at the impassive figure by the table, once more betook myself to bed,
there to meditate fruitlessly upon this new and curious problem.



CHAPTER TWELVE - FROM THE JAWS OF DEATH


On the following morning it seemed natural that my steps should stray in
the direction of Jacob Street, not only that I might relieve my anxiety
as to my friend whom I had left overnight in so distressed a state, but
also to ascertain whether any services that I could render were at the
moment in request. As to the former, my mind was completely set at rest
as soon as I entered the studio (to which I was conducted by Mrs
Wingrave, who opened the wicket), for I found Miss Blake hard at work and
looking as cheerful and interested as if poisoned sweets and
brazen-haired Jezebels were things unheard of.

I explained, half-apologetically, the purpose of my visit, and was
preparing a strategic retreat when she interrupted me.

'Now, Mr Anstey, I will not have these formalities. We aren't strangers.
You have been, and are, the best and kindest of friends to me and Percy,
and we are not only grateful but we value your friendship very much
indeed. As to Percy, he loves you.'

'Does he?' said I, with an inward glow of satisfaction. 'I am proud to
know that. And Percy's sister--?'

She coloured very prettily and smilingly avoided the pitfall. 'Percy's
sister,' she replied, 'takes an indulgent view of her brother's
infatuation. But I am going to treat you as a friend. I am going on with
my work, because it has to be done, even if I didn't like doing it; but
it would be very nice and companionable if you would sit down and smoke a
pipe and talk to me, that is, of course, if you can spare the time.'

'If I could spare the time!' Why, the whole Appeal Court, with the House
of Lords thrown in, might have sat and twiddled their thumbs for all I
cared. But, in fact, I had nothing to do at all.

'You are sure I shan't hinder you?' I said, feeling for my pipe.

'Perfectly,' she answered. 'I have done all the troublesome part, you
see--posing and draping the model,' and she pointed with her pencil to a
lay figure (it was an elaborate, 'stuffed' figure with real hair and a
wax face and hands), dressed in the very height of fashion, which stood,
posed in what Lewis Carroll would have called an 'Anglo-Saxon attitude,'
simpering at us idiotically.

'That is a very magnificent costume,' I remarked. 'I suppose it is one of
your own? Or do you keep a wardrobe for the models?'

'It isn't costume at all,' she replied with a laugh. 'It is just dress
material draped on and tacked or pinned in position. You will see if you
go round to the other side.'

I went round to the 'off-side,' and having thus discovered the fraud,
asked: 'Is this a figure for a subject picture?'

She laughed softly. 'Bless your innocent heart, Mr Anstey, I don't paint
pictures. I draw fashion-plates. I have to earn a living, you know, and
give Percy a start.'

'What a horrid waste of talent!' I exclaimed. 'But I had no idea that
fashion-plate artists took all this trouble'; and I pointed to the smooth
card on her easel which bore a masterly, though rather attenuated, nude
figure--in the Anglo-Saxon attitude--lightly drawn in pencil, and looking
almost like a silver point.

'Most of them don't,' she replied, 'and perhaps it isn't really
necessary. But I like to make a finished pencil drawing, though it has
all to be rubbed out when the pen work has been done over it.'

'And the preliminary nude figure,' said I; 'you do that from a model, I
suppose?'

'No,' she answered. 'I can draw a nude figure well enough for this
purpose out of my head. You see, I worked from the model for a long time
at the Slade School, and I never threw away a drawing. I have them all
bound in books, and I have copied them and drawn them from memory over
and over again. In practice, one must be able to rough out a figure out
of one's head.'

As she talked, her pencil travelled easily and lightly over the smooth
fashion-plate board, gradually clothing the nude figure in transparent
habiliments, and I sat smoking with infinite contentment and watching
her. And a very dainty, picturesque figure she made in her long blue
pinafore, with her red-gold hair and waxen skin, as she stood gracefully
poised before her easel, hand on hip and the drawing arm flung out
straight and swinging easily from the shoulder. I contrasted her lithe
form, in which every curve was full of life and grace, with the absurd
rigidity of the lay-figure, her simple, dignified garments with the fussy
exuberance of the fashionable costume (though, to be sure, that costume
was her own creation), and was moved to comments on the effigy that might
have lacerated its feelings if it had had any.

'How long will this drawing take you?' I asked presently.

'I shall have it done by this evening,' she replied, 'and tomorrow
morning I shall take it to the office and deliver it to the Art editor.'

'Couldn't I take it for you?' said I.

'I am afraid not,' she answered. 'I must go myself to see that it is all
right and to get instructions for the next drawings. Besides, why should
you?'

'Didn't we agree that you were to keep indoors out of harm's way? Or at
least not to go abroad without an escort? If you must take the drawing
yourself, you had better let me come with you to see you safely there and
back. Do you mind?'

'Of course I should like your company, Mr Anstey,' she replied, 'but it
seems such a tax on you.'

'I wish all taxes were as acceptable,' said I. 'But I understand that you
agree; so, if you will fix a time, the escort will assemble at the gate
and the bugles will sound "fall in" with military punctuality.'

After a few more half-hearted protests she fixed the hour of half-past
ten for the following morning, and I then took my leave, very well
satisfied with the progress of this friendship that was becoming so dear
to me, and even sensible of a dawning hope that a yet closer intimacy
might some day become possible.

Punctually at the appointed time the Hampstead tram set me down at the
end of Jacob Street, when I proceeded to collect the convoy and make sail
for Bedford Street, Covent Garden, which was the abiding-place of the Art
editor to whom the drawing was consigned. But if the outward voyage was
characterised by business-like directness, it was quite otherwise with
the homeward; which was marked by so many circumnavigations and
interrupted by so many ports of call--including the National Gallery--that
it was well on in the afternoon when the convoy shortened sail at
sixty-three Jacob Street, and it became necessary for the escort to put
into port and take in stores in the form of tea and biscuits. And even
then, so satisfactory had the voyage turned out that (to pursue the
metaphor to a finish) the charter-party was renewed and further voyages
projected.

Expeditions abroad, however, could only be occasional, and even then on a
plausible business pretext, for my fair friend was a steady worker and
spent long days at her easel and drawing-desk; nor was I entirely without
occupation, though Thorndyke made but the smallest demands upon my
vacation leisure. In effect, not a day passed without a visit to Jacob
Street, and whether my time was spent placidly watching the growth of a
new drawing, in executing shopping commissions, or in escort duties, it
was all equally pleasant to me, and day by day more firmly established my
position as the indispensable friend of the little household.

Affairs had been on this footing for about a week when early on a certain
afternoon I set forth from the Temple for my daily call, but with a more
definite purpose than usual, for I bore with me the locket, in which
Polton had fixed a new glass. I rang the studio bell with the customary
pleasurable anticipation of the warm and evidently sincere welcome, and
listened complacently to Mrs Wingrave's footsteps as she came along the
paved passage, and as the wicket opened I prepared to step jauntily
through. But the first words that the worthy lady spoke scattered in an
instant all my pleasant thoughts and filled me with alarm.

'Miss Blake has just gone out,' she said. 'A most sad thing has happened.
Poor Master Percy has had an accident. He has broken his leg.'

'Where did this happen, and when?' I asked.

'It must have happened about an hour ago,' she replied. 'I don't know
where, but they have taken him into a house near Chalk Farm.'

'Who brought the news?' I demanded breathlessly; for, seeing that Percy
would be at school at the time mentioned, the story was, on the face of
it, highly suspicious.

'It was a lady who brought the message,' said Mrs Wingrave. 'She wouldn't
come in, but she handed me a note, written in pencil and marked "urgent".
Miss Blake showed it to me. It didn't give any particulars beyond what I
have told you, and the address of the house.'

'What was the lady like?' I asked.

'Well,' Mrs Wingrave replied, 'I call her a lady, but she was really
rather a common-looking woman; painted and powdered and very vulgarly
dressed.'

'Did you notice her hair?'

'Yes; you couldn't help noticing it. Brassy-looking, golden stuff,
frizzed out like a mop--and her eyebrows were as black as mine are.'

'Do you know where the note is?' I asked.

'I expect Miss Blake took it with her, but she may have left it in the
studio. Shall we go and see?'

We hurried together across the yard and into the studio, where for a
minute or so we searched the tables and the unfastened bureau. But there
was no sign of the note.

'She must have taken it with her,' said Mrs Wingrave. 'But I think I can
give you the address, if that is what you want. You don't think there's
anything wrong, do you?'

'I am extremely uneasy, Mrs Wingrave,' said I, producing my notebook and
a pencil, 'and I shall go straight to the house, if I can find it. What
is the address? For Heaven's sake don't give me a wrong one!'

'I remember it quite clearly,' she replied, 'and I think I know the
place. It is number twenty-nine Scoresby Terrace, a corner house; and the
terrace turns out of Sackett's Road on the left side going up from here.'

I wrote this down in my note-book and then asked: 'How long has Miss
Blake been gone?'

'She started less than ten minutes before you came,' was the reply. 'If
you hurry you may possibly over-take her.'

We came out of the studio, and as we crossed the yard she gave me very
full and clear directions as to how to find the place, some of which I
jotted down. Passing a marble tombstone on which her husband had been
working, I noticed a number of his tools lying on a sack, and among them
a long chisel, almost like a small crowbar. 'May I borrow this, Mrs
Wingrave?' I said, picking it up. 'Certainly, if you want to,' she
replied with a look of surprise.

'Thank you,' I said, slipping it up my sleeve. 'I may have to force a
door, you know,' and with this I let myself out at the wicket and strode
away swiftly up the street.

I am habitually a rapid walker, and now I covered the ground at a pace
that made other pedestrians stare. For Winifred, I felt sure, would have
flown to her brother on the wings of terror, and hurry as I might, I
should be hard put to it to overtake her. But her terror could have been
nothing compared with mine. As I raced along the shabby streets, swinging
the chisel openly in my hand--for its presence in my sleeve was a
sensible hindrance--the sinister possibilities--nay, probabilities--that,
unsought, suggested themselves one after another, kept me in a state of
sickening dread. Supposing I failed to find the place after all! It was
quite possible, for the neighbourhood was strange and rather intricate.
Or suppose I should lose time in searching for the house and arrive at
last, only to find--Here I set my teeth and fairly broke into a run,
regardless of the inquisitive stares of idlers at doors and street
corners. But, for all my terror and horrible forebodings, I kept my wits
and held my attention firmly to Mrs Wingrave's directions, and I derived
a faint encouragement from the fact that I had never lost touch of the
landmarks and that every hurried step was bringing me nearer to my goal.
At length, want of breath compelled me to drop into a walk, but a couple
of minutes later, with a gasp of relief, I reached the corner of
Sackett's Road; and even as I swung round into the long, straight, dreary
street, I caught a glimpse of a woman, at the far end, hurrying forward
in the same direction. It was only a momentary glimpse, for in the
instant when I saw her she turned swiftly into a by-street to the left.
But brief as was the vision, and far away as she was, no doubt was
possible to me. It was Winifred.

I drew a deep breath. Surely I should be in time. And perhaps my fears
might be groundless after all. The plot might be but the creation of my
own uneasy suspicion. At any rate, I was nearly there, and it was hardly
possible that in a few short minutes anything could happen--but here all
my terrors came crowding on me again, and, breathless as I was, I again
broke into a run.

As I reached the corner of Scoresby Terrace and looked at the corner
house, my heart seemed to stand still. A single glance showed that it was
an empty house, and the horrible desolation of its aspect was made more
dreadful by the silence and the total absence of any sign of life. I flew
across the road, and barely glancing at the number-twenty-nine-raced up
the garden path and tugged furiously at the bell.

Instantly the hollow shell reverberated with a hideous jangling that
sounded more ominous and dreadful from the vacancy that the discordant
echoes bespoke. But it slowly died away and was succeeded by no answering
sound. A deadly silence enveloped the ill-omened place. Not a creak upon
the stair, not a sign of life or movement could I detect, though I held
my breath to listen. Yet this was the house, and she was in it--and that
other! Again I wrenched at the bell, and again the horrible jangling
filled the place with echoes, like some infernal peal rung by a company
of ghouls. And still there was no answer.

In a frenzy of terror I rushed down the side passage, and bursting open
the flimsy gate, ran into the back garden and tried the back door. But it
was locked and bolted. Then I darted to the back parlour window, and
springing on the sill, shattered, with a stroke of the chisel, the pane
above the catch. Passing my hand in through the hole, I drew back the
catch and slid up the lower sash. I had noticed that the wooden shutters
were not quite closed, but at the moment that I slid up the window-sash,
the shutters closed and I heard the cross-bar snap into its socket.

For a moment I had a thought of running round to the front and breaking
in the street door. But only for a moment. Rescue, not capture, was my
purpose. A glance at the flimsy, decrepit shutters showed me the way in.
Thrusting the edge of the long, powerful chisel into the crack close to
the lower hinge, I gave a violent wrench, and forthwith the hinge came
away from the jamb, the screws drawing easily from the rotten woodwork.
Another thrust and another wrench at the upper hinge brought that away
too; at a push the whole shutter swung inward and I sprang down into the
room. And at that moment I heard the street door shut.

I ran across the room to the door. Of course it was locked and the key
was outside. But I was not a criminal lawyer for nothing. In a moment I
had the chisel driven in beside the lock, and pressing on the long
handle, drove the door back on its hinges, when the lock-bolt and latch
disengaged from the striking-plate and the door came open at once.

I ran out into the hall, unlocked the front room, and looked in, but it
was empty. Then I flew up the stairs and was about to unlock the door of
the first room that I came to, when I became aware of a soft, shuffling
sound proceeding apparently from the next room. Instantly I ran to that
door, and turning the key, flung it open.

The sight that met my eyes as I darted into the room was but the vision
of a moment, but in that moment it imprinted itself upon my memory for
ever. Even now, as I write, it rises before me, vivid and horrible, with
such dreadful remembrance that my hand falters as it guides the pen. In a
corner near the wall she lay--my sweet, gracious Winifred-lay huddled,
writhing feebly and fumbling with her hands at her throat. Her face was
of the colour of slate, her lips black, her eyes wide and protruding.

It was, I say, but the vision of a moment, a frightful, unforgettable
moment. The next, I was on my knees beside her, my open knife was in my
hand, its keen edge eating through the knot at the back of her neck that
secured the band that was strangling her. A moment of agonised impatience
and then the knot was divided and the band hastily unwound--it was a
narrow silken scarf--revealing a livid groove in the plump neck.

As I took away the scarf she drew a deep, gasping breath with a hoarse,
distressful sound like the breathing of a croup-stricken child. Again and
again it was repeated, growing quicker and more irregular, and with each
succeeding gasp the horrible purple of face and lips faded away, leaving
a pallor as of marble; the dreadfully protruding eyes sank back until
they looked almost normal, though wild and frightened.

I watched these changes with a sense of utter helplessness, though not
without relief--for they were clearly changes for the better. But I
longed to help her, to do something active to advance her recovery. If
only I had had Thorndyke's knowledge I might have been of some use. He
would have known what to do. But perhaps there was nothing to be done but
wait for her natural recovery. At any rate, that was all that I could do.
And so I remained kneeling by her side with her head resting on my arm,
holding her hand, and looking with infinite pity and affection into the
frightened, trustful eyes that sought my own with such pathetic appeal.

Presently, as her breathing grew easier, the gasps began to be mingled
with sobs; and then, suddenly, she burst into tears and wept
passionately, almost hysterically, with her face buried against my
shoulder. I was profoundly moved, indeed I was almost ready to weep
myself, so intense was the revulsion now that the danger was past. In the
tumult of my emotions I forgot everything but that she was saved, and
that I loved her. As I sought to comfort her, to coax away her terrors,
to soothe and reassure her, I cannot tell what words of tenderness I
murmured into her ear, by what endearing names I addressed her. Stirred
as I was to the very depths of my soul, I was aware of nothing but the
great realities. In the stress of terror but now barely past and the joy
and relief of the hardly hoped for recovery, the world of everyday was
forgotten. All I knew was that she was here, safe in my arms, and that
she was all in all to me.

By degrees her emotion expended its force and she grew calmer. Presently
she sat up, and having wiped her eyes, looked nervously about the empty
room.

'Let us go away from this dreadful place,' she said in a low, frightened
voice, laying her hand entreatingly on my arm.

'We will,' said I, 'if you are well enough yet to walk. Let us see.'

I stood up and lifted her to her feet, but she was very unsteady and
weak. I doubt if she could have stood without support, for I could feel
her trembling as she leaned on me heavily. Still, with my help, she
tottered to the door and crossed the landing, and then, very slowly, we
descended the stairs. At the open door of the room which I had entered,
we paused to adjust her hat and remove any traces of the struggle before
we should emerge into the street. I was still holding the silken scarf,
and now put it into my pocket to free my hands that I might assist her in
settling her hat and the crumpled collar of her dress. As I looked her
over to see that all was in order, I noticed three or four conspicuous
golden hairs sticking to her right sleeve. I picked them off and was in
the act of dropping them when it occurred to me that Thorndyke might be
able to extract some information from them, whereupon I brought out my
pocket-book and slipped them between the leaves.

'That is how I got into the house,' I said, pointing to the shattered
window and the hanging shutter.

She peered fearfully into the empty room and said: 'I heard the crash of
the glass. It was that which saved me, I think, for that brute heard it
too, and rushed away downstairs instantly. How did you break open the
shutter?'

'I did it with a chisel of Mr Wingrave's-and that reminds me that I have
left the chisel upstairs. I must take it back to him.'

I bounded up the stairs, and running into the room, snatched up the
chisel from the floor and ran out again. As I turned the corner of the
staircase, I met her beginning to ascend the stair, clinging to the
handrail and sobbing hysterically. I cursed myself for having left her,
even for a few moments, and putting my arm around her, led her back into
the hall.

'Oh, pray forgive me!' she sobbed. 'I am all unstrung. I couldn't bear to
be alone.'

'Of course you couldn't,' said I, drawing her head to my shoulder and
stroking her pale cheek. 'I oughtn't to have left you. But try, Winnie
dear, to realise that it is now over and gone. And let us get out of this
house.'

She wiped her eyes again, and as her sobs died away into an occasional
moan, I opened the street door. The sight of the open street and the
sunlight seemed to calm her at once. She put away her handkerchief, and
clinging to my arm, walked slowly and a little unsteadily by my side down
the garden path and out at the gate.

'I wonder where we can get a cab,' said I.

'There is a station not very far away, I believe,' said she. 'Perhaps
some one can direct us.'

We walked slowly down Sackett's Road, looking about that curiously
deserted thoroughfare for some likely person from whom to make inquiries,
when I saw a taxi-cab draw up at a house and discharge its passengers. I
managed to attract the notice of the driver, and a minute later we were
seated in the vehicle travelling swiftly homeward.

During the short journey hardly a word was exchanged. She was quite
composed now, but she was still deathly pale and lay back in her seat
with an air of intense fatigue and exhaustion. When we reached the studio
I helped her out of the cab, and having dismissed it, led her to the gate
and rang the bell.

Instantly I heard hurried steps in the passage, the wicket was flung
open, and Mrs Wingrave looked out eagerly. When she saw us, she burst
into tears.

'Thank God!' she exclaimed. 'I've been in an agony of suspense. Directly
Percy came home, I knew that Mr Anstey must be right--that the message
about him was a trap of some sort. What has happened?'

'I'll tell you later, Mrs Wingrave,' Winifred replied. 'I don't want to
talk about it now. Is Percy at home?'

'No. The two Wallingford boys were with him. He has gone home to tea with
them. I thought it best to say nothing, and let him go. They live quite
near here.'

'I am glad you did,' said Winifred, as we crossed the yard-where I
replaced the invaluable chisel. 'Perhaps we needn't tell him anything
about this.'

'It might be better not to,' said Mrs Wingrave. 'And now go and sit down
quietly in the studio and I will bring you some tea. You both look as if
you wanted some rest and refreshment.' She bustled away towards her own
residence and Winifred and I entered the studio.

As I held the curtain aside to let her pass, my companion halted and
looked round the great, bare hall with an air of deep reflection--almost
of curiosity. 'I never thought to look upon this place again,' she said
gravely; 'and I never should but for you. My life is your gift, Mr
Anstey.'

'It is a very precious life to me, Winifred,' said I. And then I added:
'I can't call you Miss Blake.'

'I am glad of that,' she said, looking at me with a smile. 'It would
sound very cool and formal now when you have held my life in your hands,
and my heart is bursting with gratitude to you.' She laid her hand on my
arm for a moment, and then, as if afraid of saying too much, returned
abruptly to the subject of her brother. 'It is fortunate Percy was not at
home. I don't think we need tell him, at least not just now. Do you think
so?'

'I don't see any necessity,' I replied. 'He knows the general position
and the precautions that have to be taken. Perhaps he can be told later.
And now you must just sit on the settee and rest quietly, for you are as
pale as a ghost still. I wonder you have not collapsed altogether.'

In a few minutes Mrs Wingrave brought in the tea and placed it on a table
by Winifred's settee. I drew up a chair and performed the presidential
functions in respect of the teapot, and under the influence of the homely
ceremony and the reviving stimulant my patient began to recover something
like her normal appearance and manner. I kept up a flow of more or less
commonplace talk, avoiding, for the present, any reference to the
terrible events of the afternoon, the details of which I decided to
elucidate later when the effect of the shock had passed off.

The postponement, however, was shorter than I had intended, for when we
had finished tea and I had carried the tray across the yard and restored
it to Mrs Wingrave, Winifred opened the subject herself.

'You haven't asked me how this thing happened,' she said, as I re-entered
the studio and sat down beside her in the vacant place on the settee.

'No. I thought you wouldn't want to talk about it just now.'

'I don't want to talk about it to Mrs Wingrave,' said she. 'But you are
my deliverer. I don't mind telling you--besides you ought to know. And I
want to know, too, by what extraordinary chance you came to be in that
place at that critical moment. When I saw you come into the room, it
seemed as if a miracle had happened.'

'There was nothing very miraculous about it,' said I, 'except that I
happened to arrive at the studio a little earlier than usual.' And here
I gave her an account of my arrival and my interview with Mrs Wingrave
and my efforts to overtake her.

'It was very clever of Mrs Wingrave to remember the address so clearly,'
said Winifred.

'It is a mercy that she did,' said I. 'If she had not--but there, we
won't think of that. What happened when you got to the house?'

'I rang the bell and a woman opened the door. I hardly saw her until I
had entered the hall and she had shut the door, and then--you know how
dark the hall was--I couldn't see her very distinctly. But I noticed that
she was a good deal powdered and that she had bright, unreal-looking
golden hair, though that didn't show much as she had a handkerchief tied
over her head and under her chin. And I also noticed that her face seemed
in some way familiar to me.

'As soon as she had shut the door the woman said in a rather peculiar
voice: "You must excuse the state of the house, we haven't properly moved
in yet. The little man is with the nurse on the first floor, the second
room you come to. Will you go up?"

'I ran up the stairs and she followed close behind me. When I came to the
second room, I asked: "Is this the one?" and when she answered "Yes," I
opened the door and stepped in. Then, of course, I saw it was an empty
room, and instantly I suspected that it was a trap. But at that moment
the woman threw the scarf over my head and pulled it tight. I turned
round quickly, but she dodged behind me and pulled me into the room, and
there we struggled and kept turning round and round for hours, as it
seemed to me, she trying to get behind me to tie the scarf, and I
struggling to keep her in front of me. She still held both ends of the
scarf, and though she was not able to pull it quite tight, it was tight
enough to make my breathing difficult and to prevent me from calling out.
At last I managed to turn quickly and seize her by the hair and the
handkerchief that was tied over her head. But the handkerchief came away
in my hand and the hair with it. It was a wig. And then, to my horror, I
saw that this was not a woman at all. It was a man! The man who stabbed
me that night at Hampstead! I recognised him instantly, and the shock was
so awful that I nearly fainted. For a moment I felt perfectly helpless,
and in that moment he got behind me and tied the scarf and pulled it
tight.

'Then there came a tremendous pealing of the bell. The man started
violently, and I could feel his hands trembling as he tried to finish
tying the knot while I struggled to get hold of his wrists. But, of
course, I could not struggle long, for the scarf was so tight that it
almost completely stopped my breathing, and the horror of the thing took
away all my strength. When the bell rang the second time, he broke into a
torrent of curses mixed with a curious sort of whimpering, and flung me
violently on the floor. He was just finishing the knot when I heard a
crash of glass down below, and at that he sprang to his feet, snatched up
the wig and handkerchief, and flew down the stairs.

'After this there seemed a long, long interval. Of course it was only a
matter of seconds, I suppose, but it was agonising--that horrible feeling
of suffocation. At last I heard a bursting sound down below. Then the
street door shut, and then--just as I seemed to be losing
consciousness--you came into the room, and I knew that I was saved.' She
paused, and then, laying her hand on mine, she continued: 'I haven't
thanked you for saving me from that horrible death. I can't. No words are
enough. Any talk of gratitude would be mere anticlimax.'

There is no question of gratitude, Winnie,' said I. 'Your life is more to
me than my own, so there is no virtue in my cherishing it. But I needn't
tell you that, for I suspect that my secret has slipped out unawares
already.'

'Your secret?' she repeated.

'That I love you, Winnie dearest. You must know it by now. I suppose I
ought not to speak of it just at this time. And yet--well, perhaps I
might ask you if you would take time to consider whether we might not,
some day, be more to one another than we are now.'

She looked down gravely though a little shyly, but she answered without
hesitation: 'I don't need to take time to consider. I can tell you at
once that I am proud to be loved by such a man as you. And it is not a
case of gratitude. I should have said the same if you had asked me
yesterday--or even longer ago than that.'

'Thank you for telling me that, Winnie,' said I. 'It would have been an
unworthy thing if I had seemed to presume on any small service--'

'It would have been an absurd thing to have any such idea, Mr Anstey.'

'Mr Anstey?' I repeated. 'May I humbly mention that I also have a
Christian name?'

'I always suspected that you had,' she retorted with a smile, 'and I must
confess to having speculated as to what it might be.'

'It takes the prosaic form of Robert, commonly perverted by my own family
to Robin.'

'And a very pretty name, too,' said she. 'But you are a foolish Robin to
speak in that way about yourself. The mistake you are making,' she
continued, holding up an admonitory forefinger, 'is that you don't
realise what an exceedingly nice person you are. But we realise it. Mrs
Wingrave is quite fond of you; Percy loves you; and as for Percy's
sister, well, she lost her heart longer ago than she is prepared to
admit. So let us hear no more ridiculous self-deprecations.'

'There shall be no more, sweetheart,' said I. 'You have taken away the
occasion and the excuse. A man who has won the heart of the sweetest and
loveliest girl in the whole world would be a fool to undervalue himself.
But it is a wonderful thing, Winnie. I can hardly believe in my good
fortune. When I saw you that night at Hampstead, I thought you were the
most beautiful girl I had ever seen. And now I know I was right. But how
little did I dream that that lovely girl would one day be my own!'

'I say again that you are a foolish Robin,' said she, resting her cheek
against my shoulder. 'You think your goose is a swan. But go on thinking
it, and she will be as near a swan as she can manage, or failing that, a
very faithful, affectionate goose.'

She looked up at me with a smile, half-shy but wholly endearing, and
noting how her marble-white cheeks had grown pink and rosy, I kissed her;
whereupon they grew pinker still.

It was all for our good that Percy lingered with his friends and left us
to the undisturbed possession of our new happiness. For me the golden
minutes supped away unnumbered--sullenly and relentlessly checked,
however, by my unconsulted watch--as we sat, side by side and hand
clasped in hand. We talked little; not that we were, as Rosalind would
say, 'Gravelled for lack of matter' (and even if we had been, Rosalind's
admirable expedient was always available). But perfect companionship is
independent of mere verbal converse. There is no need for speech when two
hearts are singing in unison.

At last there came the expected peal of the bell. I might, I suppose,
have gone out to open the wicket, but, in fact, I left that office to Mrs
Wingrave.

'I don't think Percy will notice anything unusual,' said I. 'You look
perfectly recovered now.'

'I suppose I do,' she answered with a smile. 'There have been
restoratives, you see.'

'So there have,' I agreed, and ex abundantia cautelae, as we lawyers say,
I added a sort of restorative codicil even as the quick footsteps
pattered across the yard.

Whether Percy observed anything unusual I cannot say with certainty. He
was a born diplomatist and a very model of discretion. But I have a
strong suspicion that he detected some new note in the harmony of our
little society. Particularly when I addressed his sister as Winnie did he
seem to cock an attentive ear; and when she addressed me as Robin he
cocked both ears. But he made no sign. He was a jewel of a boy. No lover
could have asked for anything more perfect in the way of a prospective
brother-in-law.

But my suspicion of that juvenile diplomat was confirmed--and my
admiration of his judgment reached a climax--when the time arrived for me
to go, and Winifred rose to accompany me to the gate. This had always
been Percy's office. But now he shook hands with me without turning a
hair and without even a glance at the studio door. It was a marvellous
instance of precocious intelligence.

We had left the studio and were just crossing the yard when suddenly I
bethought me of the locket which Thorndyke had entrusted to me for
delivery, and which I had, up to this moment, completely forgotten.

'Here is another narrow escape,' said I. 'The special errand which, to
the uninitiated, appeared to be the occasion of my visit here today, has
never been discharged. I was to give you your locket, which the ingenious
Polton has made as good as new, and had forgotten all about it. However,
it is not too late,' and here I took the little bauble from my pocket and
handed it to her.

'I am glad it came today, of all days,' she said as she took it from me.
'Now I can wear it as a sort of memento. If we had only known, Robin, we
could have got Mr Polton to engrave the date on the back.'

'He can do that later,' said I. 'It is engraved on my heart already. I
can never forget a single moment of this day. And what a wonderful day it
has been! What a day of wild extremes! Within a few hours I have suffered
the most intense misery and dread that I have ever experienced, and been
blessed with the greatest happiness that I have ever known. And as to
you, my poor darling--'

'Not a poor darling at all,' she interrupted, 'but a very rich and proud
and happy one. A day of storm and sunshine it has indeed been, but the
storm came first, and "in the evening there was light." And after all,
Robin dear, you can't have a rainbow without rain.'

By this tune we had reached the gate; and when I had taken her in my arms
and kissed her, I opened the wicket and passed out. As it closed behind
me I looked up and down the dreary street, but it was dreary to me no
longer. I don't know who Jacob was--I mean this particular Jacob--but as
I stopped to look back fondly at the factory-like gate, I felt that I was
in some sort under an obligation to him as the (presumptive) creator of
the sacred thoroughfare.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN - THORNDYKE STATES HIS POSITION


Recalling the events of the evening after leaving the studio, I am
sensible of a somewhat hazy interval between the moment when I turned the
corner of Jacob Street and my arrival at the familiar precincts of the
Temple. After the fashion of the aboriginal Londoner, I had simply set my
face in the desired direction and walked, unconscious of particular
streets, instinctively or subconsciously heading for my destination by
the shortest route. And meanwhile my mind was busy with the stirring
incidents of this most eventful day, with its swift alternations of storm
and sunshine, its terror, its despair, and its golden reward. So my
thoughts now alternated between joy at the attainment of a happiness
scarcely hoped for and apprehension of the dangers that lurked unseen,
ready to spring forth and wreck the life that was more to me than my own.

Thus meditating, I sped through by-streets innumerable and unnoted,
crossing quiet squares and traversing narrow courts and obscure passages,
but always shunning the main thoroughfares with their disturbing glare
and noise, until I came, as it were, to the surface at the end of
Chichester Rents, and turned into Chancery Lane. There the familiar
surroundings brought me back to my everyday world, and my thoughts took a
new direction. What would Thorndyke have to say to my news? Had he any
resources unknown to me for staving off this very imminent danger? And
would the terrible episode of the empty house convey any enlightenment to
him that I had missed?

Still revolving these questions, I dived down Middle Temple Lane and
presently became aware of a tall figure some little distance ahead,
walking in the same direction as my own. I had nearly overtaken him when
he turned at the entrance to Pump Court and looked back, whereupon a
mutual recognition brought us both to a halt.

'I expect we are bound for the same port, Anstey,' said he as we shook
hands. 'I am going to call on Thorndyke. You are still helping him,
aren't you?'

'He says I am, and I hope it is true. At any rate, Jervis has not come
back yet, if that is what you mean. I suppose, Drayton, you haven't any
fresh information for us?'

Sir Lawrence shook his head gloomily. 'No,' he answered, 'I have learned
nothing new, nor, I fear, are any of us likely to. Those brutes seem to
have got away without leaving a trace that it is possible to make
anything of. We can't expect impossibilities even of Thorndyke. But I am
not calling on him with reference to the murder case. I want him to come
down with me to Aylesbury to help me with an interview. A question of
survivorship has arisen, and he knows more about that subject than I do,
so I should like him to elicit the facts, if possible.'

As we walked through Pump Court and the Cloisters, I debated with myself
whether I should tell Drayton of the horror that this day had witnessed.
He was an interested party in more than one sense, for he had the warmest
regard for Winifred. But I knew that he would be profoundly shocked, and
as he continued to talk of the case on which he wanted Thorndyke's
advice, I said nothing for the present.

When I let myself and Drayton in with my latch-key, we found Thorndyke
seated at the table with a microscope and a tray of reagents and mounting
materials, preparing slides of animal hairs to add to his already
extensive collection.

'I am ashamed to disturb you at this hour,' Drayton began.

But Thorndyke interrupted him. 'You are not disturbing me at all. This
kind of work can be taken up and put down at any moment.'

'It is very good of you to say so,' said Drayton, 'and I will take you at
your word.' And thereupon he opened the matter of which he had spoken to
me.

'When do you want me to come down to Aylesbury?' Thorndyke asked.

'The day after tomorrow, if you can manage it.'

Thorndyke reflected for a few moments as he picked up with his forceps a
newly-cleaned cover-glass, and delicately dropped it on the specimen that
floated in its little pool of balsam.

'Yes,' he said at length, 'I think we can arrange that. There isn't very
much doing just now.'

'Very well,' said Sir Lawrence. 'Then I will call for you at ten o'clock,
and I needn't trouble you with any details now. We can talk the case over
on the way down.' He rose as if to depart, but as he turned towards the
door, he stopped and looked back at Thorndyke.

'I am afraid,' said he, 'that I have rather neglected our friend Miss
Blake. Has either of you seen her lately?'

Thorndyke gave me a quick look, and in the short interval before
replying, I could see that he was rapidly debating how much he should
tell Sir Lawrence. Apparently he reached the same conclusion as I had,
that we could hardly conceal material facts from him, for he replied:

'Yes, we have both seen her quite lately; in fact, I think Anstey has
just come from her studio. And I am sorry to say, we are both rather
anxious about her.'

'Indeed,' said Drayton, laying down his hat and seating himself. 'What is
amiss with her?'

'The trouble is,' replied Thorndyke, 'that she is the sole witness to the
identity of the murderers, and they realise it, and they have determined,
accordingly, to get rid of her.' And here he gave Sir Lawrence an
account of the incident of the poisoned chocolates and the circumstances
that had led up to it.

Drayton was thunderstruck. As he listened to Thorndyke's vivid and
precise narration, he sat motionless, with parted lips and his hands on
his knees, the very picture of amazement and horror.

'But, good God!' he exclaimed, when Thorndyke had finished 'this is
perfectly frightful! It is a horrible state of things. Something must be
done, you know. It is practically certain that they will make some
further attempt.'

'They have already,' said I. And as the two men turned to me with looks
of startled inquiry, I recounted--not without discomfort in recalling
them--the terrible events of that afternoon.

My two friends listened with rapt attention as I told the hideous story,
and on each it produced characteristic effects. Sir Lawrence glared at me
with a scowl of suppressed fury, while Thorndyke's face settled into a
rigid immobility like that of a stone mask.

When I had concluded, Drayton sprang to his feet and began to pace the
room in uncontrollable agitation, muttering and cursing under his breath.
Suddenly he halted opposite Thorndyke, and gazing frowningly into his set
face, demanded: 'Is it not possible to do something? Something radical
and effective, I mean? I don't know what cards you hold, Thorndyke, and I
am not going to embarrass you by asking for details, but are you in a
position to make any kind of move?'

Thorndyke, who had also risen, and now stood with his back to the fire,
looked down reflectively for a few moments. At length he replied:

'The difficulty is, Drayton, that if we move prematurely, we run a
serious risk of failing, and we can't afford to fail.'

'Do I understand, then, that you are in a position to take action?'

'Yes. But it would be extremely unsafe, for if we fail once we fail
finally. It would be a gamble, and we should quite probably lose.
Whereas, if we can wait, we shall have these men to a certainty. We have
taken their measure and we know now exactly what kind of persons we are
dealing with. You see, Drayton,' he continued after a brief pause,
'secret crime most commonly comes to light through the efforts of the
criminal to cover his tracks. That is so in the present case. All that I
know as to the identity of these men I have learned from their struggles
to conceal it. But for their multitudinous precautions I should have
known nothing about them. And you see for yourself that they are
criminals of the usual kind who will not let well alone. They keep making
fresh efforts to secure their safety, and each time they make a move we
learn something more about them. If only we can wait, they will surely
deliver themselves into our hands.'

There was a brief silence. Then Sir Lawrence gave utterance to the
thought that was in my own mind.

'That is all very well, Thorndyke, and as a lawyer I fully understand
your desire to get a conclusive case before making a move. But can we
afford to wait? Are we justified in using this poor young lady as a bait
to enable us to catch these villains?'

'If that were the position,' replied Thorndyke, 'there could be but one
answer. But we must remember that the capture of these men is the
condition on which her safety depends. If we fail, we fail for her as
well as for ourselves.'

'Then,' asked Drayton, 'what do you suggest? You don't propose to stand
by passively until they make some fresh attempt to murder her?'

'No. I suggest that more complete precautions be taken to secure Miss
Blake's safety, and meanwhile I hope to fill in one or two blanks in my
collection of evidential facts and perhaps induce these men to make a
move in a new direction. I think I can promise to bring the affair to a
climax in one way or another, and that pretty soon.'

'Very well,' said Drayton, once more taking up his hat. 'But who is going
to look after Miss Blake?'

'Anstey has taken that duty on himself,' replied Thorndyke, 'and I don't
think any one could do it better. If he wants assistance or advice, he
has only to call upon us.'

With this arrangement Drayton appeared to be satisfied, though he still
appeared uneasy--as, indeed, we all were. But he made no further
suggestion, and very shortly took his leave.

For some time after his departure not a word was spoken. The conversation
that had just taken place had given me abundant food for reflection,
while Thorndyke, who still stood with his back to the fire, maintained a
grim silence. Evidently he was thinking hard, and a glance at his
face--stern, rigid, inexorable--assured me that his cogitations boded ill
for those who had aroused his righteous anger. At length he looked up and
asked:

'What measures can you suggest for Miss Blake's protection?'

'I have told her that, for the present, she must not go out of doors on
any occasion whatever unless accompanied by me--or, of course, by you or
Drayton. She has promised to abide absolutely by that rule and to make no
exception to it. She has also promised to keep the studio door locked and
to inspect any visitors from the window of the bedroom adjoining before
unlocking it.'

'If she keeps to those rules she should be quite safe,' said Thorndyke.
'They are not likely to try to break in. There is a man living on the
premises, I think?'

'Yes. Mr Wingrave is about the place at his work most of the day, and, of
course, he is always there at night.'

'Then, I think we may feel reasonably secure for the present; and I am
glad you have made such complete arrangements, for I was going to suggest
that you come down with us to Aylesbury.'

'With what object?' I asked. 'Drayton won't want me at the conference.'

'No. But it just occurred to me that, as we shall be within a mile or two
of Beauchamp Blake and can easily take it on our way back, we might go
and have a look at the place and see if we can pick up any information on
the spot. I believe the question of the sale of the property is more or
less in abeyance, but it would be just as well to make a few inquiries
locally.'

I received the suggestion with some surprise but no enthusiasm.

'Doesn't it seem rather inopportune,' I said, 'with these imminent
dangers impending, to be occupying ourselves in prosecuting this shadowy
claim? Surely this is no time for building castles in the air. The chance
of young Percival's ever coming into this property is infinitely remote,
and we can attend to it when we have done with more urgent matters.'

'If we attend to it at all,' he replied 'we must do so when we have the
opportunity. Should the property be sold, Percy's chance will be gone for
good. And the conflict between our two purposes is only in your mind. The
fact of our keeping an eye on Percy's interests will not hinder our
pursuit of the wretches who murdered poor Drayton and would now murder
Percy's sister. You can trust me for that.'

'No, I suppose it won't,' I admitted. 'And you seem to take Percy's claim
to this estate quite seriously.'

'It is impossible to do otherwise,' said he. 'It may be impossible to
prove it, even if an opportunity should arise. But it is a real claim,
and what little chance he has ought to be preserved. It mustn't be lost
by our negligence.'

I was not keen on the expedition, but I knew what Winifred's sentiments
would have been, and loyalty to her bade me assent, though in my own
mind, I felt it to be a fruitless and somewhat foolish errand.
Accordingly I agreed to form one of the party on the day after the
morrow, a decision which Thorndyke received with more satisfaction than
the occasion seemed to warrant.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN - BEAUCHAMP BLAKE


'Can there be any more pleasant place of human habitation than an English
country town?' I asked myself the question as I strolled round the market
square of the little town of Aylesbury, gazing about me with a Londoner's
pleasure in the restful, old-world aspect of the place I had still more
than half an hour to wait, but I had no feeling of impatience. I could
spend that time agreeably enough, sauntering around, wrapped in
pleasurable idleness provocative of reflection, looking at the handsome
market-place with its clock-tower and its statues immortalising in bronze
the worthies of more stirring times, or at the carriers' carts that
rested unhorsed in the square and told of villages and hamlets nestling
amidst their trees but a few miles away down the leafy lanes.

Presently my leisurely perambulations brought me opposite a shop of more
than common smartness, and here--perhaps because the crowd of market folk
was a little more dense--I paused and gazed somewhat absently into the
window. I have no idea why I looked into that particular shop window. The
wares exposed in it--ladies' hats--have no special attraction to the
masculine eye--at least in the state in which they are presented by the
milliner, bereft of the principal ornament which should be found
underneath them. Nevertheless, I was not the only male observer. Another
man had stopped and stood, nearer to the window than I, inspecting the
gaily-flowered and feathered headgear with undeniable interest.

The incongruity of this eager scrutiny of things so characteristically
feminine struck me with amused curiosity, and I watched the man with a
half-suppressed smile. He was a small, slight man, neatly dressed in a
suit of tweeds and a tweed hat, and the trouser-clips at his ankles
suggested that he had cycled in from the country. I could not see his
face, as I was standing nearly behind him, but apparently he became
aware, after a time, of my presence--perhaps he saw my reflection in the
window--and of the fact that I was observing him somewhat curiously, for
he turned away with some suddenness, glancing up at me as he passed and
then half pausing to look at me again before he bustled away and
disappeared up an alley.

There was something very odd in that second look. The first had been a
mere casual glance, but the second--quick, searching, even
startled--suggested recognition, and something more than recognition.
What could it have been? And who could he be? The face--a clean-shaved,
thin, sallow face, not very young, seen only for a moment, left a clear
mental image that still remained. And as I visualised it afresh I was
conscious of a faint sense of familiarity. I had seen this man before.
Where had I seen him; and who was he? And why did he look at me with that
singular expression?

I stood where he had left me, cudgelling my brains for an answer to these
questions. And even as I stood there, a cyclist passed swiftly across the
end of the square and disappeared in the direction of the London Road. He
was too far off for his face to be clearly recognisable: but he was a
small man, he wore a tweed suit and hat, and trouser-clips, and I had no
doubt that he was the same man.

Now who was he? The more I recalled the face, the more convinced I was
that I had seen it before. But the identity of its owner eluded me
completely. I couldn't place the fellow at all. Probably it didn't matter
in the least who he was. But still it was exasperating to be baffled in
this way. Unconsciously, I turned and stared into the milliner's window.
And then, in a flash it came. The middle of the window was occupied by an
enormous hat--a huge, bloated, fungous structure overrun with counterfeit
vegetation and bristling with feathers; such a hat as might have adorned
the cranium of a Hottentot queen. A glance at that grisly head-dress
supplied the missing link in the chain of association. The face that had
looked into mine was the face of the woman who had shadowed Winifred and
me from Hampstead; who had lured her to the empty house, and had there
revealed herself as a man in disguise. In short, this was the murderer of
poor Drayton, and the would-be murderer of Winifred!

And I had held this wretch in the hollow of my hand and I had let him go!
It was an infuriating thought. If my quickness of observation had only
been equal to his, I should have had him by now safely under lock and
key. No wonder he had looked startled. But he must have a remarkably good
memory for faces to have recognised me in that instantaneous glance. For
he had seen me only once--at the inquest at Hampstead--and then but for a
moment. Unless he had got a glimpse of me at the empty house, or--which
seemed more probable--had shadowed and watched me when I had been acting
as Winifred's escort. At any rate he knew me, better than I knew him, and
had managed very adroitly to slip through my fingers.

But what on earth was he doing at Aylesbury? Was it possible that he
lived in this neighbourhood? If so, a description given to the police
might even yet secure his arrest. I was turning over this possibility
when the chiming of a clock recalled my appointment. I glanced up at the
dial on the clock-tower and had just noted that the appointed hour had
struck when I observed Thorndyke ascending the steps to the platform at
the base. This was our rendezvous, and I forthwith hurried across the
cobbled square and presented myself, bursting with my news and
discharging them in a volley as soon as I arrived.

Thorndyke was deeply interested, but yet I found in his manner something
slightly disappointing. He was an impassive man, difficult to surprise or
move to any outward manifestation of emotion. Still, knowing this, I was
a little chilled by the almost academic view that he took of the
incident, and especially by his firm rejection of my plan for invoking
the aid of the police.

'It sounds tempting,' he admitted, 'to swoop down on this man and put an
end forthwith to all our dangers and complications, but it would be a bad
move. Quite probably the police would decline to take any action. And
then what sort of description could you give them? For the purposes of a
search it is far too general, and a change of clothing would make it
entirely inapplicable. And we must admit the possibility of your being
mistaken. And finally, if we gave this information, we should almost
certainly lose one man--whom none of us has ever seen, but who is
probably the principal. We should have let the cat out of the bag, and
all our carefully-laid plans would come to nought.'

'I didn't know that we had any carefully-laid plans,' said I.

'You know that we are engaged in investigating a murder; that our aim is
to secure the two or more murderers and to elucidate the causes and
circumstances of the crime, and that we have accumulated a certain number
of data to that end.'

'You have,' I objected. 'I have practically no data at all. May I ask if
you know who this sallow-faced little devil is?'

'I have a strong suspicion,' he replied. 'But suspicion isn't quite what
one wants to take into a court of law. I want to verify my suspicions and
turn them into conclusive evidence. So that when I play my card it shall
be a trump card.'

To this I had no reply to make. I knew Thorndyke's methods. For years I
had acted as his leading counsel, and always when I had gone into court I
had taken with me a case complete to the last detail. Now, for the first
time, I was realising the amount of patience and self-restraint that went
to the making of a case of unassailable conclusiveness, and I found
myself with difficulty overcoming the temptation to make a premature
move.

While we had been talking, we had been making our way at an easy pace out
of the town on to the London Road, and now Thorndyke, with the one-inch
ordnance map in his hand, indicated our route.

'Beauchamp Blake,' said he, 'lies just off the Lower Icknield Way, on the
left of the London Road. But there is no need for us to take the shortest
way. The by-road through Stoke Mandeville looks more entertaining than
the main road, and we can pick up the Lower Icknield Way at the
crossroads below the village.'

Our route being thus settled, we set forth, turning off presently into
the quiet, shady by-road. And as we swung along between the thinning
hedgerows, with the majestic elms--now sprinkled with yellow--towering
above us and casting athwart the road streaks of cool shadow, we chatted
sporadically with long intervals of silence, for we were Londoners on
holiday to whom the beauty of this fair countryside was reinforced by a
certain pleasant strangeness.

'I have wondered from time to time,' I said, after one of the long
pauses, 'what can be the significance--if it has any--of that blue-dyed
hair that you extracted from Winifred's locket' (I had confided to
Thorndyke the new relations that had grown up between our fair client and
me).

'Ah,' he replied. 'A very interesting problem, Anstey.'

'I have also wondered what made you take the hair out of the locket to
examine it under the microscope.'

'The answer to that question is perfectly simple,' said he. 'I took it
out to see if it was blue. In the mass the hair looked black.'

'But do I understand that you thought it might be blue?'

'I expected to find it blue. The examination was a measure of
verification.'

'But why, in the name of Fortune, should you expect to find blue hair in
a locket? I had no idea that hair ever was dyed blue--except,' I added
with a sudden flash of recollection, 'in the case of ancient Egyptian
wigs, and I had an idea that they were not hair at all.'

'Some of them, I believe, were not. However, this was not ancient
Egyptian hair. It was modern.'

'Then, will you tell me what it was that made you expect to find the hair
in the locket dyed blue?'

'The expectation,' he replied, 'arose out of an inspection of the locket
itself.'

'Do you mean those mysterious and obscure Biblical references engraved
inside?'

'No; I mean the external characters, the peculiar construction, the motto
engraved on the front, and the hallmark on the back.'

'But what,' I asked, 'was the connection between those external
characters and this most extraordinary peculiarity of the hair inside?'

He looked at me with the exasperating smile that I knew so well (and was,
in fact, expecting).

'Now, you know, Anstey,' said he, 'you are trying to pump me; to suck my
brains instead of using your own. I am not going to encourage you in any
such mental indolence. The proper satisfaction of a discovery is in
having made it yourself. You have seen and handled the locket, you have
heard my comments on it, and you have access to it for further
examination. Try to recall what it is like, and if necessary, examine it
afresh. Consider its peculiarities one by one and then in relation to one
another. If you do this attentively and thoughtfully you will find that
those peculiarities will yield some most curious and interesting
suggestions, including the suggestion that the hair inside is probably
blue.'

'I shan't find anything of the kind, you old devil,' I exclaimed
wrathfully, 'and you know perfectly well that I shan't. Still, I will
take an early opportunity to put the "little Sphinx" under
cross-examination.'

While we had been talking we had passed through the village of Stoke
Mandeville, and we now arrived at the crossroads, where we turned to the
left into the ancient Icknield Way.

'A mile and a half farther on,' said Thorndyke, again consulting the map,
'we cross the London Road. Then we turn out of the Icknield Way into this
lane, leaving Weston Turville on our left. I note there is an inn
opposite the gates of Beauchamp Blake. Does that topographical feature
interest you?'

'I think,' said I, 'that after another couple of miles, we shall be ready
for what the British workman calls a "breaver." But it is probably only a
wayside beerhouse.'

Another half-hour's walking brought us to the London Road, crossing which
we followed a side road--apparently part of the Icknield Way--which
skirted the lake-like reservoir and presently gave off as a branch a
pleasant, elm-bordered lane on the right-hand side of which was a tall
oak paling.

'This,' said Thorndyke, whose stature enabled him easily to look over the
fence, 'is the little park of Beauchamp Blake. I don't see the house, but
I see the roof of a gatekeeper's lodge. And here is the inn.'

A turn of the lane had brought into view a gatekeeper's lodge by the main
gates of the park, and nearly opposite, the looked-for hostelry. And a
very remarkable-looking hostelry it was, considering its secluded
position; an antique, half-timbered house with a high, crinkly roof in
which was a row of dormer windows, and a larger, overhanging gabled bay
supported below by an immense carved corner-post. But the most singular
feature of the house was the sign, which swung at the top of a tall post
by a horse-trough in the little forecourt, on which was the head of a
gentleman wearing a crown and a full-bottomed wig, apparently suspended
in mid-air over a brown stone pitcher.

'It seems to me,' said I, as we approached the inn, 'that the sign needs
an explanatory inscription. The association of a king and a brown jug may
be natural enough, but it is unusual as an inn-sign.'

'Now, Anstey,' Thorndyke exclaimed protestingly, 'don't tell me that that
ancient joke has missed its mark on your superlative intellect. The
inscription on the parlour window tells us that the sign is the King's
Head, and the pitcher under that portrait explains that the king is James
the Second or Third--His Majesty over the water. This is evidently a
Jacobite house. Does the sedition shock you? Or shall we enter and
refresh? If the landlord's ale is as old as his politics we ought to find
quite exceptional entertainment within, and perhaps pick up a trifle of
local gossip that may interest us.'

I assented readily, secretly denouncing my slowness in the 'uptake'.
Thorndyke's explanations were always so ridiculously simple--when you had
heard them.

The landlord, who looked like a retired butler, received us with
old-fashioned deference and inducted us into the parlour, drawing a
couple of Wycombe armchairs up to the table.

'What can I do for you, gentlemen?' he inquired.

'Well, what can you do for us?' asked Thorndyke. 'Is it to be bread and
cheese and beer?'

'I can let you have a cold fowl and a cut of boiled bacon,' said the
landlord with the air of one who lays down the ace of trumps.

'Can you really!' exclaimed Thorndyke. 'That is a repast fit for a
king--even for the king over the water.'

The landlord smiled slyly. 'Ah, you're alluding to my old sign, sir,'
said he. 'T'wouldn't have done to have had him swingin' up there time
back. Some others would have been swingin' too. In those days he used to
hang in this room over the fireplace, only there was a portrait of King
George fixed over him with concealed hinges. When strangers came to the
house there was King George--God bless him!--the same as the sign that
used to hang outside; but when the villagers or the people from the Hall
opposite sat in the room, then George was swung back on his hinges to
bring James into view and a pitcher of water was put on the table to
drink the toasts over. This was a thriving house in those days. They say
that Percival Blake--he was the last of the old family and a rare plotter
by all accounts--used to meet some of his political cronies in this very
room, and I've no doubt a lot of business was plotted here that never
came to anything.'

'Who has the place now?' asked Thorndyke.

'The present squire is Mr Arthur Blake, and a queerish sort of squire he
is.'

'In what way queer?' I asked.

'Well, you see, sir, he's a Colonial--lived in Australia all his life, I
understand. And he looks it--a big, roughish-looking man, and very short
spoken. But he can ride, I'll say that for him. There isn't a better
horseman in the county. Mounts from the off-side, too. I suppose that's
their way out there, though it don't suit our rule of the road.'

As the landlord gave these particulars, he proceeded, with swift
dexterity, to lay the table and furnish it with the materials for the
feast, aided and abetted by an unseen female who lurked in the
background. When he had put the final touch with a 'foam-crowned jug of
nut-brown,' he showed a tendency to withdraw and leave us to our meal;
but Thorndyke was in a conversational mood and induced him, without
difficulty, to fetch another tumbler and proceed with his output of local
lore.

'Is it true that the place is going to be sold?' Thorndyke inquired.

'So they say,' replied the landlord. 'And the best thing the squire could
do if the lawyers will let him. The place is no good to him.'

'Why not?'

'Well, sir, he's a bachelor, and like to remain one it seems. Then he's a
stranger to the place and don't appear to take to English ways. He keeps
no company and he makes no visits; he don't know any of his neighbours
and doesn't seem to want to. He has only kept on one or two of the
servants, and he lives with his man--foreign-looking chap named Meyer--in
a corner of the house and never uses the rest. He'd be more comfortable
in a little farm house.'

'And how does he spend his time?' asked Thorndyke.

'I don't know, sir,' was the answer. 'Mostly loafing about, I should say.
He takes photographs, I hear; quite clever at it, too, it seems. And he
goes out for a ride every afternoon--you'll see him come out of the gate
at three o'clock almost to the minute--and sometimes he goes out in the
morning, too.'

'And as to visitors? Are strangers allowed to look over the house?'

'No, sir. The squire won't have any strangers about the place at all. I
fancy what made him so particular was a burglary that occurred there
about a couple of years ago. Not that there was much in it, for they got
all the things back and they caught the burglar the very next day.'

'That was smart work,' I remarked.

'Yes,' our friend agreed, 'they did the thief very neatly. It was a
one-man job and the burglar seems to have been a downy bird, for he
worked in gloves so that he shouldn't leave any marks behind. But he took
those gloves off a bit too soon, for, when they heard him making off and
let the dogs loose, he had to do a bolt, and he dropped one of the things
in the park--a silver salver it was, I think--and the police found it the
next morning and found some finger-marks on it. They wanted to take the
salver up to Scotland Yard to have it examined, but the squire wouldn't
have that. He took a photograph of the fingermarks and gave it to the
police, and they took it up to Scotland Yard, and the people there were
able to tell them at once whose fingermarks they were, and they got the
burglar that very evening with all the stolen goods in his possession.
Wonderful smart, I call it.'

'Do you think,' Thorndyke asked, 'that we should be able to get a look at
the house? Just the outside, I mean?'

'I'll see what can be done, sir,' the landlord replied 'I'll have a few
words with the lodge-keeper. I was butler to the last squire but one, so
they know me pretty well. I'll just run across while you are finishing
your lunch. But you'd better wait until the squire has gone out, because,
if he sees you on the drive, like as not he'll order you out, and that
wouldn't be pleasant for gentlemen like you.'

'I think we'll take the risk,' said Thorndyke. 'If he tells us to go, we
can go, but I don't like sneaking in behind his back.'

'No, sir, perhaps you are right,' the landlord agreed, a little
dubiously, and departed on his errand, leaving us to finish our
lunch--which, in fact, we had practically done already.

In this long conversation I had taken no part. But I had been an
interested listener. Not that I cared two straws for the small beer that
our host had been retailing. What had interested, and a good deal puzzled
me was Thorndyke's amazing inquisitiveness respecting the private and
domestic affairs of a man whom neither of us knew and with whom we really
had no concern. For the question of the succession to the property was a
purely legal one--and pretty shadowy at that--on which the personal
qualities and habits of the present tenant had no bearing whatever. And
yet my experience of Thorndyke told me that he certainly had not been
asking these trivial and impertinent questions without some reasonable
motive. No man was less inquisitive about things that did not concern
him.

But the discrepancy between his character and his conduct did not end
here. As soon as the landlord had gone and we had filled and lit our
pipes, he began to explore his waistcoat pockets and presently produced
therefrom Polton's reproduction of Mr Halliburton's ridiculous mascot,
which he laid on the table and regarded fondly.

'Do you usually carry that thing in your pocket, Thorndyke?' I asked.

'Not usually,' he replied, 'but this is a special occasion. We are on
holiday, and moreover, we are seeking our fortune, or at least, hoping
that something may turn up.'

'Are we?' I said. 'I am not conscious of any such hope, and I don't know
what you expect.'

'Neither do I,' he replied. 'But I feel in an optimistic mood. Perhaps it
is the beer,' and with this he picked up the mascot, and opening the
split gold ring with a knife-blade, attached it to his watch-chain,
closing the ring with a squeeze of his finger and thumb.

It was a singular proceeding. What made it especially so was Thorndyke's
openly-expressed contempt of the superstition which finds expression in
the use of charms, mascots and other fetishistic objects and practices.
However, we were on holiday, as he had said, and perhaps it was
admissible to mark the occasion by playing the fool a little.

In a few minutes the landlord returned and announced that he had secured
the consent of the lodge-keeper to our making an inspection of the house,
with the proviso that we were not to go more than a couple of hundred
yards down the drive. 'I'll just step across with you,' he added, 'so
that he can see that you are the right parties.'

Accordingly, when we had paid the modest reckoning, we picked up our hats
and sticks and as our host held open the parlour door, we passed out into
the courtyard, glancing up with renewed interest at the historic sign
which creaked in the breeze. Crossing the road, we passed through the
wicket of the closed gate, under the detached observation of the
lodge-keeper; and here our host wished us adieu and returned to the inn.

A short walk down the drive brought us to a turn of the road where we
came in sight of the house across a stretch of meadows in which a small
herd of cows made spots of vivid colour. It was not a large mansion, but
what it lacked in size it made up for in character and interest. The two
parts were clearly distinct, the newer portion being a Jacobean brick
building with stone dressings and quaint corbie-step gables, while the
older part--not later than the sixteenth century--was a comparatively low
structure showing massive timbers with pargetted plaster fillings, a high
roof with wide-spreading eaves and a long row of picturesque dormer
windows and large, clustered chimneys.

'It is a grand old house,' I said. 'What a pity it is that Blake is such
a curmudgeon. The inside ought to be even more interesting than the
outside.'

'Yes,' Thorndyke agreed, 'it is a splendid specimen of domestic
architecture, and absolutely thrown away, if our host was not
exaggerating. One could wish for a more appreciative tenant--such as our
young friend Percy, for instance.'

I glanced at Thorndyke, surprised, not for the first time, at the way in
which he tended to harp on this very unresonant string. To me, Percy's
claim to this estate was simply a romantic instance of the
might-have-been, and none too clear at that. His chance of ever
inheriting Beauchamp Blake was a wild dream that I found myself unable to
take seriously. But this was apparently not Thorndyke's view, for it was
evident that he had considered the matter worth inquiring into, and his
last words showed that it still hovered in his mind. I was on the point
of reopening the discussion when two men appeared round the corner of the
house, each leading a saddled horse. Opposite the main doorway they
halted and one of them proceeded to mount--from the off-side, as I
noticed. Then they apparently became aware of our presence, for they both
looked in our direction; indeed they continued to stare at us with
extraordinary attention, and by their movements appeared to be discussing
us anxiously.

Thorndyke chuckled softly. 'There must be something uncommonly suspicious
in your appearance, Anstey,' he remarked. 'They seem to be in a deuce of
a twitter about you.'

'Why my appearance?' I demanded. 'They are looking at us both. In fact I
think it is you who are the real object of suspicion. I expect they think
you have come back for that silver plate.'

As we spoke, the discussion came to an end. The one man remained, holding
his horse and still looking at us, while the other turned and advanced up
the drive at a brisk trot, sitting his mount with that unconscious ease
that distinguishes the lifelong, habitual equestrian. As he approached,
he looked at us inquisitively and with undissembled disapproval, but
seemed as if he were going to pass without further notice. Suddenly,
however, his attention became more intense. He slowed down to a walk, and
as he drew near to us he pulled up and dismounted. And again I noticed
that he dismounted from the off-side.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN - THE SQUIRE AND THE SLEUTH-HOUND


As Mr Blake approached with the evident intention of addressing us, it
was not unnatural that I should look at him with some interest. Not that
such interest was in any way justified by his appearance, which was quite
commonplace. He was a tall man, strongly built, and apparently active and
muscular. His features were somewhat coarse, but his expression was
resolute and energetic, though not suggestive of more than average
intelligence. But at the moment, as he bore down on us, leading his horse
by the bridle-rein, with his eyes fixed on Thorndyke's face, suspicion
and a certain dim suggestion of surprise were what I principally gathered
from his countenance.

'May I ask what your business is?' he demanded somewhat brusquely, but
not rudely, addressing Thorndyke and looking at him with something more
than common attention.

'We really haven't any business at all,' my colleague replied. 'We were
walking through the district and thought we should like to have a glance
at your very picturesque and interesting house. That is all.'

'Is there anything in particular that you want to know about the house?'
Mr Blake asked, still addressing Thorndyke.

'No,' the latter replied. 'Our interest in the place is merely
antiquarian, and not very profound at that.'

'I see,' said Mr Blake. He appeared to reflect for a few moments and
seemed to be on the point of moving away when he stopped suddenly and a
quick change passed over his face. At the same moment I noticed that his
eyes were fixed intently on Thorndyke's ridiculous mascot.

'I take it,' said he,' that you had the lodge-keeper's permission to come
inside the gates?'

'Yes,' Thorndyke replied. 'He gave us permission--through the inn-keeper,
who asked him--to come in far enough to see the house. As far as we have
come, in fact.'

Mr Blake nodded, and again his eyes wandered to the object attached to
Thorndyke's watch-chain.

'You are looking at my mascot,' the latter said genially. 'It is a
curious thing, isn't it?'

'Very,' Blake agreed gruffly, 'What is it?'

Thorndyke pulled the soft wire ring open, and detaching it from his
chain, handed the little object to the other, who examined it curiously
and remarked:

'It seems to be made out of a bone.'

'Yes; the bone of a porcupine ant-eater.'

'Ha. You got it somewhere abroad. I suppose?'

'No; replied Thorndyke. 'I found it in London, and, of course, it isn't
really mine. It belongs to a man named Halliburton. But I don't happen to
have his address at the moment, so I can't return it.'

Mr Blake listened to this explanation with a sort of puzzled frown,
wondering, perhaps, at my colleague's uncalled-for expansiveness to an
utter stranger. But his wonder was nothing to mine, as I heard the
usually secretive Thorndyke babbling in this garrulously confidential
fashion.

When he had examined the mascot, Mr Blake handed it back to Thorndyke
with an inarticulate grunt, and as my colleague hooked the ring on his
watch-chain, he turned away, walked round his horse to the off-side,
mounted lightly to the saddle and started the horse forward at a trot. As
he disappeared round a bend of the tree-bordered road, I glanced at
Thorndyke, who was once more gazing calmly at the house.

'Mine host was right; I observed. 'Squire Blake is a pretty considerable
boor.'

'His manners are certainly not engaging,' Thorndyke agreed.

'I didn't notice that he had any manners,' said I, 'and it seemed to me
that you were most unnecessarily civil, not to say confidential.'

'Well, you know,' he replied, 'we are on his premises, and not only
uninvited, but contrary to his expressed wishes. We could hardly be
otherwise than civil. And after all, he didn't eject us. But I suppose we
may as well retire now.'

'Yes,' I agreed, 'he is probably waiting to see us off his confounded
land, and possibly speaking his mind to the lodge-keeper.'

Both these surmises appeared to be correct, for when we came round the
clump of trees at the turn of the road, I saw the squire in earnest
conversation with the keeper, who was standing at attention, holding the
gate open, and, I thought, looking somewhat abashed. We passed out
through the wicket, which was still unfastened, but though the
lodge-keeper looked at us attentively, and even a little curiously, Blake
gave no sign of being aware of our existence.

'Well,' said I, 'he is an unmannerly hog. But he has one redeeming
feature. He is a man of taste. He did admire you, Thorndyke. While you
were talking he couldn't keep his eyes off you.'

'Possibly he was trying to memorise my features in case I should turn out
to be a swell cracksman.'

I laughed at the idea of even such a barbarian as this mistaking my
distinguished-looking colleague for a member of the swell mob. But it was
not impossible. And certainly the squire had scrutinised my friend's
features with an intensity that nothing but suspicion could justify.

'Perhaps,' said I, 'he suffers from an obsession on the subject of
burglars. Our host's remarks seemed to suggest something of the kind. I
wonder what he was saying to the lodge-keeper. It looked to me as if the
custodian was receiving a slight dressing-down on our account.'

'Probably he was,' replied Thorndyke. 'But I think that, if my learned
friend had happened to be furnished with eyes in the back of his head--'

'As my learned senior appears to be,' I interjected.

'--he would already have formed a more definite opinion as to what took
place. In the absence of the retrocephalic arrangement, I suggest that we
slip through this opening in the hedge and sit down under the bank.'

Stooping to avoid the thick upper foliage, he dived through the opening
and I followed, with no small curiosity as to what it was that my
extraordinarily observant colleague had seen. Presumably some one was
following us, and if so, as the opening occurred at a sharp bend of the
road, our disappearance would have been unobserved.

'It is my belief, Thorndyke,' I said, as we sat down under the bank,
'that your optical arrangements are like those of the giraffe. I believe
you can see all round the horizon at once.'

Thorndyke laughed softly. 'The human field of vision, Anstey,' said he,
'as measured by the perimeter, is well over a hundred and eighty degrees.
It doesn't take much lateral movement of the head to convert it into
three hundred and sixty. The really important factor is not optical but
mental. That earnest conversation with the gatekeeper suggested a
possibility, though a rather remote one. Ordinary human eyesight, used
with the necessary attention, was quite sufficient to show that the
improbable had happened, as it often does. Hush! Look through that chink
in the hedge.'

As he concluded in a whisper, rapid footfalls became audible. Nearer and
nearer they approached, and then, through my spy-hole, I saw a man in
cord breeches and leggings and a velveteen coat walk swiftly past. The
gatekeeper had been dressed thus, and presumably the man was he, though I
had not observed him closely enough to be able to recognise him with
certainty.

'Now, why is he following us?' I asked, taking the identity for granted.

'We mustn't assume that he is following us at all with a definite intent,
though I suspect he is. But he may be merely going the same way. He may
have business in Wendover.'

'It would be rather amusing to dodge him once or twice and see what his
game is,' I said with the schoolboy instinct that lingers on, if
atavistically, in the adult male.

'It would be highly amusing,' Thorndyke agreed, 'but it wouldn't serve our
purpose, which is to ascertain his purpose and keep our knowledge to
ourselves. We had better move on now if he is out of sight.'

He was out of sight, having reached and turned down the Tring Road. We
followed at a sharp walk, and as we came out into the Tring Road, behold
him standing in the footway a couple of hundred yards towards Wendover,
looking about him with a rather foolish air of bewilderment. As soon as
he saw us, he lifted his foot to the bank and proceeded to attend to his
bootlace.

'We won't notice him,' said Thorndyke. 'He is evidently an artless soul
and probably believes that he has not been recognised. Let us encourage
that eminently desirable belief.'

We passed him with an almost aggressive appearance of unconsciousness on
both sides, and pursued our way along the undulating road.

'I don't think there is much doubt now that he is following us,' said I,
'and the question is, why is he doing it?'

'Yes,' said Thorndyke, 'that is the question. He may have had
instructions to see us safely out of the district, or he may have had
further instructions. We shall see when we get to the station. Meanwhile
I am tempted to try a new invention of Polton's. It is slightly
fantastic, but he made me promise to carry it in my pocket and try it
when I had a chance. Now, here is the chance, and here is the
instrument.'

He took from his pocket a leather case from which he extracted a rather
solidly-made pair of spectacles. 'You see,' he said, 'Polton has long had
the idea that I ought to be provided with some means of observing what is
going on behind me, and he has devised this apparatus for the purpose.
Like all Polton's inventions, it is quite simple and practicable. As you
see, it consists of a rigid spectacle-frame fitted with dummy
glasses--clear, plain glass--at the outer edge of which is fixed a little
disc of speculum-metal worked to an optically true plane surface and set
at a minute angle to the glass. As the disc is quite close to the eye, it
enables the wearer, by the very slightest turn of the head, to get a
clear view directly behind him. Would you like to try it?'

I took the spectacles from him and put them on, and was amazed at their
efficiency. Although the discs were hardly bigger than split peas, they
gave me a perfectly clear view along the road behind us--as if I had been
looking through a small, round hole--and this with a scarcely appreciable
turn of the head. Viewed from behind, I must have appeared to be looking
straight before me.

'But,' I exclaimed, 'it seems a most practical device, and I shall insist
on Polton making me a pair.'

'That will please him,' said Thorndyke, and he added, reflectively 'if
only there were a few thousand more Poltons--men who found their
satisfaction in being useful and giving pleasure to their fellows--what a
delightful place this world would be!'

I continued to wear the magic spectacles all the way to Wendover, finding
a childish pleasure in watching the unconscious gatekeeper who was
dogging our footsteps and taking ludicrous precautions to keep--as he
thought--out of sight. Only as we descended the long hill into the
beautiful little town did I take them off, the better to enjoy the charm
of the picturesque approach with its row of thatched cottages and the
modest clock-turret, standing up against the background of the wooded
heights that soared above Ellesborough. At the station we had the good
fortune to find a train due and already signalled, but we delayed taking
our tickets until our follower arrived, which he did, in evident haste, a
couple of minutes later, being, no doubt, acquainted with the times of
the trains. As soon as he appeared, Thorndyke sauntered to the
booking-office wicket and gave him time to approach before demanding in
clear, audible tones, two firsts to Marylebone. The gatekeeper followed,
and thrusting his head and shoulders deep into the opening, as if he were
about to crawl through, made his demand in a muffled undertone.

'We need not trouble ourselves about him any more,' said Thorndyke,
'until we get to London. Then we shall know whether he is or is not
trying to shadow us.'

When we had settled ourselves in an empty compartment and began to charge
our pipes as the train moved off, I returned to the question of our
tactics.

'What do you propose to do, Thorndyke, if this fellow tries to follow us
home? Shall we let him run us to earth, or shall we lose him?'

'I see no reason why we should make a secret of who we are and where we
live. That is apparently what Blake wants to know--that is, if this man
is really shadowing us.'

'But,' I urged, 'isn't it generally wiser to withhold information until
you know what use is going to be made of it?'

'As a rule, it is,' he admitted. 'But it may happen that the use made of
information by one party may be highly illuminating to the other. We may
assume that Blake wants to know who we are simply because he suffers from
an obsession of suspicion and thinks that we were in his grounds for some
unlawful purpose. But he may have some other object, and if he has, I
should like to know what it is; and the best way to find out is to let
him have our names and address.'

To this I assented, though I was a little mystified. The man Blake was no
concern of ours, and it did not seem to matter in the least what
suspicions of us had got into his thick head. However Thorndyke probably
knew his own business--and meanwhile the presence of this sleuth-hound
provided an element of comedy of which I was far from unappreciative, and
which my sedate colleague enjoyed without disguise.

When we alighted at Marylebone, we walked quickly to the barrier, but
having passed through, we sauntered slowly to the main exit.

'Do you think Polton's spectacles would be very conspicuous?' I asked.

My colleague smiled indulgently. 'The new toy has caught on,' said he,
'and it would be undeniably useful at the present moment. No, put the
spectacles on. The discs are hardly noticeable to a casual observer.'

Accordingly I slipped the appliance on as we strolled out into the
Marylebone Road and was able, almost immediately, to report progress.

'He is watching us from the exit. Which way are we going?'

'I think,' replied Thorndyke, 'as he is a country cousin, we will make
things easy for him and give him a little exercise after the confinement
of the train. The Euston Road route is less crowded than Oxford Street.'

We turned eastward and started at an easy pace along the Marylebone Road
and Euston Road, keeping on the less-frequented side of the street. I was
a little self-conscious in regard to the spectacles, but apparently no
one noticed them; and by their aid I was able to watch with astonishing
ease our artless follower and to amuse myself by noting his conflicting
anxieties to keep us in view and himself out of sight. We turned down
Woburn Place, crossed Queen Square to Great Ormond Street and proceeding
by Lamb's-Conduit Street, Red Lion Street, Great Turnstile, Lincoln's
Inn, and Chancery Lane, crossed Fleet Street to Middle Temple Lane. Here
we slowed down, lest the sleuth-hound should lose us, and as we were now
in our own neighbourhood, I removed the spectacles and restored them to
their owner.

At the entrance to Pump Court we separated, Thorndyke proceeding at a
leisurely pace towards Crown Office Row while I hurried through the
court; and having halted in the Cloisters to make sure that the sleuth
was not pursuing me, I darted through Fig-Tree Court and across King's
Bench Walk to our chambers, where I found Polton laying a sort of hybrid
tea and supper.

To our trusty assistant I rapidly communicated the state of affairs
(including the triumphant success of the magic spectacles, at which his
face became a positive labyrinth of ecstatic wrinkles); and having
provided ourselves with field-glasses, we stationed ourselves at the
laboratory window, from whence we had the gratification of watching
Thorndyke emerge majestically from Crown Office Row, followed shortly by
the man in the velveteen coat, whose efforts to make himself invisible
brought Polton to the verge of apoplexy.

'Hadn't I better follow him and see where he goes to, sir?' the latter
suggested.

The suggestion was put to Thorndyke when he entered, but was rejected.

'I don't think we want to know where he goes from here,' said he. 'But
still, seeing that he has come so far, it might be kind of you, Polton,
to go down and give him a chance of obtaining any information that he
wants.'

Polton needed no second bidding. Clapping on his hat, he set forth
gleefully down the stairs. But in a minute or two he was back again,
somewhat crestfallen.

'It's no go, sir,' he reported. 'I found him copying the names on the
door-post in the entry, and I think he must have got them all down, for
when he saw me, he was off like a lamplighter.'

Thorndyke chuckled. 'And to think,' said he, 'that our friend, the
squire, could have got all the information he wanted by the simple
expedient of asking for our cards. Verily, suspicious folk give
themselves a deal of unnecessary trouble.'



CHAPTER SIXTEEN - MR BRODRIBB'S EMBASSY


There is a certain psychological phenomenon known to those financial
navigators who have business on the deep and perilous waters of the Stock
Exchange as 'jobbing backwards.' It is not their monopoly, however. To
ordinary mortals--who describe it as 'prophesying after the event'--it
has been familiar from time immemorial, and has always been associated
with a degree of wisdom and certainty strangely lacking in prophecy of a
more hasty and premature kind.

Reviewing the curious case of which this narrative is the record, I am
tempted to embark on this eminently satisfying form of mental exercise.
But when I do so, I am disposed to look with some surprise at the very
conspicuous deficiency in the power of 'jobbing forward' which I
displayed while the events which I am chronicling were in progress. Now,
I can see that all the striking and significant facts (only they then
appeared neither striking nor significant) which enabled Thorndyke, from
the very first, to pursue a steady advance along a visible trail, were in
my possession as much as they were in his. But, whereas in his hands they
became connected so as to form a continuous clue, in mine they remained
separate, and apparently unrelated fragments. At the time, I thought that
Thorndyke was hiding from me what material evidence he had. Now it is
obvious to me (as also to the acute reader, who has, no doubt, already
pieced the evidence together) that he not only concealed nothing, but
actually gave me several of the very broadest hints.

So, despite the knowledge that I really possessed, if I had only realised
it, I remained utterly in the dark. All that I knew for certain was that
Winifred was encompassed by dangers; that human wolves prowled about her
habitation and dogged her footsteps when she went abroad.

But even these perils had their compensations, for they gave an
appearance of necessity to the constant companionship that my
inclinations prompted. It was not a mere pilgrim of love that wended his
way daily to Jacob Street, but an appointed guardian with duties to
discharge. In the personally-conducted tours through the town, on
business connected with the drawings that Winifred continued to produce
with unabated industry, I was carrying out an indispensable function,
since she was not permitted to go abroad without an efficient escort; and
thus duty marched with pleasure.

Intimate, however, as my relations with Winifred had become, and
recognised now even by Percy, I abstained from any confidences on the
subject of our investigation of the murder. That was Thorndyke's affair,
and although he had made no stipulation on the subject, I had the feeling
that he expected me to keep my own counsel, as he certainly did himself.
Accordingly, in describing our visit to Beauchamp Blake--in which both
she and Percy were intensely interested--I said nothing about the man
whom I had seen in Aylesbury.

One exception I had nearly made, but thought better of it. The occasion
arose one afternoon when we were examining and criticising her latest
drawing. As we stood before the easel, a shaft of sunlight, coming in
through the great window, struck a part of the drawing and totally
altered the character of the colouring. I remarked on the change of
colour produced by the more intense illumination.

'Yes,' said she, 'and that reminds me of a very odd discovery that I made
the other day and that I meant to tell you about.' She unfastened the
silken cord by which she wore the mysterious locket suspended from her
neck, and opening the little gold volume, held it in the sunbeam so that
the light fell upon the coil of hair that it enclosed.

'Do you see?' she asked, looking at me expectantly.

'Yes,' I answered. 'In the sunlight the hair seems to have quite a
distinct blue tint.'

'Exactly!' she exclaimed. 'Now isn't that very remarkable? I have often
heard of blue-black hair, but I thought it was just a phrase expressing
intense blackness without any tinge of brown. But this is really blue,
quite a clear, rich blue, like the colour of deeply-toned stained glass.
Do you suppose it is natural? It can hardly be a dye.'

It was then that I had nearly told her of Thorndyke's discovery and his
strange and cryptic utterances on the subject. But a principle is a
principle. The fact had been communicated to me by him, and I did not
feel at liberty to disclose it without his sanction, though, to be sure,
there was nothing confidential about it. His examination of the locket
had been, apparently, a matter of mere curiosity. For Thorndyke was so
constituted that he could not bring himself willingly to leave a problem
unsolved, even though its solution promised no useful result. To him the
solution was an end in itself, undertaken for the pleasure of the mental
exercise. And this locket evidently held a secret. To what extent he had
mastered that secret, I could not guess. Nor did I particularly care. It
was not my secret, and I had no taste for working out irrelevant puzzles.

'I should hardly think the blue colour can be natural,' said I, and then,
by way of compromise, I added: 'but I expect Thorndyke could tell you.
When you come to see us again you had better show it to him and hear what
he says about it.'

I took the locket from her hand and looked it over with half-impatient
curiosity, remembering Thorndyke's exasperating advice, and recalling his
reference to the hallmark on the back, I turned it over and scrutinised
the minute device.

'You are looking at the hallmark, or the goldsmith's "touch," or whatever
it is,' said Winifred. 'It is rather curious. I have never seen one like
it before. It certainly is not an ordinary English hallmark. Let me get
you a magnifying-glass.'

She fetched a strong reading-glass, and through this I examined the mark
more minutely. But I could make nothing of it. It consisted of four
punch-marks, of which the first was a capital A surmounted by a small
crown and bearing two palm-leaves, the second a kind of escutcheon
bearing the initials AH surmounted by a crown, and over that a
fleur-de-lis; the third bore simply a capital L, and the fourth the head
of some animal which looked like a horse.

'It is a curious and unusual mark,' said I, handing back to her the
locket and the glass, 'but it conveys no information to me beyond the
suggestion that the locket is apparently of foreign workmanship, probably
French or Italian, But,' I added, with a malicious hope of seeing my
reverend senior cornered, 'you had better ask Thorndyke about it when you
come. He is sure to be able to tell you all about it.'

'He seems to be a sort of human encyclopaedia,' Winifred remarked as she
refastened the locket. 'I shall adopt your advice and consult him about
that hair, but I shan't be able to come this week. There is quite a big
batch of drawings to be done, and that means some long working days.
Perhaps you can arrange an afternoon in the latter part of next week for
the oracular tea-party.'

I promised to ascertain my colleague's arrangements and to fix a day, but
the promise was left unredeemed and the 'oracular tea-party' was thrust
into the background by new and more stirring events, which began to cast
their shadows before them that very evening. For, when I entered our
chambers, behold Mr Brodribb and Sir Lawrence Drayton settled in
armchairs by the fire, in company with the small table and the inevitable
decanter. Evidently some kind of conference was in progress.

'Ha!' said Brodribb. 'Here is the fourth conspirator. Now we are
complete. I have been devilling for your respected senior, Anstey, and I
have called to report progress. Also, as you see, I have captured Sir
Lawrence and brought him along as he seemed to be an interested party.'

'He is a somewhat mystified party at present,' said Drayton, 'but
probably some explanations are contemplated.'

'They are going to begin as soon as Anstey has filled his glass,' said
Brodribb, bearing in mind, no doubt, the laws of conviviality as
expounded by Mrs Gamp; and as the stipulated condition was complied with,
he proceeded: 'It was suggested to me by Thorndyke a short time ago that
the tenure of the Beauchamp Blake property would be put on a more
satisfactory footing if the missing title-deeds could be recovered.'

'More satisfactory to the present tenant, you mean,' said Drayton.

'More satisfactory to everybody,' said Brodribb.

'That would depend on the nature of the documents recovered,' Sir
Lawrence remarked. 'But let us hear the rest of the suggestion.'

'The suggestion of our learned and Machiavellian friend was that, since
the documents are believed to be hidden somewhere in the house, it would
be a good plan to have a systematic survey of the premises carried out by
some person who has an expert knowledge of secret chambers and
hiding-places.'

'Do you know of any such person?' Drayton asked.

Brodribb smiled a fat smile and replenished his glass. 'I do,' he replied
'and so do you. Thorndyke himself is quite an authority on the subject;
and, of course, the suggestion was that the survey should be made and the
search conducted by him. Naturally. You can guess why, I suppose?'

'I can't,' said Drayton, 'if you are suggesting any reason other than the
one you have given.'

'My dear Drayton,' chuckled Brodribb, 'can you imagine Thorndyke
embarking on a search of this kind without some definite leading facts?
No, no. Our friend has got something up his sleeve. I've no doubt that he
knows exactly where to put his hand on those documents before he begins.'

'Do you, Thorndyke?' Sir Lawrence asked, with an inquisitive glance at my
colleague.

'Now,' the latter replied, 'I put it to you, Drayton, whether it is
likely that I, who have never been in this house in my life, have never
seen a plan of it, and have no knowledge whatever of its internal
construction or arrangement, can possibly know where these documents are
hidden.'

'It certainly doesn't seem very probable,' Drayton admitted, and it
certainly did not. But still I noted that Thorndyke's answer contained no
specific denial, a circumstance that apparently did not escape Brodribb's
observation, for that astute practitioner received the reply with an
unabashed wink and wagged his head knowingly as he savoured his wine.

'You can think what you like,' said he, 'and so can I. However, to
proceed: the suggestion was that I should put the proposal to the present
tenant, Arthur Blake, and expound its advantages, but, of course, say
nothing as to the source of the inspiration. Well, I did so. I wrote to
him, pointing out the desirability of getting possession of the deeds,
and suggesting that he should call at my office and talk the matter
over.'

'And how did he take it?' asked Drayton.

'Very calmly--at first. He called at my office yesterday and opened the
subject. But he didn't seem at all keen on it; thought it sounded rather
like a wild-goose chase--until I mentioned Thorndyke. Then his interest
woke up at once. The mention of a real, tangible expert put the matter on
a different plane; gave it an air of reality. And he had heard of
Thorndyke--read about him in the papers, I suppose--and, of course, I
cracked him up. So in the end he became as keen as mustard and anxious to
get a start made as soon as possible. And not only keen on his own
account. To my surprise, he raised the question of the other claimant,
Peter Blake's son. Of course he knew about Peter Blake's claim, although
it was before his time, and it seems that he read the newspaper report of
the curious statement that Miss Blake--Peter's daughter--made at the
inquest on Sir Lawrence's brother. Well, in effect, he suggested--very
properly, as I thought--that Miss Blake might like to be present when
the search was made.'

'I certainly think,' said Drayton, 'she should be, if not actually
present, at least represented. There might be some documents affecting
her brother directly.'

'That was his point, and he authorised me to invite her to be present and
to make all necessary arrangements. So the question is, Thorndyke, when
can you go down and find the documents?'

'I am prepared to begin the search the day after tomorrow.'

'And with regard to Miss Blake? You are acquainted with her, I think?'

'Yes,' replied Thorndyke. 'We can communicate with her. But my feeling is
that it would hardly be desirable for her to be present while the actual
survey is being made. It may be a tedious affair, and we shall get on
with it better without spectators. Of course I shall know if anything is
found and shall probably ascertain its nature; and in that case she can
be informed.'

Drayton nodded, but he did not seem quite satisfied. 'I suppose that will
do,' said he, 'though I would rather that she were directly represented.
You see, Thorndyke, you are acting for Blake, and if Anstey goes with
you, he is your coadjutor. I wonder if Blake would object to my looking
in later in the day. I could, as I have to go down to Aylesbury the day
after tomorrow. What do you say, Brodribb?'

'I see no objection,' was the reply, 'in fact, I will take the
responsibility of inviting you to call and see what progress has been
made.'

'Very well, then,' said Drayton, 'I will come about four. I shall go down
by car, and when I have finished with my client, I can easily take
Beauchamp Blake on my way home. And for that matter,' he added, 'I don't
see why Miss Blake shouldn't come with me. My client's wife could
entertain her while I am transacting the business, and then she could
come on with me to the house. How does that strike you, Thorndyke?'

'It seems quite an admirable arrangement,' my colleague replied. 'She
will be saved the tedium of waiting about and she will have the advantage
of your advice if any delicate inquiries have to be made.'

Drayton's suggestion was accordingly adopted, subject to Winifred's
consent--which I did not doubt she would give readily, notwithstanding
the pressure of her work--and shortly afterwards our two friends took
their departure, leaving me a little puzzled as to the origin and purpose
of the conference and the projected expedition.

It had been a rather curious transaction. There were several points that
I failed to understand. In the first place, what interest had Thorndyke
in these title-deeds? Assuming him to take Percy's rather indefinite
claim seriously--which he apparently did--was the establishment of the
title desirable from his point of view? I should have thought not. It had
appeared that Blake was anxious to sell the property and had been
restrained only by the insecurity of the title. But if the title were
made secure, he would almost certainly sell the estate, which was the
last thing that Percy's advisers could wish. Then could it be that our
shrewd old friend Brodribb was right? That Thorndyke had actually
ascertained or inferred the whereabouts of the missing deeds? In the case
of any other person the supposition would have seemed ridiculous. But
Thorndyke's power of reasoning from apparently unilluminating facts was
so extraordinary that the possibility had to be admitted, and his evasive
reply to Drayton's direct question seemed to make it even probable.

'I don't see,' said I, with a faint hope of extracting some trifle of
information from Thorndyke, 'why you are so keen on these title-deeds.'

'That,' he replied, 'is because you persist in thinking in sections. If
you would take a larger view of the subject this proposed search would
appear to you in a rather different light.'

'I wonder if there is really going to be a search,' I said craftily, 'or
whether old Brodribb was right. I am inclined to suspect that he was.'

'I commend your respect for Brodribb's opinions,' he replied. 'Our friend
is an uncommonly wide-awake old gentleman. But he was only guessing.
Whatever we find at Beauchamp Blake--if we find anything--will be
discovered by bonafide research and experiment. And that raises another
question. Are you going down with Drayton or did you propose to come with
me?'

'I don't want to be in your way,' I replied, a little piqued at the
question. 'Otherwise I should, of course, have liked to come with you.

'Your help would be very valuable,' said he, 'if you are willing to
sacrifice the other attractions. But if you are going to help me, we had
better take a little preliminary practice together. There is a set of
empty chambers next door. Tomorrow I will get the keys from the
treasurer's office, and we can put in some spare time making careful
measured plans. The whole art of discovering secret chambers is in the
making of plans so exact as to account for every inch of space, and
showing accurately the precise thickness of every wall and floor. And a
little practice in the art of opening locked doors without the aid of
keys will not be amiss.'

This programme was duly carried out. On the morrow we conveyed into the
empty chambers a plane table covered with drawing-paper, a surveyor's
tape, and a measuring-rod; and with these appliances, I proceeded, under
Thorndyke's direction, to make a scaled plan of the set of rooms, showing
the exact thickness of all the walls and the spaces occupied by chimneys,
cupboards, and all kinds of projections and irregularities. It was a
longer business than I had expected; indeed I did not get it completed
until the evening was closing in, and when at last I had filled in the
final details and took the completed plan to our chambers for Thorndyke's
inspection, I found my colleague busily engaged in preparations for the
morrow's adventure.

'Well!' I exclaimed, when my plan had been examined and replaced by a
fresh sheet of paper, 'this is an extraordinary outfit! I hope we shan't
have to carry this case home after dark.'

It was certainly a most sinister collection of appliances that Thorndyke
had assembled in the suitcase. There was a brace and bits, and auger, a
bunch of skeleton keys, an electric lantern, a pair of telescopic
jemmies, and two automatic pistols.

'What on earth are the pistols for?' I demanded.

'Those,' he replied, 'are just an extra precaution. Many of these
hiding-holes are fitted with snap locks, and it is quite possible to find
oneself caught in a trap. Then, if there should be no room to use a
jemmy, it might be necessary to blow the lock to pieces.'

'Well,' I remarked, 'it is as well to take all necessary precautions, but
if Blake sees those pistols they will need a good deal of explaining,
especially as he will certainly recognise us as the two suspicious
visitors.'

'We need not exhibit them ostentatiously,' said Thorndyke. 'We can carry
them in our pockets, and the jemmies as well. Then if the necessity to
use them arises, they will explain themselves.'

The rest of the evening we spent in a course of instruction in the
arrangement and design of the various kinds of secret chambers,
hiding-holes, aumbries, and receptacles for documents, sacred vessels,
and other objects that, in times of political upheaval, might need to be
concealed. On this subject Thorndyke was a mine of information, and he
produced a note-book filled with descriptions, plans, sections, and
photographs of most of the examples that had been examined, which we went
over together and studied in the minutest detail. By the end of the
evening, I had not only acquired an immense amount of knowledge on an
obscure out-of-the-way subject, but I had become in so far infected with
Thorndyke's enthusiasm that I found myself looking forward almost eagerly
to the romantic quest on which the following day was to see us launched.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN - THE SECRET CHAMBER


It was close on half-past eleven when our train drew up in Wendover
Station. We had just finished our rather premature lunch and had packed
up the luncheon baskets and placed them on the seats; and now, lifting
down the suitcase and the plane table with its folding tripod, stepped
out on to the platform.

'I wonder,' said I, 'if Blake has sent any kind of conveyance for us. I
don't suppose he has.'

My surmise turned out to be correct. When we went out into the station
approach, the only vehicle in sight was a closed fly, which we decided to
charter; and having stowed our impedimenta on the front seat and given
the driver the necessary directions, we entered and took possession of
the back seat. The coachman climbed to the box and started the horse at a
quiet jog-trot, turning into the Aylesbury, or London Road to avoid the
steep hill down which we had come to the station on the last occasion. As
we passed the fine, brick-towered windmill and came out on the country
road, Thorndyke leaned forward and opened the suitcase.

'We had better put the more suspicious-looking objects in our pockets,'
said he. 'We may not want them at all, and then they won't have been
seen, whereas if they are wanted, the necessity will explain our having
provided ourselves with them.'

He took out the bunch of skeleton keys and slipped them into his coat
pocket, and then picked out the two telescopic jemmies, one of which he
handed to me while he bestowed the other in some kind of interior
pocket--into which, I noticed, it disappeared with singular completeness,
suggesting a suspicious suitability of the receptacle. Finally he took
out the two automatic pistols, and having pocketed one, handed me the
other after a careful and detailed explanation of its mechanism and the
proper way to hold and fire it. I took the weapon from him and stowed it
in my hip-pocket, very gingerly and with some reluctance, for I detest
firearms; and as I placed it carefully with the muzzle pointed as far as
possible away from my own person, I reflected once more with dim surprise
on the circumstance that Thorndyke, whose dislike of these weapons was as
great as my own, should have adopted this clumsy and dangerous means of
dealing with a somewhat remote contingency. It seemed an excessive
precaution, and I found creeping into my mind a faint suspicion that my
colleague might possibly have had something more in his mind than he had
disclosed, though that was even more incomprehensible, considering the
very peaceful nature of our quest.

I was still turning these matters over in my mind when the fly reached
the crossroads and entered the lane. Here the appearance of the inn just
ahead recalled me to our immediate business, and old Brodribb's
observation recurred to me.

'How are you going to start, Thorndyke?' I asked. 'I presume you have got
some definite programme?'

'I shall be guided by what Blake has to tell us,' he replied. 'He may
have a good plan of the house, and it is possible that he has made some
explorations of his own which will give us a start. There is our old
friend, the lodge-keeper, mightily surprised to see us.'

I caught a passing glimpse of the sleuth, staring at us in undisguised
astonishment; then we swung round into the drive, and the old house came
into view. We were evidently expected, for as we approached the house a
man came out of the main entrance and stood on the wide threshold
awaiting our arrival. Just as the fly was about to draw up opposite the
portico, Thorndyke said in a low voice:

'If we are offered any refreshments, Anstey, we had better decline them.
We have had lunch, you know.'

I glanced at him in amazement. It was a most astonishing remark. But
there was no time to ask for any explanation, for at that moment the fly
drew up, the driver jumped down from his seat, and the squire came
forward to receive us.

'We have met before, I think,' said the latter as we shook hands. 'If I
had known who you were I should have invited you to look at the house
then. However, it isn't too late. I see you have brought your traps with
you,' he added, with a glance at the plane table and its tripod.

'Yes,' said Thorndyke, 'we are prepared to make a regular survey, if
necessary. But perhaps you have a plan of the house?'

'There is a plan,' replied Blake, 'though I fancy it is not very exact. I
will show it to you. Probably it will give you a hint where to begin.'

As I had now settled with the fly-man, we entered the house, and Blake
conducted us into a large room, furnished as a library and containing a
considerable collection of books. On a table by one of the windows was a
plan spread out and held open by paperweights.

'You see,' said Blake, 'this is an architect's plan, made, I think, when
some repairs were contemplated. It is little more than a sketch, and
doesn't give much detail. But it will help you to take a preliminary look
round before lunch.'

'We have had lunch,' said Thorndyke. 'We got that over in the train so
that we should have a clear day before us. Time is precious, and we ought
to get to work at once. I suppose you have not made any sort of
investigation on your own account?'

As Thorndyke mentioned our premature meal, the squire gave him a quick
glance and seemed to look a little resentful. But he made no comment
beyond answering the question.

'I have not made any regular examination of the house, but I have poked
about a little in the old part and I have found one secret chamber, which
I have utilised as a photographic dark-room. Perhaps you would like to
see that first. There may be some other hiding-places connected with it
which I have overlooked. There is a tall cupboard in it which I have used
to store my chemicals.'

'We may have to empty that cupboard to see if there is anything behind
it,' said Thorndyke. 'At any rate, we had better begin by overhauling
it.'

He opened the suitcase and took from it the surveyor's tape, which he put
in his pocket.

'Hadn't we better take the lamp?' said I.

'You won't want that,' said Blake. 'There is a portable lamp in the
room.'

I was half-inclined to take it, nevertheless, but as Thorndyke shut the
suitcase and prepared to follow our host, I let the matter rest.

From the library we passed out into a long gallery, one side of which was
hung with portraits, presumably of members of the family, and some of
them of considerable antiquity, to judge by the style of the painting and
the ancient costumes. Then we crossed several rooms--fine, stately
apartments with florid, moulded ceilings and walls of oaken panelling, on
which I noticed a very respectable display of pictures. The rooms were
fully furnished--very largely, I noticed, with the oak and walnut
furniture that must have been put in when the new wing was built. But
they were all pervaded by a sense of desolation and neglect; they were
dusty and looked faded, unused, and forgotten. Nowhere was there a sign
of human occupation, nor, I noticed, did we meet, in the whole course of
our journey across this part of the house, a single servant or retainer,
or, indeed, any living creature whatever.

A door at the end of a short passage, on being unlocked and opened,
revealed a short flight of wooden stairs, and when we had descended these
we found ourselves in a totally different atmosphere. This was the old
timber house, and as we crossed its deserted rooms and trod its
uncarpeted oaken floors, our footsteps resounded with dismal echoes among
the empty chambers and corridors, conveying a singular sense of
remoteness and desolation. The gloomy old rooms with their dirt-encrusted
casements, the massive beams in their ceilings, the blackened
wainscoting, rich with carved ornament but shrouded with the dust and
grime of years of neglect, the gouty-legged Elizabethan tables and
ponderous oaken chairs and settles; all these dusty and forgotten
appurtenances of a vanished generation of men seemed to have died with
their long-departed human associates and to be silently awaiting their
final decay and dissolution. It was an eerie place, dead and desolate as
an Egyptian tomb.

And yet, strangely enough, it was here that I saw the one solitary sign
of human life. We were passing along a narrow gallery or corridor when I
noticed, high up in the panelled wall, one of those small interior
windows which one sees in old houses, placed opposite an exterior window
to light an inner chamber. Looking up at this little window, I saw the
face of some person looking down on us. It was the merest glimpse that I
caught, for the window was coated with dust and the room behind it in
darkness. But there was the face of some human creature, man, woman, or
child, and its appearance in this remote, sepulchral place, so far from
the domain of the living household, smote upon me strangely and seemed to
make even more intense the uncanny solitude of the empty mansion.

I was still speculating curiously on who this watcher might be, when our
host halted by the wall of a smallish room.

'This is the place,' said he, pointing to the wall. 'I wonder if you can
find the door.'

The wainscoting in this room was nearly plain, the only ornament being a
range of very flat pilasters and a dado moulding, enriched by a row of
hemispherical bosses. Thorndyke ran his eye over the wainscoting, noting
more particularly the way in which the pilasters were joined to the
intervening panels.

'I suppose,' said he, 'we had better try the most obvious probabilities
first. The natural thing would be to use one of these bosses to cover the
release of the lock.'

Blake assented (or dissented) with an inarticulate grunt, and Thorndyke
then proceeded to pass along the row of bosses, pressing each one firmly
in turn. After about a dozen trials, he came to one in the middle of a
pilaster which yielded to the pressure of his thumb, sinking in some two
inches, in the fashion of a large electric-bell push. Holding the 'push'
in with his thumb, he pressed vigorously against the adjoining panel,
first on one side of the pilaster and then on the other, but in neither
case was there any sign of the panel moving, though I added my weight to
his.

'You haven't quite hit it off yet,' Blake informed us.

Thorndyke reflected for a few seconds. Then, keeping the boss pressed in,
he put his other thumb on the next one of the series, which was at the
edge of the panel, and gave a sharp push, whereupon this boss also sank
in with an audible click and then the whole panel swung inward,
disclosing a narrow and wonderfully well-concealed doorway.

'Good,' said Blake. 'You've solved the problem more quickly than I did.
Just hold the door open a moment. It has rather a strong spring, and I
generally prop it open with this block.' As he spoke he fetched a small
block of wood from under an adjacent table and set it against the foot of
the door.

'I had better go first,' said he, 'as I know where to find the lamp.'
With this he entered before us, striking a wax match and shading it with
his hand. The dim illumination showed a narrow, passage-like room,
apparently a good deal more lofty than the low-ceiled room from which we
had entered it, and dimly revealed a very high cupboard near the farther
end. We had groped our way after him a few paces when he turned
suddenly. 'How stupid of me!' he exclaimed. 'I had forgotten that I had
left the lamp in the next room. Excuse me one moment.'

He slipped past us, and kicking the block away, ran out, pulling the door
sharply after him, when it slammed to with a loud click of the latch.

'What the deuce did he kick that block away for,' I exclaimed, 'and leave
us all in the dark?'

'We shall probably find out presently,' replied Thorndyke. 'Meanwhile,
stand perfectly still. Don't move hand or foot.'

'Why do you say that?' I demanded with something like a thrill of alarm,
for there was something rather disturbing in the tone of Thorndyke's
sharply-spoken command. And standing there in the pitchy darkness, locked
in a secret chamber in the very heart of this great, empty mansion, there
came to me a flash of sudden suspicion. I recalled Thorndyke's mysterious
warning to take no food in this house; I remembered the loaded pistol
that he had put into my hand, and I saw again that unaccountable face at
the window, watching us as Blake led us--whither? 'You don't think Blake
is up to any mischief, do you?' I asked.

'I can't say,' he replied. 'Perhaps he will come with the lamp presently.
But we may as well see where we are while we are waiting.'

I heard a rustling as if he were searching his pockets. Then, suddenly,
there broke out a bright light that flooded the little room and rendered
all the objects in it plainly visible.

It was a queer-looking room, almost more like a rather irregularly-shaped
passage, for none of the walls were straight, and the ceiling sloped up
from a height of about eight feet at one end to nearly twelve at the
other. Near the farther end was a very high wall-cupboard, and at the
extreme end, facing us, was a small door, about three feet above the
floor level and approached by a flight of five wooden stairs.

The appearance of the light was reassuring, and still more so was the
evidence that it afforded of Thorndyke's foresight in having provided
himself with this supplementary lamp. But much less reassuring was his
next observation after having flashed his light all over the room.

'I suspect we have seen the last of our host--for the present, at any
rate. Look at the top of the cupboard, Anstey.'

I looked at the cupboard. It was between eight and nine feet high, and
was fitted with folding doors, of which the leaf nearest to us was half
open; and on the top of the half-open door, near the free corner, a
little board had been placed with one end resting on the door and the
other insecurely supported by the moulding at the top of the cupboard;
and on the board, delicately balanced over the door, was a large chemical
flask, filled with what looked like water and fitted with a cork.

'What do you make of it?' Thorndyke asked, keeping his powerful
inspection-lamp focused on the flask as I gazed at it.

'It looks like some sort of booby-trap,' said I. 'It is a wonder that
flask wasn't shaken down when Blake slammed the door.'

'He probably expected that it would be, and it very nearly was, for you
can see that it has jarred to the extreme edge. But failing the slam of
the door, he no doubt assumes that we, being as he imagines in total
darkness, shall grope our way along the wall until we come to the
cupboard. Then, the instant we touch the door, down will come the flask.
It is quite an ingenious plan.'

'But what is the purpose of it?' I demanded. 'It can't be a practical
joke.'

'It isn't,' said he. 'Far from it. I should say it is very deadly
earnest. Unless I am mistaken, that flask is filled with some volatile
poison. The instant that it falls and breaks, this room will become a
lethal chamber.'

At these words, uttered by Thorndyke in tones as calm and emotionless as
if he were giving a demonstration to his students, a chill of horror
crept over me. My very hair seemed to stir. It was an appalling
situation. I stared in dismay and terror at the flask, poised aloft and
ready, as it seemed, at the slightest movement, or even a loudly-spoken
word, to come crashing down and stifle us with its deadly fumes.

'Great God!' I gasped. 'Then we are in a trap! But is there nothing that
we can do? The flask is too high up for us to reach it.'

'It would be sheer insanity to go near it; said Thorndyke. 'But I don't
think we need be very disturbed. There must be some way of getting out of
this chamber. Let us go and reconnoitre the door, though I daresay our
friend has attended to that.'

We tiptoed cautiously back to the door and examined its construction. The
mechanism was very simple, but like most old locksmith's work, extremely
massive. The two bosses outside evidently were the ends of two sliding
bars and bolts of wood. The one which Thorndyke had pressed first
apparently had a slot which, when it was brought opposite the massive
latch, allowed the latter to rise. That at least was what Thorndyke
inferred, for, as the latch was in the thickness of the great oaken
doorpost (which had a slot to let it escape, when raised) the actual
mechanism could not be seen. The second sliding bar, when pushed in,
raised the latch itself by means of an inclined plane. Both the sliding
bars had been provided with knobs on their inner ends, so that they could
be pulled in from inside as well as pushed in from without; but whereas
the knob still remained on the bar which raised the latch, that of the
bar which released the latch and allowed it to rise had been removed. The
end of the bar could be seen, nearly flush with the surface of the
doorpost, and in it a small hole in which the knob had evidently been
screwed.

'Would it be possible to hook anything, such as a skeleton key, into that
hole?' I asked when we had examined it thoroughly.

'I think we can do better than that,' said he, hooking the bulls-eye of
his inspection-lamp in a button-hole of his coat and feeling in his
pocket. 'This is a more workmanlike appliance.'

He exhibited an appliance that looked like a kind of clasp-knife, but was
actually a pocket set of screw-taps, such as are carried by engineers and
plumbers. Drawing out the smallest tap, he tried it in the hole, but the
latter was too small to admit it. Then, from the same appliance, he drew
out a taper reamer, and on trying this in the hole he found that the
point entered easily. He accordingly drove it in lightly, rotating it as
he pressed, and continued to turn it until the sharp-cutting tool had
broached out the hole to a size that would admit the nose of the tap,
when he withdrew the reamer, and inserting the tap, gave it a few
vigorous turns. Now, on pulling gently at the handle of the tap, it was
seen to be fast in the hole, and the sliding bar began to move forward.

'I wonder if our host is hanging about outside,' said he.

'What does it matter whether he is or not?' I asked.

'Because I want to try whether we can open the door, and I don't want him
to hear.'

'But, confound it,' said I, 'he will see us when we come out.'

'We are not going to come out that way if we can find any other.'

'Why not?' I demanded. 'We want to get clear of that infernal flask, and
the sooner we are out the better.'

'Not at all,' said Thorndyke. 'If we come out and show ourselves, the
game is up, and there will probably be trouble. Whereas if we can get out
another way, we shall put him in a very pretty dilemma. Hearing no sound
from us, he will probably assume that his plan has succeeded. And if
Drayton should arrive before he has taken the risk of verifying our
decease, his explanations should be rather interesting. At any rate, I
should like to see what his next move will be, but we must make our
retreat secure in case of accidents. I think we can raise the latch
without making any noticeable sound. You observe that the pivot has been
oiled--and also that the door-spring is new and has apparently been fixed
on quite recently.'

In my heart I cursed his inquiring spirit, for I wanted to get out of
this horrible trap. But I offered no objection, standing by sullenly
while he proceeded with calm interest to complete his experiment.
Grasping the tap-handle with one hand and the knob with the other, he
pulled steadily at the former until the sliding bar was drawn inwards to
its full extent, and then at the knob, which came in with similar ease
and silence. But when I saw the latch rise and the door begin to swing
inwards, I could hardly restrain myself from dragging it open and making
a burst for freedom.

The next moment the opportunity was gone. With the same silent care
Thorndyke reclosed the door, let the latch down, and slid back the
release bar.

'Now,' said he, turning away but leaving the tap jammed in the hole, 'we
can pursue our investigations at our ease. If there is no other exit, we
can come out this way, and we have got a clear retreat in case of
accidents. What does the appearance of this place suggest to you? I mean
as to an exit.'

'Well,' I answered, 'there is a door at the top of those steps.
Presumably its function is the ordinary function of a door.'

'I doubt it,' said he. 'It is too blatantly innocent. More probably its
function was to occupy pursuers while the fugitive was gaining a start.
Still, we will have a thorough look at it, as I expect our host has
already done. We had better go one at time, and for Heaven's sake step
lightly, and remember that if that flask should come down, you make a
bee-line for the door and get outside instantly.'

Lighted by Thorndyke's lamp, I crept cautiously along the room with my
eyes riveted on the flask and my heart in my mouth. Then Thorndyke
followed, and together we ascended the steps to the door, and proceeded
to examine it minutely. It was provided with plainly visible hinges but
had no ostensible latch or lock. Around it were a number of projecting
ends of tree-nails, but pressure on them, one after the other, produced
no result, nor did the door itself show any sign of yielding; indeed, the
form of the hinges suggested that it opened inwards--towards the room--if
it would open at all.

'We are wasting time, Anstey,' Thorndyke said at length. 'The thing is a
dummy, as we might have expected. Let us try something more likely. Now,
from what I know of these secret chambers, I should say that the most
probable exits are the cupboard and the stairs. Both, you notice, seem to
be functionless. There is no reason for that great cupboard having been
built in here, and these stairs simply lead to a dummy door. And
cupboards with sliding shelves and concealed doors in the back, and
stairs with movable treads were very favourite devices. The cupboard is
unfortunately not practicable while that flask is balanced overhead, so
we had better give our attention to the stairs. I suspect that there are
two exits, in different directions, but either will do for us.'

We stole softly down the stairs, and stooping on hands and knees, brought
the light to bear on the joints of the treads and risers; but the dirt of
ages had settled on them and filled up any tell-tale cracks that might
have been visible. To my eye, the steps looked all alike, and all seemed
to be solid oak planks immovably fixed in their positions.

Suddenly Thorndyke dived into his inner pocket and brought forth the
telescopic jemmy, which he pulled out to its full length. Then, laying
the chisel end on the tread of the bottom stair, he drove its edge
forcibly against the angle where the tread and the riser met. To my
surprise, the edge entered fully half an inch into the joint, which the
dirt had filled and concealed.

'Get your jemmy, Anstey, and push it in by the side of mine,' said he.

I produced the tool from my breast pocket, where it had been reposing to
my great discomfort, and opening it out, I inserted its edge close to
that of Thorndyke's.

'Now,' said he, 'both together. Push!'

We both bore heavily on the ends of the jemmies, and the sharp chisel
ends entered fully an inch; and simultaneously a visible crack appeared
along the foot of the riser. We now withdrew the jemmies and reinserted
them at the two ends of the tread. Again we drove in together, and the
crack widened perceptibly. On this, Thorndyke rose and closely examined
the angle of the step above and then that of the third, and here, as he
brought the bulls-eye close to the surface of the step, I could see that
a narrow crack had opened between the step and the riser.

'It looks,' said I, 'as if the two steps had shifted.'

'Yes,' he agreed, 'and apparently the pivot, if there is one, is above.
Let us get to work again.'

We reinserted the jemmies several times in different places, thrusting
together and as forcibly as we dared with that horrible flask insecurely
balanced above our heads; and at each thrust there was an appreciable
widening of the crack, which had now opened fully a quarter of an inch,
making it evident that the stairs were really movable.

'Now,' said Thorndyke, 'I think we might venture to prise.'

He reversed his jemmy and inserted the 'crow' end into the crack near one
extremity, while I inserted mine near the opposite end. Then, at a word
from him, we bore on the ends of the levers, and with a protesting groan,
the step rose another inch. Thorndyke now laid aside his jemmy, and
standing on the bottom step, thrust his fingers into the gaping crack; I
did the same, and when we had got a fair grasp, he gave the word.

'Now, both together. Up she comes!'

We both heaved steadily but not too violently. There was a grinding creak
as the long-disused joint moved; then suddenly the two steps swung up and
stood nearly upright on their pivot, disclosing a yawning hole in which
the light showed a narrow flight of brick steps.

Thorndyke immediately stepped in through the opening, and descending a
few steps, turned and held the light for me, when I followed.

The steps fell away steeply down a kind of well with walls of brickwork,
which was thickly encrusted with slimy growths of algae and fungi, and
the steps themselves were slippery with a similar coating and were almost
hidden, in places, by great fungous masses which sprouted from the joints
of the brickwork. After descending about eight feet, we reached a level
floor and proceeded along a narrow brick tunnel, stooping to clear the
slime-covered roof. This extended some fifteen yards and ended in what at
first looked like a blank wall. On coming close, however, and throwing on
it the light of the lantern, I perceived an oblong space of planking
about five feet long by three high and three feet above the floor,
forming a rude door, very massive and clumsy and furnished with a simple,
roughly-fashioned iron latch.

'I don't see any hinges,' observed Thorndyke, 'so there is probably an
internal pivot. Let us prise up the latch first and then see how the door
moves.'

He slipped the end of his jemmy under the latch, taking a bearing on the
brickwork, and levered the great latch up without much difficulty in
spite of the rust that had locked it in position. Then, inserting the
chisel end into the crack between the door and the jamb, he gave a
tentative wrench, when the door moved perceptibly, inwards at one end and
outwards at the other.

'It is evidently pivoted in the middle,' said he. 'If you will prise the
other end while I work at this, we shall get it open easily.'

We accordingly inserted our jemmies at the respective ends and gave a
steady thrust; on which the door, with a deep groan and a loud screech
from the rusty pivots, swung round on its centre, letting in a flood of
cheerful daylight and fresh air, which I inhaled with profound relief. A
vigorous pull on the edge brought the door fully open and disclosed a
mass of foliage which blocked the view from within and no doubt concealed
the door from outside. But in any case it would have been very
inconspicuous, for we could now see that the solid planking was covered
externally with counterfeit brickwork, very convincingly executed with
slices of brick.

Thorndyke reached out and pulled aside a branch of the tree that obscured
the view 'This door,' said he, 'seems to open on the edge of the moat, so
it was probably made at a time when the moat was full of water. However,
we have found our way out, and it is a better one than the cupboard would
have given us, for, if that has an exit in the back, it probably leads up
to the garrets or the chimneys. Now all we have to do is to remove our
traces from the chamber above and make our way out. But there is no need
for you to come up.'

'I am coming up all the same,' said I, and as he turned to re-enter the
tunnel, I followed, though I admit, with infinite reluctance. But I did
not actually re-enter the chamber. I stood with my head out of the
opening and a terrified eye on the accursed flask, while Thorndyke
tiptoed across the room to the door. Here he withdrew the tap from the
hole, and folding it, dropped it into his pocket. Then he stooped and
blew away the wood-dust that had fallen from the reamer on to the floor,
and having thus removed every trace (excepting the broached-out hole in
the sliding bar), he stepped lightly back and re-entered the opening.

'The problem now,' said he, 'is to get these stairs back in their place
without shaking down the flask.'

'Does it matter,' I asked, 'now that we have a means of escape?'

'Not very much,' he answered, 'but I would rather leave it there in
evidence.'

The movable stairs were furnished with a rough wooden handle on the
underside to enable a fugitive to replace them from below. This Thorndyke
grasped, and with a steady pull, drew the stairs down into their original
position, giving a final tug to bring the joints close together. Then
once more we began to descend the slippery steps.

We were about half-way down when Thorndyke stopped.

'Listen, Anstey,' said he, switching off the light. And as he spoke, I
caught the sound of footsteps somewhere overhead. Then I heard the door
of the secret chamber open slowly--I could recognise it by the sound of
the door-spring--and after a little interval, Blake's voice called out:

'Dr Thorndyke! Mr Anstey! Where are you?'

Again there was a short pause. The door slowly opened a little farther,
the floor above creaked under a stealthy tread, and then I seemed to
catch faintly another voice, apparently more distant.

'They are not here,' said Blake. 'They seem to have got out somehow.
Here, catch hold of the lamp. Mind the door! Mind the--'

The door-spring creaked. There was a heavy thud, and an instant later the
sound of shattering glass, followed by a startled shout and a hurried
trampling of feet.

'The knob! The knob! Quick!' a high-pitched voice shrieked; and at that
the very marrow in my bones seemed to creep. For the knob was useless
now. Thorndyke's reamer had destroyed the screw-hole.

With the sweat streaming down my face and my heart thumping with
sickening violence, I listened to the torrent of curses, rising to yells
of terror and anguish and mingled with strange, whimpering cries. I could
see it all with horrible distinctness: the two trapped wretches above,
frantically turning the knob in the broached-out hole while the poisonous
fumes rose remorselessly and encompassed them.

The cries grew thicker and more muffled, and mingled with dreadful coughs
and gasps. Then there was a sound of a heavy body falling on the floor
and a horrible husky screech broke out, whereat I felt the hair of my
scalp stir like the fur of a frightened cat. Three times that appalling
screech came through the floor to our pitch-dark lurking-place, the last
time dying away into a hideous, quavering wail. Then, once more, there
was the thud of a heavy body falling on the floor, and after that an
awful silence.

'God Almighty!' I gasped. 'Can't we do anything, Thorndyke?'

'Yes,' he replied, 'we can get out of this. It is time we did.'

Even as he spoke I became aware of a faint odour of bitter almonds which
seemed every moment to grow more distinct. It was undoubtedly time for us
to be gone; and when, once more, the light of his lamp flashed down the
stairway, I responded readily to a gentle push and began to descend the
steps as rapidly as my trembling knees would let me.

The faint, sinister odour pursued us even to the tunnel and it was with a
sigh of relief that I reached the open doorway and looked again on the
sky-lit foliage and breathed the wholesome air. We crept out together
through the long, low doorway, and grasping the branches of the trees and
bushes outside, scrambled down the sloping bank to the dry floor of the
moat.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN - THE CAT'S EYE


When we stood up at the bottom of the bank, I turned to Thorndyke and
asked:

'What are we going to do now? We must make some effort to let those poor
devils out.'

That,' he replied, 'is an impossibility. In the first place they are
certainly dead by now, and in the second it would be certain death to
attempt to open that door. The chamber is full of the vapour of
hydrocyanic acid.'

'But,' I expostulated, 'we ought to do something. Humanity demands that
we should, at least, make a show of trying to save them.'

'I don't see why,' he replied coldly. 'They are certainly dead, and if
they were not, I would not risk a single hair of my head to save their
lives. Still, if you have any feeling on the matter, we can go and
reconnoitre. But we must look to our own safety.'

He struck out along the floor of the moat at a brisk pace, and I kept up
with him as well as my trembling knees would let me, for I was horribly
shaken by the shocking experiences of the last few minutes, and still
felt sick and faint. Thorndyke, on the other hand, was perfectly unmoved,
and as he strode along at my side, I glanced at his calm face and found
in his quiet, unconcerned manner something inhuman and repelling. It is
true that those two wretches who now lay stark and dead on the floor of
that dreadful chamber deserved no sympathy. They had digged a pit for us
and fallen into it themselves. But still, they were human beings, and
their lives were human lives, but Thorndyke seemed to value them no more
than if they had been a couple of rats.

About a hundred yards farther along the moat, we came to a cross path, at
each end of which was a flight of rough steps up the bank. We ascended
the steps on the house side, and these brought us to a small door with a
Tudor arch in the head. A modern night-latch had been added to the
ancient lock, but it was a simple affair which Thorndyke's picklock
opened in a few moments, and the door then yielded to a push. It opened
into a corridor which I recognised as the one which we had passed through
and where I had seen the face at the window--a dead face it was now, I
suspected. We turned and walked along it in the direction in which Blake
had led us, and as we neared the end I began to be sensible of a faint
odour in the musty air; an attenuated scent of bitter almonds.

'We must go warily,' said Thorndyke. 'The next room, I think, is the one
out of which the secret chamber opens.'

He paused and stood looking dubiously at the door; and as he stood
hesitating, I pushed past him, and seizing the handle, flung the door
open and looked into the room. But it was only an instantaneous glance,
showing me the uninterrupted wall, the wooden block lying where Blake had
kicked it, and close by, a dead rat. The sight of that little corpse and
the sickening smell of bitter almonds that suddenly grew strong in the
air as the door opened, produced an instant revulsion. My concern for our
would-be murderers was extinguished by a thrill of alarm for my own
safety. I drew the door to hurriedly and followed Thorndyke, who was
walking quickly away.

'It is no use, Anstey,' he said, a little impatiently. 'It is mere
sentiment, and a silly one at that. All we can do is to open these
windows and clear off until the gas has diffused out. It won't take so
very long with all the gaping joints in this old woodwork.'

'And what are we going to do meanwhile?'

'We must find the housekeeper, if there is one, and let her know the
state of affairs. Then we must send information to the police at
Aylesbury, and before they arrive, I think it would be well to prepare a
written statement, which we can sign in their presence and which should
contain all that we are prepared to say about the matter before the
inquest.'

'Yes,' I agreed 'that seems to be the best course'; and with this we
proceeded to open the rusty casements of the corridor and then made our
way back to the new wing of the house.

The inn-keeper had certainly been right. Squire Blake had been very far
from lavish in the matter of retainers. One after another of the great,
dusty rooms we crossed or peered into without encountering a single
serving-man or maid. The house seemed to be utterly deserted. At last we
came to the entrance hall, and here, as we stood commenting on this
extraordinary solitude, a door opened and a faded and shabby elderly
woman, looking like a rather superior charwoman, emerged. She looked at
us curiously and then asked:

'Can you tell me, sir, if Mr Blake is ready for lunch?'

'I am sorry to say,' replied Thorndyke, 'that Mr Blake has met with a
mishap. He has locked himself in his dark room and has poisoned himself
accidentally with some chemicals.'

'Oh dear!' exclaimed the woman, looking at Thorndyke with a sort of
stupefied dismay. 'Hadn't some one better go and fetch him out?'

'That is not possible at present,' said Thorndyke. 'The room is full of
poison gas.'

'But,' the woman protested, 'he may die if no one goes to his
assistance.'

'He is dead already,' said Thorndyke, 'and there is another person in the
room with him, who is also dead'.

'That will be Mr Meyer, his valet,' said the woman, staring at Thorndyke
with a sort of bewildered horror, puzzled, no doubt, by the incongruity
between his tragic tidings and his calm, matter-of-fact demeanour. 'And
you say they have both killed themselves! Lord! Lord! What a dreadful
thing!' She clasped her hands, and gazing helplessly from one of us to
the other, asked: 'What are we to do? Oh! what are we to do?'

'Is there any one whom we could send into Aylesbury?' asked Thorndyke,
'We ought to let the police know of the accident, and we ought to get a
doctor.'

There is only the lodge-keeper,' she whimpered shakily 'He could go on Mr
Meyer's bicycle. Dear, dear! what an awful thing it is!'

'If you will have the bicycle brought to the door,' said Thorndyke, 'I
will write a note and take it up to the lodge-keeper myself. There are
writing materials in the library I suppose?'

She supposed there were, and showed us into the room, where we found some
notepaper and envelopes. Then she departed, wringing her hands and
muttering, to fetch the bicycle.

'I shall not give any details in this note,' Thorndyke said as he sat
down at the table and uncapped his fountain pen, 'I shall just tell them
that Mr Blake and his valet have met their deaths--presumably--by
poisoning, that it is a police case, and that the Divisional Surgeon had
better accompany the police officer.'

With this he wrote the note, addressing it to the Superintendent or Chief
Constable, and he had just closed and sealed it when the woman reappeared
to announce the arrival of the bicycle, which had been brought to the
door by a young woman, apparently a housemaid. Thorndyke mounted the
machine and rode away swiftly up the drive, and I turned back into the
house, followed by the two women, who, now that the first shock had spent
itself, were devoured by curiosity and eager to extract information.

Their efforts in this direction, however, were not very successful, for,
although the facts must very soon become public property, it seemed
desirable at present to say as little as possible, while, as for any
explanation of this extraordinary affair, I was as much in the dark as
they were. So I maintained a discreet, though difficult, reticence until
Thorndyke reappeared, when the two women retired and left us in
possession of the room.

'I sent our friend off with the note,' said my colleague 'and I told him
enough to make sure that he will put on the pace. It is only about four
miles, and as the police probably have a car, we may expect them pretty
soon. I will just draft out a statement of the actual occurrences, and
you had better write, on the same paper, a confirmatory declaration. We
can read them to the officer and sign them in his presence.'

He proceeded to write out a concise, but fairly full, narrative of what
had befallen us in this house, with a brief statement of the nature of
our business here, and when I had read it through, I wrote at the foot a
paragraph confirming the statement and accepting it as my own. This
occupied some considerable time, and we had not long finished when there
was a somewhat peremptory ring at the bell, and a minute later, the
elderly woman--whom I assumed to be the housekeeper--entered, accompanied
by a police officer and a gentleman in civilian clothes. The former
introduced himself briefly and got to business without preamble.

'Concerning this note, sir,' said he, 'you have given no particulars. I
suppose there is no doubt that Mr Blake and his valet are really dead?'

'I should say there is no doubt at all,' replied Thorndyke. 'But I have
written out a statement of the particulars, from which you will be able
to judge. Shall I read it to you?'

'I think the doctor had better see the bodies first,' was the reply.

'Certainly,' agreed the doctor. 'We don't want to waste precious time on
statements. Where are they?'

'I will take you to them,' said Thorndyke, 'but I must tell you that they
are shut in a room which is filled with the vapour of hydrocyanic acid.'

The two men gave a startled look at Thorndyke, and as he led the way out
into the hall and across the new wing, they followed, talking together
earnestly but in low tones. Presently they overtook us, and the officer
remarked:

'This is a very extraordinary affair, sir. Has no attempt been made to
get these men out of that room?'

'No,' replied Thorndyke.

'But why not?'

'I think you will see when you get there.'

'But,' exclaimed the doctor, 'surely some effort ought to have been made
to save them! You don't mean to say that you have left them in that
poisoned air and made no attempt even to open the doors and windows?'

'We have opened some of the neighbouring windows,' said Thorndyke; and he
proceeded to give a description of the secret chamber and its
surroundings, to which the doctor listened with pursed-up lips.

'Well,' he remarked dryly, 'you seem to have been very careful. Is it
much farther?'

'It opens out of the next room but one,' replied Thorndyke, and as he
spoke I detected in the air a very faint odour of bitter almonds. I fancy
the doctor noticed it, too, but he made no remark, and when we reached
the end of the corridor and Thorndyke indicated the door that gave access
to the room, both men hurried forward. The doctor turned the handle and
flung the door open, and he and the officer stepped briskly across the
threshold. And then they both stopped short, and I guessed that they had
seen the dead rat. The next moment they both backed out hastily and the
doctor slammed the door behind him and followed us to the discreet
distance at which we had halted.

'The vapour is as you say,' said the latter, visibly crestfallen, 'in an
extreme state of concentration.'

'Yes,' agreed Thorndyke, 'but it is much less than it was. If you will go
a little farther away, I will throw the door open and we can then retire
and let the vapour diffuse out.'

'Do you think it safe, sir?' queried the officer. 'There's a fearful reek
in there'; then, as Thorndyke approached the door, he and the doctor (and
I) walked away quickly up the corridor; and looking back, I saw my
colleague, pinching his nostrils together, fling the door wide open and
hurry after us.

When we had retired to a safe distance, the officer halted and said:

'You were saying something about a statement, sir. Shall we have it now?
I don't understand this affair in the least.'

Thorndyke produced the statement from his pocket and proceeded to read it
aloud; and as he read, the two men listened with growing astonishment and
not very completely concealed incredulity. When he had finished, I read
out my statement, and then we both signed the document, the officer
adding his signature as the witness.

'Well.' he said, as he put the paper in his pocket-book, 'this is a most
extraordinary story. Can you give any kind of explanation?'

'At the moment,' replied Thorndyke, 'I am not proposing to go beyond the
actual occurrence--certainly not until I have seen the bodies.'

The officer looked dissatisfied, and naturally enough. On the facts
presented, he would have been quite justified in arresting us both on a
suspicion of murder; and indeed, but for Thorndyke's eminent position and
my own status as a King's Counsel, he would probably have done so. As it
was, he contented himself with the expression of a hope that we should
presently be able to throw some light on the mystery, on which remark my
colleague offered no comment.

When about half an hour had passed, Thorndyke suggested that the vapour
had probably cleared off from the room out of which the secret chamber
opened and that it might now be possible to open the door of the chamber
itself. Our friends were somewhat dubious, however. The sight of the dead
rat had effectually dissipated the doctor's enthusiasm and engendered a
very wholesome caution.

'Perhaps,' said Thorndyke, 'as my friend and I know where to find the
concealed fastenings of the door, we could open it more safely. What do
you say, Anstey?'

I was not much more eager than the doctor, but as Thorndyke would
certainly have gone alone if I had refused, I assented with assumed
readiness, and we started down the corridor, followed at a little
distance by the other two. On entering the room, in which the odour of
the poison had now become quite faint, Thorndyke opened both the
casements wide and then slid the block of wood close up to the foot of
the door.

'Now,' said he, 'when I say "ready," take a deep breath, close your
mouth, pinch your nostrils, and then push in the right-hand boss. I will
press the other one and open and fix the door. Ready!'

I pushed in the boss, and immediately afterwards Thorndyke pressed in the
other one. The door yielded, and as we pushed it wide open, he thrust the
block in after it. Glancing in, I had a momentary glimpse of the dark
chamber with the two dead men lying huddled on the floor and an
extinguished lantern by the side of the nearer one. It was but the vision
of an instant, for almost as the door opened, I turned with Thorndyke and
ran out of the room; but in that instant it was imprinted on my memory
for ever. Even as I write, I can see with horrible vividness that dark,
gloomy hold and the two sprawling corpses stretched towards the door that
had cut them off in the moment of their crime from the land of the
living.

The first breath that I took, as I came out of the room, made me aware
that the poisonous vapour was pouring out of the chamber of death. Our
two friends had also noticed it and were already in full retreat, and we
all made our way out of the old wing back to the library, there to wait
until the poison should have become dissipated. The officer made one or
two ineffectual efforts to extract from Thorndyke some explanation of the
amazing events set forth in his statement, and then we settled down to a
somewhat desultory conversation on subjects criminal and medical.

We had been in the library rather more than half an hour and were
beginning to discuss the possibility of removing the bodies, when the
doorbell rang, and a few moments later the housekeeper entered, followed
by Sir Lawrence Drayton, Winifred, and Mr Brodribb, The latter came in
with a genial and knowing smile, which faded with remarkable suddenness
as his eye lighted on the police officer.

'Why, what the deuce is the matter?' exclaimed Sir Lawrence as he also
observed the officer.

'The matter is,' replied Thorndyke, 'that there has been a tragedy. Mr
Blake is dead.'

'Dead!' exclaimed Drayton and Brodribb in unison.

'And what.' asked the former, 'do you mean by a tragedy?'

'Perhaps,' said Thorndyke, 'the officer would allow me to read you the
written statement that I have given him. I may say,' he added, addressing
the officer 'that this lady and these gentlemen are interested parties
and that they will all be called as witnesses at the inquest.'

This latter statement, utterly incomprehensible to me, seemed to be
equally so to every one else present. Sir Lawrence and Brodribb stared in
astonishment at Thorndyke, while the officer, with a frown of perplexity,
slowly took the statement from his pocket-book and handed it to my
colleague without a word. Thereupon the latter, having waited for the
housekeeper to withdraw, read the statement aloud, and I watched the
amazement growing on the faces of the listeners as he read.

'But, my dear Thorndyke!' Sir Lawrence exclaimed, when he had finished,
'this is a most astounding affair. It looks as if this search had been a
mere pretext to get you here and murder you!'

'That, I have no doubt, is the case,' said Thorndyke, 'and that I
suspected to be the object when Brodribb conveyed the invitation to me.'

'The devil you did!' said Brodribb. 'But why should you suspect that
Blake wanted to murder you?'

'I think,' replied Thorndyke, 'that when we have seen the bodies you will
be able to answer that question yourself. And I should say,' he added,
turning to the doctor, 'that it would now be possible to get the bodies
out. Most of the fumes will have blown away by this time.'

'Yes,' the doctor agreed, evidently all agog to see and hear the
explanation of this mystery. 'We had better get a sheet from the
housekeeper and then go and see if we can get those poor wretches out.'

He set forth in company with the officer, and as soon as the two
strangers had left the room, Brodribb attacked my colleague.

'You are a most inscrutable fellow, Thorndyke. Do you mean to tell me
that when you proposed this search, you were just planning to give this
man, Blake, an opportunity to murder you?'

'To try to murder me,' Thorndyke corrected.

'And me,' I added. 'It begins to dawn on me that the post of junior to
Thorndyke is no sinecure.'

Brodribb smiled appreciatively, and Sir Lawrence remarked:

'We seem to be navigating in deep waters. I must confess that I am
completely out of my depth, but I suppose it is useless to make any
appeal.'

'I should rather say nothing more at present,' Thorndyke replied. 'In a
few minutes I shall be able to make the crucial test which I expect will
render explanations unnecessary.'

I speculated on the meaning of this statement, but could make nothing of
it, and I gathered from the perplexed expressions of the two lawyers that
they were in a similar condition. But there was not much time to turn the
matter over, for, very shortly, the police officer reappeared to announce
that the bodies had been removed from the chamber and were ready for
inspection and identification.

'It will not be necessary, I suppose,' said Drayton, as we rose to
accompany the officer, 'for Miss Blake to come with us?'

'I think,' answered Thorndyke, 'that it is desirable and, in fact,
necessary, that Miss Blake should see the bodies. I am sorry,' he added,
'that she should be subjected to the unpleasantness, but the matter is
really important.'

'I can't imagine in what respect,' said Drayton, 'but if you say that it
is, that settles the matter.'

On this we set forth, Thorndyke and the officer leading the way, and as
we crossed the great, desolate rooms I talked to Winifred about the old
house and the secret chamber to divert her attention from our rather
gruesome errand. At the end of the long corridor, as we entered the large
room, we saw the doctor standing by two shrouded figures that lay on the
floor near a window, with their feet towards us. We halted beside them in
solemn silence, and the doctor stooped, and taking the two corners of the
sheet, drew it away, with his eyes fixed on Thorndyke.

For a moment we all stood looking down on the two still and ghastly
figures without speaking a word; but suddenly Winifred uttered a cry of
horror and started back, clutching my arm.

'What is it?' demanded Drayton.

The man!' she exclaimed breathlessly, pointing to the body of the valet,
which I had already recognised. 'The man who tried to murder me in the
empty house!'

'And who stabbed you that night at Hampstead?' said Thorndyke.

'Yes, yes,' she gasped. 'It is he, I am certain of it.'

Sir Lawrence turned a look of eager inquiry on my colleague.

'This is an amazing thing,' he exclaimed. 'How on earth did this fellow
come to be associated with Mr Blake?'

Thorndyke stooped over the dead squire, and unfastening the collar and
neckband, drew the shirt open at the throat. There came into sight a
stout, silken cord encircling the neck, which Thorndyke gently pulled up,
when I saw that there was suspended from it a small gold pendant with a
single large stone. As the little jewel was drawn out from its
hiding-place, Winifred stooped forward eagerly.

'It is the Cat's Eye!' she exclaimed.

'Impossible!' Sir Lawrence ejaculated. 'Let me look at it.'

Thorndyke cut the cord and handed the pendant to Drayton, who turned it
over in his hand, gazing at it with an expression of amazement and
incredulity.

'It is,' he said at length. 'This is certainly the pendant that was
stolen from my poor brother's house. I recognise it without doubt by the
shape and colour of the stone, and there is the inscription on the back,
"Dulce Domum," which I remember now. It is unquestionably the stolen
pendant. But what does it mean, Thorndyke? You seemed to know that this
man was wearing it.'

'The meaning of it is, Sir Lawrence,' replied Thorndyke, 'that this
man'--he pointed down at the dead squire--'is the man who murdered your
brother. It was he who fired the pistol.'

Sir Lawrence looked down at the dead man with a frown of disgust.

'Do you mean to tell me, Thorndyke,' said he, 'that this man murdered
poor Andrew just to get possession of this trumpery toy?'

'I do,' replied Thorndyke, 'though, of course, the murder was not a part
of the original plan. But he carried the pistol with him to use if
necessary.'

'He has got a pistol in his pocket now,' said the officer. 'I felt it as
I was dragging him out of the secret room.'

He plunged his hand into the dead man's coat pocket and drew out a small
automatic pistol, which he handed to Thorndyke.

This seems to be the very weapon,' said the latter; 'a Baby Browning. You
remember that we identified the pattern from the empty cartridge-case.'

I had noticed a peculiar expression of perplexity gathering on Mr
Brodribb's face. Now the old solicitor turned to Thorndyke and said:

'This is a very unaccountable affair, Thorndyke. We didn't know a great
deal about Arthur Blake, but it always appeared that he was quite a
decent sort of man, whereas this robbery and murder that he actually did
commit, and the murder that he was attempting when he met his death, are
cases of sheer ruffianism. I don't understand it.'

Thorndyke turned to the doctor. 'Would you mind telling us,' said he, 'if
there is anything abnormal in the condition of this man's left knee-cap?'

The doctor stared at Thorndyke in astonishment. 'Have you any reason to
suppose that there is?' he asked.

'I have an impression,' was the reply, 'that there is an old fracture
with imperfect ligamentous union.'

The doctor stooped, and drawing up the trouser on the left side, placed
his hand on the knee.

'You are quite right,' he said, looking up at Thorndyke with an
expression of surprise. There is a transverse fracture with a gap of
fully two inches between the fragments.'

Suddenly Mr Brodribb broke out eagerly with a look of intense curiosity
at my colleague: 'It can't be! What is it that you are suggesting,
Thorndyke?'

'I am suggesting that this man was not Arthur Blake. I suggest that he
was an Australian adventurer named Hugh Owen.'

'But,' objected Brodribb, 'Owen was reported to have died some years ago.
His body was found and identified.'

'A mutilated skeleton was found,' retorted Thorndyke, 'and was identified
as that of Hugh Owen by means of a ring which was known to have belonged
to Owen. I suggest that the remains were those of Arthur Blake; that he
had been murdered by Owen, and that the ring had been put on the body for
the purpose of ensuring a false identification.'

That is perfectly possible,' Brodribb admitted. Then who do you suggest
that this other man is?'

'I suggest that this other person is a woman named Laura Levinsky.'

'Well,' said Brodribb, 'that need not be left a matter of guesswork. I
don't think I mentioned it to you, but that Australian police official
told me that Levinsky had a tattoo-mark on the right forearm--the letters
H and L with a heart between. Let us see if this person has such a mark.'

The police officer bent down over the dead valet, and unfastening the
right wristband, drew the sleeve up above the elbow.

'Ha!' exclaimed Brodribb as there were revealed, standing out on the
greenish-white skin as if painted in blue ink, the letters H and L with a
small, misshapen heart between them, 'you are right, Thorndyke, as you
always are. And I suppose she was a party to the murder?'

'I take it,' said Thorndyke, 'that these two wretches murdered Arthur
Blake, removed all identifiable objects from the corpse, put Owen's ring
on its finger, and tumbled it over the cliff, shooting down a mass of
rocks and stones on top of it. Then they took possession of all Blake's
papers and money and separated, coming to England on different ships. I
assume that no measures were ever taken to verify Blake's identity?'

'No,' replied Brodribb. There was no one who could identify him. He sent
a letter, in answer to mine, saying when he would arrive. He arrived
about the date mentioned, and presented all the necessary credentials.
The question of identity was never raised.'

For some moments we all stood looking down on the bodies of the two
adventures in silence. Presently Drayton asked, holding out the pendant:

'What is to be done with this? It was stolen from my brother, but it
seems that, as it is an heirloom, it should be handed to Miss Blake.'

'For the present,' said Thorndyke 'it must remain in the custody of the
police, as it will have to be put in evidence at the inquest. We will
take a receipt for it. But as to its being the missing heirloom, I doubt
that very much. It does not agree with the description, and I should
suppose that the original jewel will have been hidden with the
title-deeds.'

'That could hardly be,' said Winifred, 'though I agree with you that the
inscription "Dulce domum" doesn't seem to be the right one. But you will
remember that Percival's manuscript distinctly says that the jewel was
taken away and given to Jenifer to keep for the child James.'

'That is not my reading of the manuscript,' said Thorndyke. 'But we can
discuss that on another occasion. If we give our respective names and
addresses to the officer, we shall have concluded our business here.'

At this hint, the officer produced a large, official notebook in which he
entered the names and addresses of all the witnesses in the case, and
when the doctor had once more covered the corpses with the sheet, we
turned to retrace our steps to the library. As I walked along the
corridor at Winifred's side, I glanced at her a little anxiously, for it
had been a rather terrible experience. She met my glance, and resting her
hand on my arm for a moment, she said in a low voice:

'It was a gruesome sight, Robin, that poor little wretch lying there with
that awful, fixed stare of horror on her face. But I couldn't feel sorry
for her, nor even for the man, though there was something very
dreadful--almost pitiful--in the way in which his dead hand clutched that
little brass knob. It must have been a frightful moment when he found
that the knob was useless and that he and his companion were caught in
their own hideous trap. But I can't be sorry for them. I can only think
of the relief to know that you are safe and that I am free.'

'Yes,' said I, 'it is an unspeakable relief to feel that you can now go
abroad in safety--that that continual menace is a thing of the past,
thanks to Thorndyke's uncanny power of seeing through a stone wall.'

'I am not sure 'said she 'that I am not disposed to quarrel with Dr
Thorndyke for calmly walking you into this murderer's den.'

'I don't think there was ever any real danger,' I replied. 'They couldn't
have murdered us by overt methods, and as to the other methods, I have no
doubt that Thorndyke had got them all calculated out in advance and
provided for. He seems to foresee everything.'

When we reached the library, and Thorndyke and I had replaced our pistols
and jemmies in the suitcase (a proceeding which the police officer
watched with bulging eyes and open mouth), Drayton asked:

'Have you two got any sort of conveyance? Because, if you haven't, and
you don't mind a pretty tight squeeze, I can give you a lift to the
station.'

We accepted the offer gladly; and having made our adieux to the officer
and the doctor, we went out and packed ourselves and our impedimenta into
the car as soon as the lawful occupants had taken their seats. As we
moved off, I observed the housekeeper and two other women watching us
with concentrated interest; and at the gate, as we swept past the lodge,
I had an instantaneous glimpse of the keeper's face at the window, with
another countenance that seemed reminiscent of the 'Kings Head.'

The swiftly-gliding car devoured the mile or two of road to the station
in a few minutes. We drew up in the station yard, and while the chauffeur
was handing out our luggage, Drayton stood up, and laying his hand on
Thorndyke's shoulder, said earnestly:

'I have spoken no word of thanks to you, Thorndyke, for what you have
done, but I hope you understand that I am your debtor for life. Your
management of this case is beyond my wildest expectations, and how you
did it, I cannot imagine. Some day you must give me the intellectual
satisfaction of hearing how the investigation was carried out. Now I can
only congratulate you on your brilliant success.'

'I should like to second that,' said Brodribb; 'and talking of success, I
suppose you didn't find those deeds after all?'

'No,' replied Thorndyke. 'They are not there.'

'Oh, aren't they?' Brodribb. 'Then, if you are so certain where they are
not, you probably know where they are?'

'That seems a sound inference,' replied Thorndyke. 'But we can't discuss
the matter here. If you care to come to my chambers tomorrow, at two
o'clock, we might go into it further, and, in fact, conduct an
exploration.'

'Does that invitation include me?' Winifred asked.

'Most undoubtedly,' he replied. 'You are the principal party to the
transaction. And perhaps you might bring the Book of Hours with you.'

'I believe he has got the deeds stowed away in his chambers,' said
Brodribb; and although my colleague shook his head, I felt no certainty
that the old lawyer was not right.

When the car had moved off, we carried our cases into the station and
were relieved to find that we had but a few minutes to wait for a train.
I postponed my attack on my secretive colleague until we were snugly
established in a compartment by ourselves. Not that I had any
expectations. Thorndyke's reticence had conveyed to me the impression
that the time for explanations had not yet come; and so it turned out
when I proceeded to put my questions.

'Wait till we have finished the case, Anstey,' said he. 'Then, if you
have not worked out the scheme of the investigation in the interval, we
can review and discuss it.'

'But surely,' said I, 'we have finished with the case of the murder of
Andrew Drayton?'

'Not entirely,' he replied. 'What you have never realised, I think, is
the connection between the problem of the murder and the problem of the
missing documents. This is a very curious and interesting case, and those
two problems have a very strange connection. But for Owen's determination
to possess the cat's eye pendant at all costs, those documents might have
lain in their hiding-place, unsuspected, for centuries.'

This statement, while it explained Thorndyke's hitherto unaccountable
interest in Percy Blake's claim, only plunged the other problem into
deeper obscurity. During the remainder of the journey I tried to
reconstitute the train of events to see if I could trace the alleged
connection between the two problems. But not a glimmer of light could I
see in any direction; and in the end I gave it up, consoling myself with
the reflection that the morrow would probably see the last act played out
and that then I might hope for a final elucidation.



CHAPTER NINETEEN - A RELIC OF THE '45


At two o'clock punctually, on the following afternoon, our visitors made
their appearance; and at the very moment when the last of them--Mr
Brodribb--emerged from Crown Office Row, I observed from the window two
taxi-cabs, which had entered successively by the Tudor Street gate, draw
up before our door. I hailed their arrival with deep satisfaction, for
the strange events of the previous day, together with Thorndyke's rather
mysterious observations thereon, had made me impatient to see the end of
this intricate case and intensely curious to hear how my inscrutable
colleague had managed to fit together the apparently unrelated fragments
of this extraordinarily complex puzzle. Throughout the morning--while
Thorndyke was absent, and, as I suspected, arranging details of the
afternoon's adventure--I had turned over the facts again and again, but
always with the same result. There were the pieces of the puzzle, and no
doubt a complete set; but separate pieces they remained, and obstinately
refused to join up into anything resembling an intelligible whole.

'I see, Thorndyke,' said Mr Brodribb as he entered, smiling, rosy, and
looking as if he had just come out of a bandbox, 'that I did you an
injustice. You have not been sitting on the deeds. The chariots are at
the door waiting, I suppose, for the band or the stavebearers. We shall
be quite an imposing procession.'

'We won't wait for the band.' said Thorndyke. 'As we are all here, we may
as well start. Will you conduct Miss Blake down, Anstey?'

'Do I give any directions to the driver?' I asked.

'Yes. You can tell him to put you down at the north-east corner of the
Minories.'

Accordingly I led the way with Winifred, and having given the destination
to the driver, bestowed my charge and myself in the cab. The driver
started the engine, and as the cab made a sweep round to the Tudor Street
gate, I heard the door of the other cab slam.

'Have you any idea where we are going, Robin?' Winifred asked as the cab
whirled round into New Bridge Street.

'None beyond what I have communicated to the driver,' I replied.
'Apparently we are going to explore the Minories or Aldgate or
Whitechapel. It is an ancient neighbourhood, and in the days of Percival
Blake it was somewhat more aristocratic than it is now. There are good
many old houses still standing about there. You may have seen that
picturesque group of timber houses looking on Whitechapel High Street.
They are nearly all butchers' shops, and have been, at least, since the
days of Charles the Second; in fact, the group is known as Butcher Row,
though I think there is an old tavern among them.'

'Perhaps we are going to the tavern,' said Winifred. 'It is quite likely.
Many of the old inns had secret hiding-places and must have been the
favourite rendezvous of the conspirators of those times.'

She continued to speculate on the possibilities of the ancient tavern,
which had evidently captured her romantic fancy, and as I looked at
her-pink-cheeked, bright-eyed, and full of pleasurable excitement over
our adventurous quest--I once more breathed a sigh of thankfulness that
the dark days of ever-impending peril were over.

It seemed but a few minutes before the cab drew up at the corner of the
Minories; and we had hardly alighted when the other vehicle arrived and
disgorged its occupants at our side. The drivers having been paid (and
having thereafter compared notes and settled themselves to watch our
further proceedings), Thorndyke turned his face eastward and we started
together along Whitechapel High Street. I noticed that, now, no one asked
any questions. Probably each of us was busy with his own speculations;
and in any case, Thorndyke maintained a sphinx-like reticence.

'Are those delightful old houses the ones you were speaking of?' Winifred
asked as the ancient, plaster-fronted buildings came in sight.

'Yes,' I answered. 'That is Butcher Row.

'Or,' said Thorndyke, 'to give it what is, I believe, its official title,
"The Shambles", though the shambles proper are at the back.'

'The Shambles!' exclaimed Winifred, looking at Thorndyke with a startled
expression. She appeared to be about to ask him some question, but at
this moment he turned sharply into a narrow alley, into which we followed
him. I glanced up at the name as we entered and read it aloud--'Harrow
Alley.'

'Yes,' said Thorndyke, 'quite a historic little thoroughfare. Defoe gives
a very vivid description of its appearance during the Plague, with the
dead-cart waiting at the entrance and the procession of bearers carrying
the corpses down the narrow court. Here is the old "Star and Still"
tavern, and round the corner there are the shambles, very little changed
since the seventeenth century.'

He turned the corner towards the shambles, and then, crossing the narrow
road, dived through an archway into a narrow paved court, along which we
had to go in single file. This court presently opened into a
squalid-looking little square, surrounded on three sides by tall,
ancient, timber and plaster houses, the fourth side being occupied by a
rather mean, but quaint little church with a low brick tower. Thorndyke
made his way directly to the west door of the church, and taking from his
pocket a key of portentous size, inserted it into the lock. As he did so
I glanced at the board that was fixed beside the doorway, from which I
learned that this was the church of St Peter by the Minories.

As the door swung open Thorndyke motioned to us to enter. We filed in,
and then he drew the door to after us and locked it from the inside. We
stood for a few moments in the dim porch under the tower, looking in
through the half-opened inner door; and as we stood there, Winifred
grasped my arm nervously, and I could feel that her hand was trembling.
But there was no time for speech, for as Thorndyke locked the door and
withdrew the key, the inner door opened wide and two men--one tall and
one short--appeared silhouetted against the east window.

These are my friends, of whom I spoke to you,' said Thorndyke. 'Miss
Blake, Sir Lawrence Drayton, Mr Brodribb, Mr Anstey--the Reverend James
Yersbury. I think you have met this other gentleman.'

We came out into the body of the church, and having made my bow to the
clergyman, I turned to the smaller man.

'Why, it's Mr Polton!' exclaimed Winifred, shaking hands heartily with my
colleague's familiar; who greeted us with a smile of such ecstatic
crinkliness, that I instantly suspected him of preparing some necromantic
surprise for us.

'This is quite a remarkable building,' said Sir Lawrence, looking about
him with lively interest, 'and it appears the more striking by contrast
with the shabby, commonplace exterior.'

'Yes,' agreed the clergyman, 'that is rather characteristic of old London
churches. But this is rather an ancient structure; it was only partially
destroyed by the Great Fire and was almost immediately rebuilt, at the
personal cost, it is said, of the Duke of York, afterwards James the
Second. Perhaps that accounts for the strong Jacobite leanings of some of
the later clergy, such as this good gentleman, for instance.'

He led us to a space between two of the windows where a good-sized tablet
of alabaster had been let into the wall.

'That tablet,' said he, 'encloses a cavity which is filled with bones
piously collected from the field of Culloden, and the inscription leaves
one in no doubt as to the sentiments of the collector. But I believe it
was covered with plaster soon after it was put up, to preserve it from
destruction, by the authorities, and it was only discovered about fifty
years ago.'

I read the brief inscription with growing curiosity:

PRO PATRIA--PRO REGE 1745

'This Tablet was raised to the Memory of the Faithful by Stephen Rumbold,
sometime Rector of this Church.'

'But,' said Winifred, 'I thought Stephen Rumbold was rector of St Peter
by the Shambles.'

'This is St Peter by the Shambles,' replied Mr Yersbury. 'The name has
only been changed within the last forty years.'

Winifred faced me and looked with eager delight into my eyes, and I knew
that the same thought was in both our minds. Here, during all the
slowly-passing years, the missing deeds had rested, securely hidden with
the bones of those patriots at whose side Percival Blake had fought on
the fatal field of Culloden. I looked round at Thorndyke, expecting to
see some preparations to open this curious little burial-place. But he
had already turned away and was moving towards the east end of the
church. We followed him slowly until he halted before the pulpit, where
he stood for a few moments looking at it reflectively. It was a very
remarkable pulpit. I have never seen another at all resembling it. In
shape it was an elongated octagon, the panels and mouldings of deep brown
oak enriched with magnificent carving. But the most singular feature was
the manner in which it was supported. The oblong super-structure rested
on twin pillars of oak, each pillar being furnished with a handsome,
floridly-ornamented bronze capital and a bronze base of somewhat similar
character. But fine as the workmanship was, the design was more unusual
than pleasing. The oblong body and the twin pillars had, in fact, a
rather ungainly appearance.

'Here,' said Thorndyke, pointing to the pulpit, 'is another relic of the
Reverend Stephen Rumbold, and one of more personal interest to us than
the other. You notice these twin pillars. Aesthetically, they are not all
that might be desired, but they serve a useful purpose besides supporting
the upper structure, for each of them forms an aumbry, originally
designed, no doubt, to conceal the sacred vessels and other objects used
in celebrating Mass or Vespers or in administering Communion in
accordance with the rites of the Church of Rome. One of them is still
discharging this function. This pillar'--here he tapped the northern one
of the pair--'contains a chalice and paten, a thurible and a small pyx.
This other pillar contains--well, Polton will show us what it contains,
so I need not go into particulars.'

'Do I understand,' Drayton asked, 'that you have opened the aumbries
already and verified the existence and nature of the contents?'

'We have not yet opened the aumbries,' Thorndyke replied, 'but we have
ascertained that the things are there untouched. Polton and I made an
examination some days ago with an X-ray apparatus and a fluorescent
screen. It was then that we discovered the plate in the second pillar. I
wished Miss Blake to be present at the actual opening.'

At these words, like an actor taking up a cue, Polton appeared from
somewhere behind the pulpit bearing a good-sized leather handbag. This he
deposited on the floor, and as we gathered round, he took from it a
small, rounded mallet, apparently of lead, covered with leather, and a
tool of hard wood, somewhat, in shape, like a caulking chisel.

'Which pillar shall I begin on, sir?' he inquired, looking round with a
sly smile. 'The one with church plate or--'

'Oh, hang the church plate!' interposed Brodribb, adding hastily: 'I beg
your pardon, Mr Yersbury, but you know--'

'Exactly,' interrupted the clergyman, 'I quite agree with you. The church
plate will keep for another half hour.'

Thereupon Polton fell to work, and we crowded up close to watch. The
capitals of the pillars presented each two parts, a lower member, covered
with ornament, and above this a plain, cylindrical space extending up to
the abacus. It was to the lower part that Polton directed his attention.
Having mounted on a chair, he placed the edge of the hardwood chisel
against the lower edge of the ornamented member and struck it gently with
the leaden mallet. Then he shifted the chisel half an inch to the right
and struck another blow, and in this way he continued, moving the chisel
half an inch after each stroke, until he had travelled a third of the way
round the pillar, when Thorndyke placed another chair for him to step on.

'Have you oiled the surface?' my colleague asked.

'Yes, sir,' replied Polton, tapping away like Old Mortality; 'I flooded
it with a mixture of paraffin and clock oil, and it is moving all right.'

We were soon able to verify this statement, for when Polton had made a
complete circuit of the pillar, the plain space above had grown
perceptibly narrower and a ring of lighter-coloured wood began to appear
below. Still, the leaden mallet continued to deliver its dull sounding
taps, and still Polton continued to creep round the pillar.

By the time the second circuit was completed, the sliding part of the
capital had risen half-way to the top of the plain space, as was shown by
the width of paler, newly-uncovered wood below. And now the sliding
member was evidently moving more freely, for there was a perceptible
upward movement at each stroke, so that, by the end of the third circuit,
the upper, plain space had disappeared altogether and a narrow ring of
metal appeared below; and in this ring I perceived a notch about half an
inch wide.

'I think she's all clear now, sir,' said Polton.

'Very well,' said Thorndyke. 'We are all ready.'

He relieved Polton of the mallet and chisel and handed him a tool which
looked somewhat like a rather slender jemmy with a long, narrow beak.
This beak Polton inserted carefully into the notch, when it evidently
entered a cavity in the top of the woodwork. Then he began cautiously to
prise at the end of the lever.

For a moment or two nothing happened. Suddenly there was a grating sound;
the end of the lever rose, and at the same instant about a quarter of the
pillar began to separate from the rest and come forward, showing a joint
which had been cunningly hidden by the deep fluting. Polton grasped the
top of the loose panel, and with a sharp pull, drew it right out and
lifted it clear, but as he was in front of the opening, none of us could
see what was within. Then he stepped down from the chair, and Winifred
uttered a little cry and clasped her hands.

It was certainly a dramatic moment, especially to those of us who had
read the manuscript in the little Book of Hours. The pillar was a great
shell enclosing a considerable cavity, and in this cavity, standing on
the floor, was a tall leaden jar with a close-fitting, flat lid; and on
the lid stood a great, two-handled posset-pot. It was all exactly as
Percival Blake had described it, and to us, who had formed a mental
picture from that description, there was something very moving in being
thus confronted with those strangely familiar objects, which had been
waiting in their hiding-place for more than a century and a half-waiting
for the visit of Percival's dispossessed posterity.

For some time we stood looking at them in silence. At length Thorndyke
said: 'You notice, Miss Blake, that there is an inscription on the jar.'

I had not observed it, nor had Winifred; but we now advanced, and looking
closely at the jar, made out with some difficulty on the whitened surface
an inscription which had apparently been punched into the metal letter by
letter, and which read:

'The Contents hereof are the Property of Percival Blake, MD of Beauchamp
Blake in Buckinghamshire, or the Heirs of his Body AD 1746.'

'That,' said Sir Lawrence, as Winifred read the inscription aloud,
'settles the ownership of the documents. You can take possession of the
jar and its contents with perfect confidence. And now perhaps it would be
as well to see what is inside the jar.'

Polton, who had apparently been waiting for this cue, now lit a small
spirit blow-pipe. The posset-pot was tenderly lifted out by Winifred and
deposited on a pew-bench, and Polton, having hoisted out the jar and
placed it on a chair, began cautiously to let the flame of the blow-pipe
play on the joint of the lid, which had been thickly coated with wax.
When the wax began to liquefy, he introduced the edge of the jemmy into
the joint, and with a deft turn of the wrist, raised the lid, which he
then took off.

Winifred peered into the jar and announced: 'It seems to be full of
rolled-up parchments; a statement which we all verified in turn.

'I would suggest; said Mr Yersbury, 'that we carry the jar into the
vestry. There is a good-sized table there, which will be a convenience if
you are going to examine the documents.'

This suggestion was instantly agreed to. Polton took up the rather
ponderous jar and made his way to the vestry under the guidance of the
clergyman, and the rest of us followed, Winifred carrying-the precious
posset-pot. Arrived at the vestry, Polton set down the jar on the table,
and Sir Lawrence proceeded at once to extract the roll of stiff and
yellow parchment and vellum documents. Unrolling them carefully--for they
were set into a rigid cylinder--he glanced over them quickly with the air
of one looking for some particular thing.

'These are undoubtedly the title-deeds,' he said, still turning over the
pages quickly with but a cursory glance at their contents, 'but--ha! Yes.
These are what we really wanted. I had hoped that we should find them
here.'

He drew out from between the leaves of the deeds two small squares of
parchment which he exhibited triumphantly and then read aloud:

'I hereby certify and declare that on the thirteenth day of June in the
Year of Our Lord seventeen hundred and forty-two, at the church of St
Peter by the Shambles, near by Aldgate, the following persons were by me
joined together in Holy Matrimony to wit PERCIVAL BLAKE of Beauchamp
Blake in the County of Buckinghamshire, Bachelor and JUDITH WESTERN of
Cricklewood in the County of Middlesex, Spinster.

'STEPHEN RUMBOLD, MA, Rector of the said Church of St Peter by the
Shambles. 20th May 1746.'

'That,' said Sir Lawrence, 'is what principally matters, but this second
certificate clenches the proof. I will read it out:

'I hereby certify and declare that James the Son of Percival and Judith
Blake of Beauchamp Blake in the County of Buckinghamshire was baptized by
me according to the rites of Holy Church on the thirtieth of May in the
Year of Our Lord seventeen hundred and forty-three at the Church of St
Peter by the Shambles near by Aldgate.

STEPHEN RUMBOLD, MA, Rector of the said Church of St Peter by the
Shambles. 20th May 1746.'

'That,' continued Drayton, 'with the other certificates, which I
understand you have, establishes a direct descent. And seeing that the
estate is at present without an owner, this is a peculiarly opportune
moment for putting forward a claim. What do you say, Brodribb?'

'I should like,' said Brodribb, 'to have fuller particulars before giving
a definite opinion.'

'Oh, come, Brodribb,' Sir Lawrence protested, 'you needn't be so
infernally cautious. We're all friends, you know. Would you be prepared
to act for Miss Blake?'

'I don't see why not,' replied Brodribb. 'I am not committed to any other
claimant. Yes, I should be very happy to act for her.'

'Then,' said Drayton, 'we must arrange a consultation and find out
exactly how we stand. I will call at your office for a preliminary talk
tomorrow, if that will suit you.'

'Very well,' agreed Brodribb, 'come in at one o'clock, and we can lunch
together and talk over the preliminaries.'

While this conversation was proceeding, I had observed Thorndyke peering
inquisitively into the now empty jar. From this he transferred his
attention to the posset-pot which Winifred was guarding jealously. It was
a fine specimen of its kind, a comparatively large vessel of
many-coloured slip-ware. On the front was a sort of escutcheon, on which
was a heart surmounted by a B with the letters H and M on either side and
the date 1708 below. Just under the rim was a broad band bearing the
following quaint inscription:

'Here is the Gest of the Barly Korne, Glad Ham I the child is Borne.--JM'

'Isn't it a lovely old thing?' murmured Winifred. 'So human and personal
and so charming too.'

'Yes,' Thorndyke agreed 'it is a fine piece of work. Old Martin was
something more than a common village potter. Have you looked inside it?'

'No,' replied Winifred. She took the knob in her fingers and delicately
lifted off the cover; and then she uttered a cry of surprise.

'Why,' she exclaimed, 'it is the Cat's Eye-the real cat's eye this time.
And what a beauty!'

She lifted out of the pot a small pendant, curiously like the other
one--so much so, in fact, as to suggest that the latter had been a copy.
But, whereas the stone in the counterfeit had been a rather dull grey,
this one was of a beautiful deep yellow with a brilliant streak of golden
light. Attached to the pendant was a slender gold chain and a clasp,
which, like the pendant itself, was smooth and rounded with years of
wear. After gazing for a while at the flashing stone, Winifred turned the
pendant over and looked at the back. The inscription was half-obliterated
by wear, but we read without difficulty:

'God's Providence is Mine Inheritance.'

'It is extremely appropriate,' she commented when she had read it aloud,
'though it isn't quite what one expected. But what I don't understand is
how it comes to be here. Percival distinctly says that he had the jewel
and that he intended to give it to Jenifer to keep for the child.'

'Not the jewel,' Thorndyke corrected. 'He speaks of "the bauble" and "the
trinket," never of "the jewel."'

'You think he was referring to some other trinket?'

'Obviously,' replied Thorndyke. And then, looking at Winifred with a
smile, he exclaimed: 'O blind generation! Don't you see. Miss Blake, that
events have shaped themselves precisely as Percival designed? Here is his
descendant, the child of his children's children, coming to the
hiding-place wearing the precious bauble around her neck and guided by it
to the possessions of her fathers. Could anything be more complete?'

Winifred was thunderstruck. For a while she sat, motionless as a statue,
gazing at Thorndyke in speechless amazement. At length she exclaimed:
'But this is astounding, Dr Thorndyke! Do you mean that this little
locket is the trinket that was given to Jenifer and which she lost?'

'Undoubtedly,' he replied, 'and the really strange and romantic
circumstance is that it was given into your hand by the very impostor who
was seeking to rob you for ever of your inheritance.'

'Then,' exclaimed Sir Lawrence, who was almost as overcome as Winifred
herself, 'it was actually poor Andrew's "little Sphinx" that gave you the
clue to this hiding-place?'

'Yes,' replied Thorndyke, 'only the sphinx was really an oracle, just
waiting for the question to be asked.'

Winifred's eyes filled. Impulsively she grasped my colleague's hand,
murmuring shakily: 'What can I say to you, Dr Thorndyke? How can I ever
thank you for all that you have done for my brother and me?'

'You need say nothing,' he replied 'but that which is written on the back
of the cat's eye.'

Our business being now concluded, Sir Lawrence carefully returned the
precious documents to the jar and replaced the cover. From without, a
dull tapping that had been audible for some time past, had told us that
Polton was at work on the second pillar. But that was no concern of ours.

'What are we going to do now?' asked Sir Lawrence. 'It seems as if we
should mark the occasion in some way.'

'I agree with you, Drayton,' said Thorndyke, 'and I have, in fact,
arranged a little festival at my chambers; just a simple tavern dinner,
since Polton was otherwise engaged. Will that satisfy the requirements?'

'It will satisfy mine,' replied Drayton, 'and I think I can answer for
Brodribb.'

'Then,' said Thorndyke, 'if Miss Blake will consent to combine the
function of hostess with that of principal guest, we will capture Polton
and betake ourselves to the Temple.'

We strolled out into the church, where Polton and the rector were
gloatingly examining the newly-recovered sacred vessels, and having
thanked the friendly clergyman and bidden him a warm farewell, we went
forth in search of conveyances. Polton heading the procession with the
heavy jar under his arm, and Winifred tenderly carrying the posset-pot
swathed in her silken shawl.

In Whitechapel High Street we had the unexpected good fortune to
encounter an unoccupied taxi-cab, which was by universal consent assigned
to Winifred, Polton, and me. In this we bestowed ourselves and were
forthwith spirited away, leaving our companions to follow as best they
could. But they were not far behind, for we had barely arrived in the
chambers and disposed of our treasure-trove, when a second cab drew up in
King's Bench Walk and our three friends made their appearance at the
rendezvous.



CHAPTER TWENTY - QED


To an enthusiastic and truly efficient gourmet it might be difficult to
assess the respective merits of the different stages of a really good
dinner; to compare the satisfactions yielded, for instance, by the first
tentative approaches--the little affairs of outposts--with the voracious
joy of the grand onslaught on tangible and manducable solids; or again
with the placid diminuendo, the half-hearted rear-guard actions,
concerned with the unsubstantial trifles on which defeated appetite
delivers its expiring kick. For my own part, I can offer no opinion--at
any rate, without refreshing my memory as to the successive sensations;
but I recall that as our dinner drew to a close, signs of expectancy
began to manifest themselves (in Mr Brodribb's case they seemed to be
associated with the advent of the port decanter), and when Polton had
evacuated the casualties to an aid-post established in the adjacent
office, Sir Lawrence gave expression to the prevailing state of mind.

'I suppose, Thorndyke, you know what is expected of you?'

Thorndyke turned an impassive face towards his guest. 'On these triumphal
occasions,' said he, 'I usually smoke a Trichinopoly cigar. On this
occasion, I presume, I am expected to refrain.'

'Not at all,' replied Drayton. 'I think we can endure the Trichy with
reasonable fortitude; what we can't endure is the agony of curiosity. We
demand enlightenment.'

'You want to know how the "little Sphinx" answered its own riddle. Is
that your demand?'

'I understood you to say,' said I, 'that the problem of the crime and
that of the missing deeds were one and the same.'

'I said that they were closely connected. But if you want an exposition
of the unravelment, it will be more convenient to take them separately
and in the order in which they were presented. In which case we begin
with the crime.'

He paused, and I saw him glance with an indulgent smile towards the
office door which was incompletely closed, and from which issued faint
sounds of furtive movement which informed us that Polton had elected to
take his dinner within earshot of the exposition.

'We had better begin,' he proceeded, 'with the facts presented to us on
the night of the tragedy. First as to the criminals. There were traces of
two men, and only two. One of these was a tall man, as shown by the size
of his feet. He appeared to suffer from some weakness of the left leg.
The sound of his footsteps, as heard by Anstey, suggested a slightly lame
man, but as he ran away rapidly he could not have been very lame. Yet
there was some distinct disability, since he had to draw up a garden seat
to enable him to get over a fence which we climbed easily; and the faint
impression of the left foot under the fence showed that, when he jumped
down, the weight was taken principally by the right. Examination of the
cast of his left hand showed a depressed scar on the tip of the
forefinger. We also gathered that he carried a Baby Browning pistol and
appeared to be a skilful pistol shot.

'Of the other man we learned less. He was noticeably small and slight; he
was left-handed; he had dark hair, and at the time of the robbery he was
wearing gloves, apparently of kid or thin leather. But later, when
examining the tuft of his hair that was found grasped by the deceased, we
made an important discovery. Among those dark hairs was a single blonde
hair--not white, but golden--which could not have come from his own head.
Of its presence there seemed to be only two possible explanations: either
it had been rubbed off, or had fallen from the head of some other person,
or it had become detached from the inside of a wig. But the first
explanation was ruled out--'

'How?' demanded Brodribb.

'By its appearance under the microscope. When you find an alien hair, on
your coat-sleeve, for instance--'

'I don't,' said Brodribb, 'at my time of life.'

'--If you examine it under the microscope, or even with a strong lens,
you will invariably find it to be a dead hair--a hair which has completed
its growth and dropped out of its sheath. You can identify it by the
presence of the complete bulb and the absence of the inner root-sheath
(which would be adherent to it if it had been pulled out while growing).
Well, this blonde hair had no bulb. It had both ends broken, which
suggested unusual brittleness, as if it had been treated with some
bleach, such as chlorine or hydrogen peroxide. But the hair of wigs shows
absence of bulbs and is commonly so treated and is usually somewhat
brittle. Thus the probability was that this man had recently worn a wig
of artificially bleached hair.

'These were our initial data concerning these two men. There were also
some fingerprints, but we will consider those separately. The initial
data included the character of the things stolen. These were of
insignificant intrinsic value and were very easily identifiable. They
were thus quite unacceptable to the ordinary professional thief, yet the
evidence (of the suspicious visitor) suggested that they knew what they
were stealing. One of the things stolen--the cat's eye pendant--was known
to have an extrinsic value and to have been eagerly sought by other
persons, and there was thus the bare suggestion that this pendant might
have been the object of the robbery.

'We now come to the fingerprints. These presented some very remarkable
anomalies. In the first place, they were not the fingerprints of either
of the robbers. That was certain. The small man wore gloves, so they
could not have been his; and the tall man had a depressed scar on the tip
of his left forefinger, whereas there was no trace of any such scar on
the corresponding fingerprint. But if they were not the fingerprints of
either of the robbers, whose fingerprints were they? There was no trace
of any third person, and it was practically certain that no third person
was present.

'But there was another striking anomaly. Although there were numerous
impressions, only six digits were represented--the forefinger and thumb
of the left hand and the thumb and the first three fingers of the right.
Every impression of the right hand showed the same four digits, every
impression of the left showed the same two.

'Now what could be the explanation of this curious repetition? Anstey's
very reasonable suggestion was that the man had soiled these particular
digits with some foreign substance and that, consequently, the soiled
digits alone had made prints. This suggestion received a certain amount
of support from the fact that a foreign substance actually was
present--it proved, on examination, to be Japanese wax. But though the
presence of the wax accounted for the distinctness of the fingerprints
that were there, it did not explain why the other fingers had made no
mark at all. I examined the glass which bore the fingerprints with the
utmost minuteness, but in no case was there the faintest trace of the
other fingers. Yet those fingers, if they had existed, must have touched
the glass, and if they had touched it they would have made marks. The
only explanation seemed to be that there were no other fingers; that the
prints were not real fingerprints at all, but counterfeits made by means
of facsimile stamps of rubber, roller-composition, or--more
probably--chrome gelatine.

'It seemed a far-fetched hypothesis. But it fitted all the facts, and
there seemed to be no other explanation. Thus the use of a set of stamps
would explain the existence of a set of fingerprints which were not those
of either of the parties present; it would explain the repetition of the
same group of digits (on the assumption that only six stamps were
available which might easily be the case if these stamps were copies of a
particular group of fingerprints); and lastly, it would explain the
presence of the Japanese wax.'

'How would it?' I asked.

'Well, some foreign substance would be necessary. In a real
fingerprint--on glass, for instance--the mark is produced by the natural
grease of the fingers. But a rubber or gelatine stamp has no natural
grease. It is quite dry, and would make no mark at all unless it were
charged with some sticky or greasy material. Now Japanese wax is an ideal
material for the purpose. It is markedly sticky and would consequently
develop up splendidly with dusting powder; it has no tendency to spread
or run, so that it gives very clear impressions; and it might easily be
mistaken for natural skin-grease.

'The counterfeit fingerprints hypothesis was, therefore, the only one
that explained the facts, and I adopted it provisionally, assuming that
the stamps were probably thin plates of rubber or gelatine cemented on
the finger tips of the gloves worn by the short man.

'A few days later I received a visit from Detective-Superintendent Miller
who informed me that the fingerprints had been identified at the registry
as those of a well-known "habitual" named Hedges, more commonly known as
Moakey. Of course this did not alter the position since there was no
evidence that Moakey had ever been on the premises. However, I decided to
wait until he was arrested and hear what he had to say. But he never was
arrested. A day or two later, the Superintendent called on me again, and
this time he settled the matter finally. My impression was, and is, that
he came intending to make a clean breast of the matter, but that at the
last moment he shied at the responsibility of giving away official
secrets. What he actually said was that there had been a mistake; that
the fingerprints were not Moakey's after all.

'Of course this was absurd. A mistake might occur with a single
fingerprint, but with a set of six it was incredible. What had happened
appeared to me quite obvious. The fingerprints had been submitted to the
experts, who had at once identified them as Moakey's. Then the executive
had set out to arrest Moakey--and had discovered that he was in prison.
If that was really what had happened, it furnished conclusive proof that
the fingerprints were forgeries.

'At once I set to work to ascertain if it were so. I searched the lists
of convictions at assizes, quarter-sessions, and so forth, and eventually
ran Moakey to earth. He had been convicted six months previously and
sentenced to two years' imprisonment with hard labour. So, at the date of
the murder, he had been in prison about six months.

'We were now on solid ground. We knew that the fingerprints were
forgeries. But we knew more than this. The forgery of a fingerprint,
unlike that of a signature, is a purely mechanical operation, carried out
either by photography or by some other reproductive process. The forged
print is necessarily a mechanical copy of an existing real print. Whence
it follows that the existence of a forgery is evidence of the existence
of an original. And more than that, it is evidence that the forger had
access to that original. Now these forgeries were copies of Moakey's
fingerprints. It followed that we had to look for somebody who had had
access to Moakey's fingerprints.

'Fortunately we had not far to look. At the first interview the
Superintendent had referred to a previous exploit of Moakey's; a burglary
at a country house, when that artist was apprehended and convicted on the
evidence of his fingerprints, which were found on a silver salver. A
photograph of these fingerprints was immediately taken by the owner of
the house and given to the police, who took them straight to Scotland
Yard. I looked up the report of that case and had the good fortune to
find that the fingerprints were described. There were six of them, the
thumb and first three fingers of the right hand, and the forefinger and
thumb of the left hand.

'This was extremely interesting. But still more so was the fact that the
house which was broken into was Beauchamp Blake, and the further fact
that the owner who photographed the fingerprints was Mr Arthur Blake.

'I need not point out the importance of the discovery. It told us that
Arthur Blake had had, and presumably still had, in his possession, a set
of negatives with which it was possible to make the stamps of these very
fingerprints. It did not, however, follow that he had made the stamps,
for that would demand an amount of technical knowledge and skill far
beyond that of an ordinary photographer; knowledge ordinarily possessed
only by professional photo-engravers. He might have such knowledge or he
might have employed some one else. At any rate, he had the negatives and
had made them himself.

'But Blake was not only associated with the fingerprints. He was also
associated with the stolen property. Of all the persons known to us, he
was the most likely to wish to acquire the cat's eye pendant. So, you
see, the investigation, which started with a certain connection with
Beauchamp Blake, led us straight to Beauchamp Blake again. And there we
will leave it for the moment and approach the problem from one or two
different directions.

'First we will consider the mysterious woman who came into view on the
day of the inquest and who presumably sent the poisoned chocolates. Who
was she? And what was her connection with the case? Now, the first thing
that struck me in the description of her was her hair. It was of that
brassy, golden tint that one associates with bleaches such as hydrogen
peroxide. I recalled the stray hair from the small man's head which had
suggested that he had worn a wig of precisely this character. The obvious
suggestion was that this woman and that small man were one and the same
person. They appeared to be similar in stature, there were good reasons
why they should be the same, and no reasons why they should not. But,
assuming them to be the same (it was afterwards proved that they were)
the question arose, is this woman a disguised man or was that man a
disguised woman? The latter view was clearly the more probable, for
whereas a woman, if she cuts her hair short, will pass easily for a
clean-shaved man, a clean-shaved man does not pass so easily for a woman,
especially if he is dark, as this person was. It seemed probable,
therefore, that this was really a woman--a dark woman wearing a fair wig.
But who she was, and what--if any--was her relation to Blake, remained
for the present a mystery.

'We now come to the man Halliburton. Obviously he was an object of deep
suspicion. His only known address was an hotel. He visited Andrew Drayton
without any reasonable purpose. He tried unsuccessfully to purchase the
cat's eye pendant, and within four days of his failure the jewel was
stolen. Then he disappeared, leaving no trace.

'Anstey and I called at his hotel to make enquiries about him. There we
obtained a photograph of his signature, which we have not used, but which
will be produced at the inquest, and we acquired some information which
has been invaluable. He had lost, and left behind, a mascot which he
valued so highly that he offered ten pounds reward for its recovery. We
got the loan of it, and Polton made this indistinguishable facsimile.'
Here Thorndyke passed round Polton's masterpiece for inspection. 'Now,'
he continued, 'in connection with this mascot, two very important facts
emerged. One was that, as Anstey expressed it, this man was a
superstitious ass, a man who believed in the occult properties of mascots
and charms. The importance of that becomes evident when we remember that
the cat's eye was, in effect, a mascot--an object credited with occult
powers affecting the fortunes of its owner. It enables us to understand
his anxiety to possess the cat's eye.

'The other important fact emerges from the nature of the thing itself. It
is a neck vertebra of an Echidna, or porcupine ant-eater, decorated with
aboriginal ornament. The Echidna is an animal peculiar to Tasmania and
Australia, and the ornament is distinctive of the locality. This mascot,
therefore, established some connection between Halliburton and
Australasia. But Blake had lived most of his adult life in Australia.
There was, however, a difficulty. Punched on the mascot--apparently with
typefounder's steel punches--were the letters o and h. The name signed
in the hotel register was Oscar Halliburton, and these letters seemed to
be his initials. But if that was so, Oscar Halliburton would appear to be
a real person and consequently could not be Arthur Blake.

'Thus, at this stage of the inquiry, on the hypothesis that the robbery
had been committed by Blake, we had two persons whom we could not account
for--the unknown woman (possibly a man) and Mr Oscar Halliburton.

'But just as we appeared to have reached an impasse, Mr Brodribb threw a
flood of light on the problem. For different reasons, Sir Lawrence and I
were anxious to obtain some particulars of Arthur Blake and his affairs,
and these particulars Mr Brodribb was fortunately in a position to supply.
The information that he furnished amounted to this:

'Arthur Blake appeared to be a decent, industrious man with nothing
against him but the rather queer company that he had kept. He had been
associated in Australia with a man named Hugh Owen, who was a person of
shady antecedents, and who, on his side, was associated with a woman
named Laura Levinsky who appeared to be definitely a bad character, and
who, like Owen, was under police observation. These two persons seem to
have separated immediately after Blake's departure for England, and both
disappeared. Levinsky was lost sight of for good, but Owen's body--or
rather unrecognisable remains--came to light some years later and was
identified by a ring which was known to have belonged to Owen.

'Certain particulars that Mr Brodribb gave concerning Owen made a
considerable impression on me. For instance, it appeared that Owen was
originally a photo-engraver by trade and that he had later owned a small
type-foundry. Also that he had fractured his left kneecap and that this
injury was certainly never completely repaired. But the first thing that
struck me on looking at this party of three was that whereas Blake
appears to have been a respectable man and most unlikely to have
committed an atrocious crime such as the one we were investigating, the
same could not be said of his two companions, and inevitably I found the
question creeping into my mind: Is it certain that those remains were
really the remains of Owen? Or may it have been that they were those of
Arthur Blake? That these two criminals had murdered Blake when Brodribb's
letter arrived: that Owen had taken the papers and credentials and come
to England personating Blake, and that Levinsky had come by another
route?

'It seemed, perhaps, a rather violent supposition; but it was quite
possible; and the instant it was adopted as a working hypothesis, all the
difficulties of the case vanished as if by magic. We could now account
for the mysterious woman. We could also account for Halliburton, for the
letters on the mascot could be read either way-o h for Oscar Halliburton
or h o for Hugh Owen; and Owen had possessed and used in his type-foundry
steel punches exactly like those with which the letters had been made;
and further, Owen was a native of Tasmania and had lived many years in
Australia. He fitted the mascot perfectly.

'Then Owen had been a photo-engraver; that is to say, he possessed the
very kind of knowledge and skill that was necessary to make the stamps
for the fingerprints; and he agreed with the taller of the two criminals
in that he had a marked weakness of the left leg. In short, the
agreements were so striking as to leave little doubt in my mind that our
two criminals were Owen and Levinsky, and that the former was in
possession of Beauchamp Blake, personating the murdered owner.

'One point only remained to be verified in order to complete this aspect
of the case. We had to ascertain whether the man who was posing as Arthur
Blake had, in fact, fractured a knee-cap. I was casting about for some
means of getting this information when the third attempt was made on Miss
Blake's life, and it became evident that the danger to her was too great
to admit of further delay. Just then Sir Lawrence asked me to go down
with him to Aylesbury, and that proposal suggested to me the plan of
visiting Beauchamp Blake and making an unmistakable demonstration. I had
learned from Mr Brodribb something of the squire's habits, and I got
further details from the landlord of the "King's Head." With the help of
the latter I obtained access to the park at the time when the squire
would be coming out, and I planted myself, with Anstey, where we were
bound to be noticed.

'My object was twofold. First, I wanted to ascertain, if possible,
whether the squire had any abnormal condition of the left leg, and if so,
whether that condition was probably due to a fractured knee-cap, and
secondly, I proposed to make such a demonstration as would convince him
(if he were really Owen) that it was useless to murder Miss Blake until
he had settled with me, and that it would be highly unsafe to make any
further attempts. To this latter end I attached Polton's facsimile of the
mascot to my watch-guard, where it could hardly fail to be seen, and
then, as I have said, I planted myself on the road leading to the gate.

'Both purposes were achieved. I was able to verify with my own eyes the
landlord's statement that the squire habitually mounted his horse from
the off-side, a most inconvenient method of mounting, but one that would
be rendered absolutely necessary by a fractured left knee-cap. Then, as I
had expected, he recognised me instantly--no doubt from the portrait
published in the newspapers--and dismounted to examine me more closely;
and when he came near, he saw the mascot and it was obvious that he
recognised it. I detached it and handed it to him, giving him such
details as must have made clear to him that I knew its history and knew
of his connection with it. His manner left me in no doubt that he fully
understood the hint and that he accepted my challenge, and further proof
was furnished by the fact that he sent a man to shadow us home and
ascertain for certain who we were. So that matters were now on a
perfectly definite footing, and I may add that further verification, if
it had been needed, was supplied by the circumstance that, on this very
day, Anstey caught a glimpse of Levinsky, disguised as a man, in the
market square at Aylesbury. The rest of the story I think you all know.'

'Yes,' said Drayton, 'we gathered that from your written statement. But
what is not clear to me is why you considered it necessary to thrust your
head into the lion's jaws. You seem to have had a complete case against
these two wretches. Why couldn't you have lodged an information and had
them arrested?'

'I was afraid to take the risk,' replied Thorndyke. 'To us the case looks
complete. But how would it have looked to the police? or to a possibly
unimaginative magistrate? or, especially to a jury of ordinary, and
perhaps thick-headed, tradesmen and artisans? Juries like direct
evidence, and that was what I was trying to produce. I had no doubt that
these two persons would try to murder me and Anstey, and that we should
prevent them from succeeding. Then we could charge them with the attempt
and prove it by direct evidence, after which we could have proceeded
confidently with the second charge of the murder of Andrew Drayton.'

'I think Thorndyke was right,' said I, seeing that Sir Lawrence still
looked doubtful. 'From my large experience of juries in criminal cases, I
feel that this intricate train of inferential evidence would have been
rather unconvincing by itself, but that it would have been quite
effective if it had come after a charge supported by the testimony of
eye-witnesses, such as we should have been.'

'Well,' said Drayton, 'we will agree that the circumstances justified the
risk, and certainly the unravelment of this case by means of such almost
invisible data is a most remarkable achievement. This exposition has
whetted my appetite for the explanation of the other mystery.'

'Yes,' said Winifred. 'I am on tenterhooks to hear how you made the
"little Sphinx" answer its own riddle. Shall I hand you the locket?'

'If you please; and the Book of Hours. And if we can get Polton to put
the microscope on the table with the slide that is on the stage, we shall
have all that we want for the demonstration.'

At this Polton emerged unblushingly from the office, and having put the
microscope on the table, carefully adjusted the mirror and then, with
brazen effrontery, took a long and intent look through the instrument,
under the pretence of seeing that the specimen was properly lighted.

'There is no need for you to go back to the office, Polton,' my colleague
said with a smile at his familiar. 'We shall want your help with the
microscope presently. Draw up a chair for yourself.'

Polton seated himself opposite the instrument with a smile of intense
gratification, and Thorndyke then resumed:

'This investigation was a much simpler affair than the other. You may
remember, Miss Blake, showing me the locket that night when I called with
Anstey at your studio, and you will remember that we noted the very
unusual construction; the evident purpose of the maker to render it as
strong and durable as workmanship could make it. This curious
construction--which I pointed out at the time--caused me to examine it
rather closely. And then I made a rather strange discovery.'

Winifred leaned forward and gazed at him with breathless expectancy.

'It was concerned with the hallmark,' he continued. 'There are, as you
see, four punch-marks. The first is a capital A with two palm-leaves
surmounted by a crown. The second is an escutcheon or shape with the
initials AH surmounted by a crown and over that a fleur-de-lis. The third
is a capital L, and the fourth is the head of an animal which looks like
a horse. This grouping shows that the piece is French. The first mark is
the town mark, the second the maker's mark, the third is the date letter,
and the fourth is the mark of the Farmer of the Duty. Now, I happened to
have had occasion to give some attention to the marks on old French
plate, and I happened to have read, only an hour or two previously, the
fragmentary narrative of Percival Blake. Accordingly, when I examined the
hallmark and learned from it that this locket had been made in Paris in
the year 1751, that fact at once arrested my attention.'

'How did you learn that from the hallmark?' Winifred asked.

'It is the function of the hallmark to give that information,' he
replied. 'The town-mark of Paris is a capital A surmounted by a crown,
but it varies in style from year to year. This one is a Roman capital
with two palm-leaves and a very small crown. That is the form used in the
middle of the eighteenth century, but the date is definitely fixed by the
date-letter--in this case a capital L, which indicates the year 1751.

'It was, of course, a very remarkable coincidence that this locket should
have been made at the place and in the year of Judith Blake's death, and
it naturally caused me to look at the little trinket more narrowly.
Hitherto I had assumed, as you did, that the object that Percival
referred to was the cat's eye pendant. But I now recalled that he had not
specifically mentioned the pendant, and that he had spoken of it as "the
bauble" or "the trinket," never as "the jewel." It was thus just barely
conceivable that this mysterious little object might be the one to which
he was referring; and the instant the question was raised, the evidence
supporting it began to run together like drops of water.

'First, there was the inscription, "O BIOC BPAXYO H AE TEXNH MAKPH,"
"Life is short but Art is long." It was the motto of the practitioner of
some art or craft. But artists and craftsmen almost invariably use the
Latin form, "Ars longa, Vita brevis--Art is long. Life is short." But
there is one body of craftsmen who use the Greek form. It is the motto of
the London College of Physicians, and moreover it is written by them in
the same uncial characters, with the round, C-shaped sigma. Now Percival
was a physician and a fellow of this very college, and he was an
enthusiast who originally practised his profession for love and not from
necessity or for a livelihood. What more natural than that he should use
the motto of his own college?

'Then there was the construction of the locket--everything sacrificed to
permanence and durability. It fitted the circumstances perfectly. And
there were the unusual suspension rings, specially adapted to take a cord
or thong. I recalled the enigmatic words "gave me a string from his bass
viol, which he says will be the best of all." Remembering that the bass
viol would be a viol da gamba or violoncello, not a double-bass, we see
that this was true; the stout gut string would last for a century or
more.

'Then again there were the scripture references which you showed me. The
first was "And then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children
with him, and shall return unto his own family, and unto the possession
of his fathers shall he return." That was a most striking passage. It
was an exact statement of Percival's aim--incidentally illustrating the
way in which the other passages were to be treated; and when I noted that
the principal word in the last reference was "parchments," I felt that a
prima facie case had been made out. I had little doubt that this locket
was the "precious bauble" that was handed to--and presumably lost
by--Jenifer.

'But after all this was only guesswork. We had to get down to
certainties. And, fortunately, there was available an excellent and
conclusive test. If the locket was Percival's, the hair in it was almost
certainly Judith's. Now there was something very unusual about Judith's
hair. During her imprisonment it had undergone a most extraordinary
change. Percival tells us that when she was released, "her hair, that had
been like spun gold, was turned to a strange black." This was very
remarkable. Judith was evidently a true blonde, and when she was
arrested, she must have been getting on for thirty years of age. But the
hair of a blonde adult does not turn black from ill-health and grief. It
tends rather to turn white. What could be the explanation of the change?

'It is a very curious one. Judith had been labouring in the mines in the
Harz Mountains. These mines yield a number of different metals, and some
of them are extremely poisonous. They are ancient mines, and in the
Middle Ages, when the properties of metals were less understood, the
terrible condition to which persons who worked in them were reduced by
chronic poisoning was put down to the influence of a race of malignant
gnomes who were believed to inhabit the mines and who were known as
kobolds. In particular, the influence of the kobolds came to be
associated with a particular, uncanny ore from which no metal could
be--in those days--extracted, and in the end this ore came to be known by
the name of these mine-gnomes or kobolds, and that name it bears this
day, in the slightly altered form of cobalt.

'Now, the metal, cobalt, has one or two very distinctive properties. One
is that of imparting a powerful and beautiful blue colour to substances
with which it combines. This was the value of the ore, and for this it
has been prized from quite ancient times. We find it in use everywhere.
The blue of all the Chinese porcelain is cobalt. The blue of the old
Delft pottery is cobalt. The blue in all the old stained-glass
windows--and modern ones too--is cobalt.

'Then this metal has another curious property which it shares with
arsenic and one or two other metals. It is capable of being absorbed into
the body and producing poisonous effects, and when so absorbed, it
becomes deposited in the skin, or, more correctly speaking, in the
epidermis and its appendages--the fingernails and the hair. But whereas
the outer skin and the nails wear away and are cast off, the
hair--especially a woman's hair--remains attached for long periods.
Consequently, in chronic cobalt poisoning, the hair becomes charged with
a cobalt compound--probably an oxide--and is stained blue.

'Bearing these facts in mind, we can now understand what had happened to
Judith. She had been sent to labour in a mine which yielded cobalt, and
probably nickel. Her hair had not turned black, it had turned blue,
though, in the mass, it would appear black--a strange, unnatural black,
as Percival tells us. Thus, if the hair in this locket was the hair of
Judith Blake, it would appear blue when properly examined. I took an
opportunity to get possession of the locket, and that very night I
removed the remains of the cover-glass and picked out a single hair,
which I mounted in Canada balsam and examined under the microscope. That
hair is on the stage of the microscope now. Polton will bring it round
and let you see it.'

Our assistant tenderly carried the microscope round and set it before
Winifred, and having adjusted the light and the focus, stepped back to
watch the effect.

'But how extraordinary!' she exclaimed as she looked into the eyepiece.
'It looks like a thread of blue glass! And how strange and romantic!'

Brodribb and Drayton rose from their chairs and came round, all agog to
see this prodigy. In succession they gazed at it with murmurs of
astonishment and then went back to their seats, still muttering.

'The appearance of that hair,' Thorndyke resumed, 'settled the question
conclusively. This was Percival's trinket beyond a doubt, and all that
remained was to read the message inside. As we now knew what to look for,
this presented no difficulty at all. It was no cipher or cryptogram. It
was simply a collection of texts, from each of which, as the first one
showed, the instructed reader would have no difficulty in picking out the
significant word or phrase. We may as well just run through them and see
what they tell us.

'Number one, Leviticus 25. 41, we have already considered. It is the
preamble which indicates the purport of the remainder. I see you have
your notebook. Will you read us out the next?'

'Number two,' said Winifred, 'is Psalms 121, 1: "I will lift up mine eyes
unto the hills, from whence cometh my help!" That is the passage, but it
doesn't convey any intelligible meaning to me.'

'No,' said Thorndyke, 'it doesn't, because you have got the wrong Psalm.
You looked up your reference in the English Authorised Version,
overlooking the fact that Percival was probably a Catholic and certainly
a resident in France, and also that the references were given with Latin
titles, suggesting that he used the Latin Vulgate. This happens to be
matter of vital importance in this case, as the Psalms are not numbered
quite alike in the two Bibles. Psalm 121 in the Vulgate is 122 in the
Authorised Version. Here is the Douay Bible, which is the official
translation of the Vulgate, and if we refer to Psalm 121.1 in it, we find
"I rejoiced at the things that were said to me; We shall go into the
house of the Lord." That is quite illuminating. It tells us that we are
concerned with a church, and the next reference tells us what church. It
is Actus Apostolorum 10.5'

'Yes,' said Winifred,' "And now send men to Joppa, and call for one
Simon, whose surname is Peter."'

'That,' said Thorndyke, 'gives us the church of St Peter. The next,' he
continued, glancing at the notebook which Winifred had handed to him, 'is
Nehemias 8. 4. "And Ezra the scribe stood upon a pulpit of wood"--we need
not complete the passage. The pulpit of wood is obviously the significant
part. Then we come to 3 Lib. Regum 7. 41--by the way, that third book of
Kings might have given you a hint that you were not dealing with the
Authorised Version. It reads: "The two pillars, and the two bowls of the
chapiters that were on the top of the two pillars," etc. The meaning of
this passage was not very clear. It had some connection with the pulpit
of St Peters Church, but what the connection was, it was not easy to
guess. Of course, directly one saw the pulpit, the meaning was obvious.

'The next reference is to Psalm 31. 7, and again you have taken the
Authorised Version and got the wrong Psalm. Psalm 31 in the Vulgate is
Psalm 32 in the Authorised Version. Your reading is "I will be glad and
rejoice in thy mercy: for thou hast considered my trouble; thou hast
known my soul in adversities." This, as you say, seems quite irrelevant,
but if you had turned forward to Psalm 32. 7, you would have read: "Thou
art my hiding-place" or "refuge," as the Vulgate has it, which is very
relevant indeed. The last reference is 2 Epist. ad Tim. "The cloak that I
left at Troas with Carpus, when thou comest, bring with thee, and the
books, but especially the parchments."

'Thus, taking the references together, they suggest to us the ideas of
parchments, a hiding-place, and the two pillars (and their capitals) of
the wooden pulpit of the church of St Peter. It was perfectly plain and
simple to a reader who knew the kind of information that was being given
and who knew of the existence of this particular church. To a stranger,
on the other hand, it was perfectly meaningless and undecipherable.'

'It certainly looks very simple now that we have heard the explanation,'
said Winifred, 'but it didn't seem so when I was trying to work it out
myself. There didn't seem to be anything to go on.'

'No,' agreed Sir Lawrence, 'there didn't seem to be anything to go on in
either case. The clues were perfectly invisible, and I don't believe any
one but our friend would have discovered a particle of evidence.'

Brodribb chuckled and reached out for the decanter. 'I agree with you,
Drayton,' said he. 'Thorndyke reminds me of that, probably fabulous, kind
of Indian juggler who throws a rope into the air and proceeds to climb up
it and pull it up after him. He can work without any visible means of
support. However, he has conducted our various affairs to a highly
satisfactory conclusion, and I propose that we charge our glasses in his
honour and invite him to light the Trichinopoly, which, I believe, is his
disgusting habit on occasions of this kind.'

Accordingly the glasses were filled, the toast pledged, and the virulent
little cheroot duly lighted; with which mystical rite the case of the
Cat's Eye was formally closed and dismissed into the domain of memory.

There is little more to tell. I am finishing this narrative in a
pleasant, panelled room in the old mansion of Beauchamp Blake, one of a
suite assigned by Percy to Winifred and me, in which we commonly spend
our weekends--for our normal abiding-place is still the Temple. Percy is
growing apace, and like his ancestor and namesake, refuses to abandon his
professional ambitions. At present he is engaged, under the direction of
a famous architect, in restoring the old house to its former comeliness,
and only this morning I saw them together superintending the replacement
of a perished fascia with a sturdy oaken plank, enriched with fine
carving and bearing in raised letters the legend: 'God's Providence is
Mine Inheritance.'



THE END


CHAPTER I. THE VANISHING MAN


The school of St Margaret's Hospital was fortunate in its lecturer on
Medical Jurisprudence, or Forensic Medicine, as it is sometimes
described. At some schools the lecturer on this subject is appointed
apparently for the reason that he lacks the qualifications to lecture
on any other. But with us it was very different: John Thorndyke was
not only an enthusiast, a man of profound learning and great
reputation, but he was an exceptional teacher, lively and fascinating
in style and of endless resources. Every remarkable case that had ever
been reported he appeared to have at his fingers' ends; every
fact--chemical, physical, biological, or even historical--that could in
any way be twisted into a medico-legal significance, was pressed into
his service; and his own varied and curious experiences seemed as
inexhaustible as the widow's cruse. One of his favourite devices for
giving life and interest to a rather dry subject was that of analysing
and commenting upon contemporary cases as reported in the papers
(always, of course, with a due regard to the legal and social
proprieties); and it was in this way that I first became introduced to
the astonishing series of events that was destined to exercise so great
an influence on my own life.

The lecture which had just been concluded had dealt with the rather
unsatisfactory subject of survivorship. Most of the students had left
the theatre, and the remainder had gathered round the lecturer's table
to listen to the informal comments that Dr. Thorndyke was wont to
deliver on these occasions in an easy, conversational manner, leaning
against the edge of the table and apparently addressing his remarks to
a stick of blackboard chalk that he held in his fingers.

'The problem of survivorship,' he was saying, in reply to a question
put by one of the students, 'ordinarily occurs in cases where the
bodies of the parties are producible, or where, at any rate, the
occurrence of death and its approximate time are actually known. But
an analogous difficulty may arise in a case where the body of one of
the parties is not forthcoming, and the fact of death may have to be
assumed on collateral evidence.

'Here, of course, the vital question to be settled is, what is the
latest instant at which it is certain that this person was alive? And
the settlement of that question may turn on some circumstance of the
most trivial and insignificant kind. There is a case in this morning's
paper which illustrates this. A gentleman has disappeared rather
mysteriously. He was last seen by the servant of a relative at whose
house he had called. Now, if this gentleman should never reappear,
dead or alive, the question as to what was the latest moment at which
he was certainly alive will turn upon the further question: "Was he or
was he not wearing a particular article of jewellery when he called at
the relative's house?"'

He paused with a reflective eye bent upon the stump of chalk he still
held; then, noting the expectant interest with which we were regarding
him, he resumed:

'The circumstances in this case are very curious; in fact, they are
highly mysterious; and if any legal issues should arise in respect of
them, they are likely to yield some very remarkable complications. The
gentleman who has disappeared, Mr. John Bellingham, is a man well
known in archaeological circles. He recently returned from Egypt,
bringing with him a very fine collection of antiquities--some of
which, by the way, he has presented to the British Museum, where they
are now on view--and having made this presentation, he appears to have
gone to Paris on business. I may mention that the gift consisted of a
very fine mummy and a complete set of tomb-furniture. The latter,
however, had not arrived from Egypt at the time when the missing man
left for Paris, but the mummy was inspected on the fourteenth of
October at Mr. Bellingham's house by Dr. Norbury of the British
Museum, in the presence of the donor and his solicitor, and the latter
was authorised to hand over the complete collection to the British
Museum authorities when the tomb-furniture arrived; which he has since
done.

'From Paris he seems to have returned on the twenty-third of November,
and to have gone direct to Charing Cross to the house of a relative, a
Mr. Hurst, who is a bachelor and lives at Eltham. He appeared at the
house at twenty minutes past five, and as Mr. Hurst had not yet come
down from town and was not expected until a quarter to six, he
explained who he was and said he would wait in the study and write
some letters. The housemaid accordingly showed him into the study,
furnished him with writing materials, and left him.

'At a quarter to six Mr. Hurst let himself in with his latchkey, and
before the housemaid had time to speak to him he had passed through
into the study and shut the door.

'At six o'clock, when the dinner bell was rung, Mr. Hurst entered the
dining-room alone, and observing the table was laid for two, asked the
reason.

'"I thought Mr. Bellingham was staying to dinner, sir," was the
housemaid's reply.

'"Mr. Bellingham!" exclaimed the astonished host. "I didn't know he
was here. Why was I not told?"

'"I thought he was in the study with you, sir," said the housemaid.

'On this a search was made for the visitor, with the result that he
was nowhere to be found. He had disappeared without leaving a trace,
and what made the incident more odd was that the housemaid was certain
that he had not gone out by the front door. For since neither she nor
the cook was acquainted with Mr. John Bellingham, she had remained the
whole time either in the kitchen, which commanded a view of the front
gate, or in the dining-room, which opened into the hall opposite the
study door. The study itself has a French window opening on a narrow
grass plot, across which is a side-gate that opens into an alley; and
it appears that Mr. Bellingham must have made his exit by this rather
eccentric route. At any rate--and this is the important fact--he was
not in the house, and no one had seen him leave it.

'After a hasty meal Mr. Hurst returned to town and called at the
office of Mr. Bellingham's solicitor and confidential agent, a Mr.
Jellicoe, and mentioned the matter to him. Mr. Jellicoe knew nothing
of his client's return from Paris, and the two men at once took the
train down to Woodford, where the missing man's brother, Mr. Godfrey
Bellingham, lives. The servant who admitted them said that Mr. Godfrey
was not at home, but that his daughter was in the library, which is a
detached building situated in a shrubbery beyond the garden at the
back of the house. Here the two men found, not only Miss Bellingham,
but also her father, who had come in by the back gate.

'Mr. Godfrey and his daughter listened to Mr. Hurst's story with the
greatest surprise, and assured him that they had neither seen nor
heard anything of John Bellingham.

'Presently the party left the library to walk up to the house; but
only a few feet from the library door Mr. Jellicoe noticed an object
lying in the grass and pointed it out to Mr. Godfrey.

'The latter picked it up, and they all recognised it as a scarab which
Mr. John Bellingham had been accustomed to wear suspended from his
watch-chain. There was no mistaking it. It was a very fine scarab of
the eighteenth dynasty fashioned of lapis lazuli and engraved with the
cartouche of Amenhotep III. It had been suspended by a gold ring
fastened to a wire which passed through the suspension hole, and the
ring, though broken, was still in position.

'This discovery of course only added to the mystery, which was still
further increased when, on inquiry, a suit-case bearing the initials
J. B. was found to be unclaimed in the cloak-room at Charing Cross.
Reference to the counterfoil of the ticket-book showed that it had
been deposited about the time of the arrival of the Continental
express on the twenty-third of November, so that its owner must have
gone straight on to Eltham.

'That is how the affair stands at present, and, should the missing man
never reappear or should his body never be found, the question, as you
see, which will be required to be settled is, "What is the exact time
and place, when and where, he was last known to be alive!" As to the
place, the importance of the issues involved in that question are
obvious and we need not consider them. But the question of time has
another kind of significance. Cases have occurred, as I pointed out in
the lecture, in which proof of survivorship by less than a minute has
secured succession to property. Now, the missing man was last seen
alive at Mr. Hurst's house at twenty minutes past five on the
twenty-third of November. But he appears to have visited his brother's
house at Woodford, and, since nobody saw him at that house, it is at
present uncertain whether he went there before calling on Mr. Hurst. If
he went there first, then twenty minutes past five on the evening of the
twenty-third is the latest moment at which he is known to have been
alive; but if he went there after, there would have to be added to this
time the shortest time possible in which he could travel from the one
house to the other.

'But the question as to which house he visited first hinges on the
scarab. If he was wearing the scarab when he arrived at Mr. Hurst's
house, it would be certain that he went there first; but if it was not
then on his watch-chain, a probability would be established that he
went first to Woodford. Thus, you see, a question which may
conceivably become of the most vital moment in determining the
succession of property turns on the observation or non-observation by
this housemaid of an apparently trivial and insignificant fact.'

'Has the servant made any statement on this subject, sir?' I ventured
to enquire.

'Apparently not,' replied Dr. Thorndyke; 'at any rate, there is no
reference to any such statement in the newspaper report, though
otherwise, the case is reported in great detail; indeed, the wealth of
detail, including plans of the two houses, is quite remarkable and
well worth noting as being in itself a fact of considerable interest.'

'In what respect, sir, is it of interest?' one of the students asked.

'Ah,' replied Dr. Thorndyke, 'I think I must leave you to consider
that question yourself. This is an untried case, and we mustn't make
free with the actions and motives of individuals.'

'Does the paper give any description of the missing man, sir?' I
asked.

'Yes; quite an exhaustive description. Indeed, it is exhaustive to the
verge of impropriety, considering that the man may turn up alive and
well at any moment. It seems that he has an old Pott's fracture of the
left ankle, a linear, longitudinal scar on each knee--origin not
stated, but easily guessed at--and that he has tattooed on his chest
in vermilion a very finely and distinctly executed representation of
the symbolical Eye of Osiris--or Horus or Ra, as the different
authorities have it. There certainly ought to be no difficulty in
identifying the body. But we hope that it will not come to that.

'And now I must really be running away, and so must you; but I would
advise you all to get copies of the paper and file them when you have
read the remarkably full details. It is a most curious case, and it is
highly probable that we shall hear of it again. Good afternoon,
gentlemen.'

Dr Thorndyke's advice appealed to all who heard it, for medical
jurisprudence was a live subject at St Margaret's, and all of us were
keenly interested in it. As a result, we sallied forth in a body to
the nearest newsvendor's, and, having each provided himself with a
copy of the Daily Telegraph, adjourned together to the Common Room to
devour the report and thereafter to discuss the bearings of the case,
unhampered by those considerations of delicacy that afflicted our more
squeamish and scrupulous teacher.



CHAPTER II. THE EAVESDROPPER



IT IS one of the canons of correct conduct, scrupulously adhered to
(when convenient) by all well-bred persons, that an acquaintance
should be initiated by a proper introduction. To this salutary rule,
which I have disregarded to the extent of an entire chapter, I now
hasten to conform; and the more so inasmuch as nearly two years have
passed since my first informal appearance.

Permit me then, to introduce Paul Berkeley, MB, etc., recently--very
recently--qualified, faultlessly attired in the professional frock-coat
and tall hat, and, at the moment of introduction, navigating with
anxious care a perilous strait between a row of well-filled coal-sacks
and a colossal tray piled high with kidney potatoes.

The passage of this strait landed me on the terra firma of Fleur-de-Lys
Court, where I halted for a moment to consult my visiting list. There
was only one more patient for me to see this morning, and he lived at
49, Nevill's Court, wherever that might be. I turned for information to
the presiding deity of the coal shop.

'Can you direct me, Mrs. Jablett, to Nevill's Court?'

She could and she did, grasping me confidentially by the arm (the mark
remained on my sleeve for weeks) and pointing a shaking forefinger at
the dead wall ahead. 'Nevill's Court', said Mrs. Jablett, 'is a alley,
and you goes into it through a archway. It turns out on Fetter Lane on
the right and as you goes up, oppersight Bream's Buildings.'

I thanked Mrs. Jablett and went on my way, glad that the morning round
was nearly finished, and vaguely conscious of a growing appetite and of
a desire to wash in hot water.

The practice which I was conducting was not my own. It belonged to poor
Dick Barnard, an old St Margaret's man of irrepressible spirits and
indifferent physique, who had started only the day before for a trip
down the Mediterranean on board a tramp engaged in the currant trade;
and this, my second morning's round, was in some sort a voyage of
geographical discovery.

I walked on briskly up Fetter Lane until a narrow arched opening,
bearing the superscription 'Nevill's Court', arrested my steps, and here
I turned to encounter one of those surprises that lie in wait for the
traveller in London by-ways. Expecting to find the grey squalor of the
ordinary London court, I looked out from under the shadow of the arch
past a row of decent little shops through a vista full of light and
colour--a vista of ancient, warm-toned roofs and walls relieved by
sunlit foliage. In the heart of London a tree is always a delightful
surprise; but here were not only trees, but bushes and even flowers. The
narrow footway was bordered by little gardens, which, with their wooden
palings and well-kept shrubs, gave to the place an air of quaint and
sober rusticity; and even as I entered a bevy of workgirls, with
gaily-coloured blouses and hair aflame in the sunlight, brightened up
the quiet background like the wild flowers that sprangle a summer
hedgerow.

In one of the gardens I noticed that the little paths were paved with
what looked like circular tiles, but which, on inspection, I found to be
old-fashioned stone ink-bottles, buried bottom upwards; and I was
meditating upon the quaint conceit of the forgotten scrivener who had
thus adorned his habitation--a law-writer perhaps or an author, or
perchance even a poet--when I perceived the number that I was seeking
inscribed on a shabby door in a high wall. There was no bell or knocker,
so, lifting the latch, I pushed the door open and entered.

But if the court itself had been a surprise, this was a positive wonder,
a dream. Here, within earshot of the rumble of Fleet Street, I was in an
old-fashioned garden enclosed by high walls and, now that the gate was
shut, cut off from all sight and knowledge of the urban world that
seethed without. I stood and gazed in delighted astonishment. Sun-gilded
trees and flower beds gay with blossom; lupins, snapdragons,
nasturtiums, spiry foxgloves, and mighty hollyhocks formed the
foreground; over which a pair of sulphur-tinted butterflies flitted,
unmindful of a buxom and miraculously clean white cat which pursued
them, dancing across the borders and clapping her snowy paws fruitlessly
in mid-air. And the background was no less wonderful; a grand old house,
dark-eaved and venerable, that must have looked down on this garden when
ruffled dandies were borne in sedan chairs through the court, and gentle
Izaak Walton, stealing forth from his shop in Fleet Street, strolled up
Fetter Lane to 'go a-angling' at Temple Mills.

So overpowered was I by this unexpected vision that my hand was on the
bottom knob of a row of bell-pulls before I recollected myself; and it
was not until a most infernal jangling from within recalled me to my
business that I observed underneath it a small brass plate inscribed
'Miss Oman'.

The door opened with some suddenness and a short, middle-aged woman
surveyed me hungrily.

'Have I rung the wrong bell?' I asked--foolishly enough, I must admit.

'How can I tell?' she demanded. 'I expect you have. It's the sort of
thing a man would do--ring the wrong bell and then say he's sorry.'

'I didn't go as far as that,' I retorted. 'It seems to have had the
desired effect, and I've made your acquaintance into the bargain.'

'Whom do you want to see?' she asked.

'Mr. Bellingham.'

'Are you the doctor?'

'I'm a doctor.'

'Follow me upstairs,' said Miss Oman, 'and don't tread on the paint.'

I crossed the spacious hall, and, preceded by my conductress, ascended a
noble oak staircase, treading carefully on a ribbon of matting that ran
up the middle. On the first-floor landing Miss Oman opened a door and,
pointing to the room, said, 'Go in there and wait; I'll tell her you're
here.'

'I said Mr. Bellingham--' I began; but the door slammed on me, and Miss
Oman's footsteps retreated rapidly down the stairs.

It was at once obvious to me that I was in a very awkward position. The
room into which I had been shown communicated with another, and though
the door of communication was shut, I was unpleasantly aware of a
conversation that was taking place in the adjoining room. At first,
indeed, only a vague mutter, with a few disjointed phrases, came through
the door, but suddenly an angry voice rang out clear and painfully
distinct:

'Yes, I did! And I say it again. Bribery! Collusion! That's what it
amounts to. You want to square me!'

'Nothing of the kind, Godfrey,' was the reply in a lower tone; but at
this point I coughed emphatically and moved a chair, and the voices
subsided once more into an indistinct murmur.

To distract my attention from my unseen neighbours I glanced curiously
about the room and speculated upon the personal ties of its occupants. A
very curious room it was, with its pathetic suggestion of decayed
splendour and old-world dignity; a room full of interest and character
and of contrasts and perplexing contradictions. For the most part it
spoke of unmistakable though decent poverty. It was nearly bare of
furniture, and what little there was was of the cheapest--a small
kitchen table and three Windsor chairs (two of them with arms); a
threadbare string carpet on the floor, and a cheap cotton cloth on the
table; these, with a set of bookshelves, frankly constructed of grocer's
boxes, formed the entire suite. And yet, despite its poverty, the place
exhaled an air of homely if rather ascetic comfort, and the taste was
irreproachable. The quiet russet of the table-cloth struck a pleasant
harmony with the subdued bluish green of the worn carpet; the Windsor
chairs and the legs of the table had been carefully denuded of their
glaring varnish and stained a sober brown; and the austerity of the
whole was relieved by a ginger jar filled with fresh-cut flowers and set
in the middle of the table.

But the contrasts of which I have spoken were most singular and
puzzling. There were the bookshelves, for instance, home made and
stained at the cost of a few pence, but filled with recent and costly
new works on archaeology and ancient art. There were the objects on
the mantelpiece: a facsimile in bronze--not bronze plaster--of the
beautiful head of Hypnos and a pair of fine Ushabti figures. There
were the decorations of the walls, a number of etchings--signed
proofs, every one of them--of Oriental subjects, and a splendid
facsimile reproduction of an Egyptian papyrus. It was incongruous in
the extreme, this mingling of costly refinements with the barest and
shabbiest necessaries of life, of fastidious culture with manifest
poverty. I could make nothing of it. What manner of man, I wondered, was
this new patient of mine? Was he a miser, hiding himself and his wealth
in this obscure court? An eccentric savant? A philosopher? Or--more
probably--a crank? But at this point my meditations were interrupted by
the voice from the adjoining room, once more raised in anger.

'Tut I say that you are making an accusation! You are implying that I
made away with him.'

'Not at all,' was the reply; 'but I repeat that it is your business to
ascertain what has become of him. The responsibility rests upon you.'

'Upon me!' rejoined the first voice. 'And what about you? Your position
is a pretty fishy one if it comes to that.'

'What!' roared the other. 'Do you insinuate that I murdered my own
brother?'

During this amazing colloquy I had stood gaping with sheer astonishment.
Suddenly I recollected myself, and dropping into a chair, set my elbows
on my knees and clapped my hands over my ears; and thus I must have
remained for a full minute when I became aware of the closing of a door
behind me.

I sprang to my feet and turned in some embarrassment (for I must have
looked unspeakably ridiculous) to confront the sombre figure of a rather
tall and strikingly handsome girl, who, as she stood with her hand on
the knob of the door, saluted me with a formal bow. In an instantaneous
glance I noted how perfectly she matched her strange surroundings.
Black-robed, black-haired, with black-grey eyes and a grave sad face of
ivory pallor, she stood, like one of old Terboch's portraits, a harmony
in tones so low as to be but a step removed from monochrome. Obviously a
lady in spite of the worn and rusty dress, and something in the poise of
the head and the set of the straight brows hinted at a spirit that
adversity had hardened rather than broken.

'I must ask you to forgive me for keeping you waiting,' she said; and as
she spoke a certain softening at the corners of the austere mouth
reminded me of the absurd position in which she had found me.

I murmured that the trifling delay was of no consequence whatever; that
I had, in fact, been rather glad of the rest; and I was beginning
somewhat vaguely to approach the subject of the invalid when the voice
from the adjoining room again broke forth with hideous distinctness.

'I tell you I'll do nothing of the kind! Why, confound you, it's nothing
less than a conspiracy that you're proposing!'

Miss Bellingham--as I assumed her to be--stepped quickly across the
floor, flushing angrily, as well she might; but, as she reached the
door, it flew open and a small, spruce, middle-aged man burst into the
room.

'Your father is mad, Ruth!' he exclaimed; 'absolutely stark mad! And I
refuse to hold any further communication with him.'

'The present interview was not of his seeking,' Miss Bellingham replied
coldly.

'No, it was not,' was the wrathful rejoinder; 'it was my mistaken
generosity. But there--what is the use of talking? I've done my best for
you and I'll do no more. Don't trouble to let me out; I can find my way.
Good-morning.' With a stiff bow and a quick glance at me, the speaker
strode out of the room, banging the door after him.

'I must apologise for this extraordinary reception,' said Miss
Bellingham; 'but I believe medical men are not easily astonished. I will
introduce you to your patient now.' She opened the door and, as I
followed her into the adjoining room, she said: 'Here is another visitor
for you, dear. Doctor--'

'Berkeley,' said I. 'I am acting for my friend Doctor Barnard.'

The invalid, a fine-looking man of about fifty-five, who sat propped up
in bed with a pile of pillows, held out an excessively shaky hand, which
I grasped cordially, making a mental note of the tremor.

'How do you do, sir?' said Mr. Bellingham. 'I hope Doctor Barnard is not
ill.'

'Oh, no,' I answered; 'he has gone for a trip down the Mediterranean on
a currant ship. The chance occurred rather suddenly, and I bustled him
off before he had time to change his mind. Hence my rather unceremonious
appearance, which I hope you will forgive.'

'Not at all,' was the hearty response. 'I'm delighted to hear that you
sent him off; he wanted a holiday, poor man. And I am delighted to make
your acquaintance, too.'

'It is very good of you,' I said; whereupon he bowed as gracefully as
a man may who is propped up in bed with a heap of pillows; and having
thus exchanged broadsides of civility, so to speak, we--or, at least,
I--proceeded to business.

'How long have you been laid up?' I asked cautiously, not wishing to
make too evident the fact that my principal had given me no
information respecting his case.

'A week to-day,' he replied. 'Thefons et origo mail was a hansom-cab
which upset me opposite the Law Courts--sent me sprawling in the
middle of the road. My own fault, of course--at least, the cabby said
so, and I suppose he knew. But that was no consolation to me.'

'Were you hurt much?'

'No, not really; but the fall bruised my knee rather badly and gave me
a deuce of a shake up. I'm too old for that sort of thing, you know.'

'Most people are,' said I.

'True; but you can take a cropper more gracefully at twenty than at
fifty-five. However, the knee is getting on quite well--you shall see
it presently--and you observe that I am giving it complete rest. But
that isn't the whole of the trouble or the worst of it. It's my
confounded nerves. I'm as irritable as the devil and as nervous as a
cat. And I can't get a decent night's rest.'

I recalled the tremulous hand that he had offered me. He did not look
like a drinker, but still--

'Do you smoke much?' I inquired diplomatically.

He looked at me slyly and chuckled. 'That's a very delicate way to
approach the subject, Doctor,' he said. 'No, I don't smoke much, and I
don't crook my little finger. I saw you look at my shaky hand just
now--oh, it's all right; I'm not offended. It's a doctor's business to
keep lifting his eyelids. But my hand is steady enough as a rule, when
I'm not upset, but the least excitement sets me shaking like a jelly.
And the fact is that I have just had a deucedly unpleasant interview--'

'I think,' Miss Bellingham interrupted, 'Doctor Berkeley and, in fact,
the neighbourhood at large, are aware of the fact.'

Mr. Bellingham laughed rather shamefacedly. 'I'm afraid I did lose my
temper,' he said; 'but I am always an impulsive old fellow, Doctor,
and when I'm put out I'm apt to speak my mind--a little too bluntly
perhaps.'

'And audibly,' his daughter added. 'Do you know that Doctor Berkeley
was reduced to the necessity of stopping his ears?' She glanced at me
as she spoke, with something like a twinkle in her solemn grey eyes.

'Did I shout?' Mr. Bellingham asked, not very contritely, I thought,
though he added: 'I'm very sorry, my dear; but it won't happen again.
I think we've seen the last of that good gentleman.'

'I am sure I hope so,' she rejoined, adding: 'And now I will leave you
to your talk; I shall be in the next room if you should want me.'

I opened the door for her, and when she had passed out with a stiff
little bow I seated myself by the bedside and resumed the
consultation. It was evidently a case of breakdown, to which the cab
accident had, no doubt, contributed. As to the other antecedents, they
were of no concern of mine, though Mr. Bellingham seemed to think
otherwise, for he resumed: 'That cab business was the last straw, you
know, and it finished me off, but I have been going down the hill for
a long time. I've had a lot of trouble during the last two years. But
I suppose I oughtn't to pester you with the details of my personal
affairs.'

'Anything that bears on your present state of health is of interest to
me if you don't mind telling me it,' I said.

'Mind!' he exclaimed. 'Did you ever meet an invalid who didn't enjoy
talking about his own health? It's the listener who minds, as a rule.'

'Well, the present listener doesn't,' I said.

'Then,' said Mr. Bellingham, 'I'll treat myself to the luxury of
telling you all my troubles; I don't often get the chance of a
confidential grumble to a responsible man of my own class. And I
really have some excuses for railing at Fortune, as you will agree
when I tell you that, a couple of years ago, I went to bed one night a
gentleman of independent means and excellent prospects and woke up in
the morning to find myself practically a beggar. Not a cheerful
experience that, you know, at my time of life, eh?'

'No,' I agreed, 'not at any other.'

'And that was not all,' he continued; 'For at the same moment I lost
my brother, my dearest, kindest friend. He disappeared--vanished off
the face of the earth; but perhaps you have heard of the affair. The
confounded papers were full of it at the time.'

He paused abruptly, noticing, no doubt, a sudden change in my face. Of
course, I recollected the case now. Indeed, ever since I had entered
the house some chord of memory had been faintly vibrating, and now his
last words had struck out the full note.

'Yes,' I said, 'I remember the incident, though I don't suppose I
should but for the fact that our lecturer on medical jurisprudence
drew my attention to it.'

'Indeed,' said Mr. Bellingham, rather uneasily, as I fancied. 'What
did he say about it?'

'He referred to it as a case that was calculated to give rise to some
very pretty legal complications.'

'By Jove!' exclaimed Bellingham, 'that man was a prophet! Legal
complications, indeed! But I'll be bound he never guessed at the sort
of infernal tangle that has actually gathered round the affair. By the
way, what was his name?'

'Thorndyke,' I replied. 'Doctor John Thorndyke.'

'Thorndyke,' Mr. Bellingham repeated in a musing, retrospective tone.
'I seem to remember the name. Yes, of course. I have heard a legal
friend of mine, a Mr. Marchmont, speak of him in reference to the case
of a man whom I knew slightly years ago--a certain Jeffrey Blackmore,
who also disappeared very mysteriously. I remember now that Dr.
Thorndyke unravelled that case with most remarkable ingenuity.'

'I daresay he would be very much interested to hear about your case,'
I suggested.

'I daresay he would,' was the reply; 'but one can't take up a
professional man's time for nothing, and I couldn't afford to pay him.
And that reminds me that I'm taking up your time by gossiping about
purely personal affairs.'

'My morning round is finished,' said I, 'and, moreover, your personal
affairs are highly interesting. I suppose I mustn't ask what is the
nature of the legal entanglement?'

'Not unless you are prepared to stay here for the rest of the day and
go home a raving lunatic. But I'll tell you this much: the trouble is
about my poor brother's will. In the first place it can't be
administered because there is not sufficient evidence that my brother
is dead; and in the second place, if it could, all the property would
go to people who were never intended to benefit. The will itself is
the most diabolically exasperating document that was ever produced by
the perverted ingenuity of a wrong-headed man. That's all. Will you
have a look at my knee?'

As Mr. Bellingham's explanation (delivered in a rapid crescendo and
ending almost in a shout) had left him purple-faced and trembling, I
thought it best to bring our talk to an end. Accordingly I proceeded
to inspect the injured knee, which was now nearly well, and to
overhaul my patient generally; and having given him detailed
instructions as to his general conduct, I rose and took my leave.

'And remember,' I said as I shook his hand, 'no tobacco, no coffee, no
excitement of any kind. Lead a quiet, bovine life.'

'That's all very well,' he grumbled, 'but supposing people come here
and excite me?'

'Disregard them,' said I, 'and read Whitaker's Almanack.' And with
this parting advice I passed out into the other room.

Miss Bellingham was seated at the table with a pile of blue-covered
notebooks before her, two of which were open, displaying pages closely
written in a small, neat handwriting. She rose as I entered and looked
at me inquiringly.

'I heard you advising my father to read Whitaker's Almanack,' she
said. 'Was that a curative measure?'

'Entirely,' I replied. 'I recommended it for its medicinal virtues, as
an antidote to mental excitement.'

She smiled faintly. 'It certainly is not a highly emotional book,' she
said, and then asked: 'Have you any other instructions to give?'

'Well, I might give the conventional advice--to maintain a cheerful
outlook and avoid worry; but I don't suppose you would find it very
helpful.'

'No,' she answered bitterly; 'it is a counsel of perfection. People in
our position are not a very cheerful class, I'm afraid; but still they
don't seek out worries from sheer perverseness. The worries come
unsought. But, of course, you can't enter into that.'

'I can't give you any practical help, I fear, though I do sincerely
hope that your father's affairs will straighten themselves out soon.'

She thanked me for my good wishes and accompanied me down to the
street door, where, with a bow and a rather stiff handshake, she gave
me my conge.

Very ungratefully the noise of Fetter Lane smote on my ears as I came
out through the archway, and very squalid and unrestful the little
street looked when contrasted with the dignity and monastic quiet of
the old garden. As to the surgery, with its oilcloth floor and walls
made hideous with gaudy insurance show-cards in sham gilt frailties,
its aspect was so revolting that I flew to the day-book for
distraction, and was still busily entering the morning's visits when
the bottle-boy, Adolphus, entered stealthily to announce lunch.



CHAPTER III. JOHN THORNDYKE



THAT THE character of an individual tends to be reflected in his dress
is a fact familiar to the least observant. That the observation is
equally applicable to aggregates of men is less familiar, but equally
true. Do not the members of the fighting professions, even to this
day, deck themselves in feathers, in gaudy colours and gilded
ornaments, after the manner of the African war-chief or the Redskin
'brave', and thereby indicate the place of war in modern civilisation?
Does not the Church of Rome send her priests to the altar in
habiliments that were fashionable before the fall of the Roman Empire,
in token of her immovable conservatism? And, lastly, does not the Law,
lumbering on in the wake of progress, symbolise its subjection to
precedent by head-gear reminiscent of the good days of Queen Anne?

I should apologise for obtruding upon the reader these somewhat trite
reflections; which were set going by the quaint stock-in-trade of the
wig-maker's shop in the cloisters of the Inner Temple, whither I
strayed on a sultry afternoon in quest of shade and quiet. I had
halted opposite the little shop window, and, with my eyes bent
dreamily on the row of wigs, was pursuing the above train of thought
when I was startled by a deep voice saying softly in my ear: 'I'd have
the full-bottomed one if I were you.'

I turned swiftly and rather fiercely, and looked into the face of my
old friend and fellow-student, Jervis, behind whom, regarding us with
a sedate smile, stood my former teacher, Dr. John Thorndyke. Both men
greeted me with a warmth that I felt to be very flattering, for
Thorndyke was quite a great personage, and even Jervis was several
years my academic senior.

'You are coming in to have a cup of tea with us, I hope,' said
Thorndyke; and as I assented gladly, he took my arm and led me across
the court in the direction of the Treasury.

'But why that hungry gaze at those forensic vanities, Berkeley?' he
asked. 'Are you thinking of following my example and Jervis's--deserting
the bedside for the Bar?'

'What! Has Jervis gone in for the law?' I exclaimed.

'Bless you, yes!' replied Jervis. 'I have become parasitical on
Thorndyke! "The big fleas have little fleas", you know. I am the
additional fraction trailing after the whole number in the rear of a
decimal point.'

'Don't you believe him, Berkeley,' interposed Thorndyke. 'He is the
brains of the firm. I supply the respectability and moral worth. But
you haven't answered my question. What are you doing here on a summer
afternoon staring into a wig-maker's window?'

'I am Barnard's locum; he is in practice in Fetter Lane.'

'I know,' said Thorndyke; 'we meet him occasionally, and very pale and
peaky he has been looking of late. Is he taking a holiday?'

'Yes. He has gone for a trip to the Isles of Greece in a currant
ship.'

'Then,' said Jervis, 'you are actually a local GP. I thought you were
looking beastly respectable.'

'And judging from your leisured manner when we encountered you,' added
Thorndyke, 'the practice is not a strenuous one. I suppose it is
entirely local?'

'Yes,' I replied. 'The patients mostly live in the small streets and
courts within a half-mile radius of the surgery, and the abodes of
some of them are pretty squalid. Oh! and that reminds me of a very
strange coincidence. It will interest you, I think.'

'Life is made up of strange coincidences,' said Thorndyke. 'Nobody but
a reviewer of novels is ever really surprised at a coincidence. But
what is yours?'

'It is connected with a case that you mentioned to us at the hospital
about two years ago, the case of a man who disappeared under rather
mysterious circumstances. Do you remember it? The man's name was
Bellingham.'

'The Egyptologist? Yes, I remember the case quite well. What about
it?'

'The brother is a patient of mine. He is living in Nevill's Court with
his daughter, and they seem to be as poor as church mice.'

'Really,' said Thorndyke, 'this is quite interesting. They must have
come down in the world rather suddenly. If I remember rightly, the
brother was living in a house of some pretensions standing in its own
grounds.'

'Yes, that is so. I see you recollect all about the case.'

'My dear fellow,' said Jervis, 'Thorndyke never forgets a likely case.
He is a sort of medico-legal camel. He gulps down the raw facts from
the newspapers or elsewhere, and then, in his leisure moments, he
calmly regurgitates them and has a quiet chew at them. It is a quaint
habit. A case crops up in the papers or in one of the courts, and
Thorndyke swallows it whole. Then it lapses and every one forgets it.
A year or two later it crops up in a new form, and, to your
astonishment, you find that Thorndyke has got it all cut and dried. He
has been ruminating on it periodically in the interval.'

'You notice,' said Thorndyke, 'that my learned friend is pleased to
indulge in mixed metaphors. But his statement is substantially true,
though obscurely worded. You must tell us more about the Bellinghams
when we have fortified you with a cup of tea.'

Our talk had brought us to Thorndyke's chambers, which were on the
first floor of No. 5A, King's Bench Walk, and as we entered the fine,
spacious, panelled room we found a small, elderly man, neatly dressed
in black, setting out the tea-service on the table. I glanced at him
with some curiosity. He hardly looked like a servant, in spite of his
neat, black clothes: in fact, his appearance was rather puzzling, for
while his quiet dignity and his serious, intelligent face suggested
some kind of professional man, his neat, capable hands were those of a
skilled mechanic.

Thorndyke surveyed the tea-tray thoughtfully and then looked at his
retainer. 'I see you have put three tea-cups, Polton,' he said. 'Now,
how did you know I was bringing some one in to tea?'

The little man smiled a quaint, crinkly smile of gratification as he
explained:

'I happened to look out of the laboratory window as you turned the
corner, sir.'

'How disappointingly simple,' said Jervis. 'We were hoping for
something abstruse and telepathic.'

'Simplicity is the soul of efficiency, sir,' replied Polton as he
checked the tea-service to make sure that nothing was forgotten, and
with this remarkable aphorism he silently evaporated.

'To return to the Bellingham case,' said Thorndyke, when he had poured
out the tea. 'Have you picked up any facts relating to the parties--and
facts, I mean, of course, that it would be proper for you to mention?'

'I have learned one or two things that there is no harm in repeating.
For instance, I gather that Godfrey Bellingham--my patient--lost all
his property quite suddenly about the time of the disappearance.'

'That is really odd,' said Thorndyke. 'The opposite condition would be
quite understandable, but one doesn't see exactly how this can have
happened, unless there was an allowance of some sort.'

'No, that was what struck me. But there seem to be some queer features
in the case, and the legal position is evidently getting complicated.
There is a will, for example, which is giving trouble.'

'They will be hardly able to administer the will without either proof
or presumption of death,' Thorndyke remarked.

'Exactly. That's one of the difficulties. Another is that there seems
to be some fatal drafting of the will itself. I don't know what it is,
but I expect I shall hear sooner or later. By the way, I mentioned the
interest that you have taken in the case, and I think Bellingham would
have liked to consult you, but, of course, the poor devil has no
money.'

'That is awkward for him if the other interested parties have, There
will probably be legal proceedings of some kind, and as the law takes
no account of poverty, he is likely to go to the wall. He ought to
have advice of some sort.'

'I don't see how he is to get it,' said I.

'Neither do I,' Thorndyke admitted. 'There are no hospitals for
impecunious litigants; it is assumed that only persons of means have a
right to go to law. Of course, if we knew the man and the
circumstances we might be able to help him; but for all we know to the
contrary, he may be an arrant scoundrel.'

I had recalled the strange conversation that I had overheard, and
wondered what Thorndyke would have thought of it if it had been
allowable for me to repeat it. Obviously it was not, however, and I
could only give my own impressions.

'He doesn't strike me as that,' I said; 'but, of course, one never
knows. Personally, he impressed me rather favourably, which is more
than the other man did.'

'What other man?' asked Thorndyke.

'There was another man in the case, wasn't there? I forget his name. I
saw him at the house and didn't much like the look of him. I suspect
he's putting some sort of pressure on Bellingham.'

'Berkeley knows more about this than he's telling us,' said Jervis.
'Let us look up the report and see who this stranger is.' He took down
from a shelf a large volume of newspaper cuttings and laid it on the
table.

'You see,' said he, as he ran his finger down the index. 'Thorndyke
files all the cases that are likely to come to something, and I know
he had expectations regarding this one. I fancy he had some ghoulish
hope that the missing gentleman's head might turn up in somebody's
dust-bin. Here we are; the other man's name is Hurst. He is apparently
a cousin, and it was at his house the missing man was last seen
alive.'

'So you think Mr. Hurst is moving in the matter?' said Thorndyke, when
he had glanced over the report.

'That is my impression,' I replied, 'though I really know nothing
about it.'

'Well,' said Thorndyke, 'if you should learn what is being done and
should have permission to speak of it, I shall be very interested to
hear how the case progresses; and if an unofficial opinion on any
point would be of service, I think there would be no harm in giving
it.'

'It would certainly be of great value if the other parties are taking
professional advice,' I said; and then, after a pause, I asked: 'Have
you given this case much consideration?'

Thorndyke reflected. 'No,' he said, 'I can't say that I have. I turned
it over rather carefully when the report first appeared, and I have
speculated on it occasionally since. It is my habit, as Jervis was
telling you, to utilise odd moments of leisure (such as a railway
journey, for instance) by constructing theories to account for the
facts of such obscure cases as have come to my notice. It is a useful
habit, I think, for, apart from the mental exercise and experience
that one gains from it, an appreciable portion of these cases
ultimately comes into my hands, and then the previous consideration of
them is so much time gained.'

'Have you formed any theory to account for the facts in this case?' I
asked.

'Yes; I have several theories, one of which I especially favour, and I
am awaiting with great interest such new facts as may indicate to me
which of these theories is probably the correct one.'

'It's no use your trying to pump him, Berkeley,' said Jervis. 'He is
fitted with an information valve that opens inwards. You can pour in
as much as you like, but you can't get any out.'

Thorndyke chuckled. 'My learned friend is, in the main, correct,' he
said. 'You see, I may be called upon any day to advise on this case,
in which event I should feel remarkably foolish if I had already
expounded my views in detail. But I should like to hear what you and
Jervis make of the case as reported in the newspapers.'

'There now,' exclaimed Jervis, 'what did I tell you? He wants to suck
your brains.'

'As far as my brain is concerned,' I said, 'the process of suction
isn't likely to yield much except vacuum, so I will resign in favour
of you. You are a full-blown lawyer, whereas I am only a simple GP.'

Jervis filled his pipe with deliberate care and lighted it. Then,
blowing a slender stream of smoke into the air, he said:

'If you want to know what I make of the case from that report, I can
tell you in one word--nothing. Every road seems to end in a cul-de-sac.'

'Oh, come!' said Thorndyke, 'this is mere laziness. Berkeley wants to
witness a display of your forensic wisdom. A learned counsel may be in
a fog--he very often is--but he doesn't state the fact baldly; he
wraps it up in a decent verbal disguise. Tell us how you arrive at
your conclusion. Show us that you have really weighed the facts.'

'Very well,' said Jervis, 'I will give you a masterly analysis of the
case--leading to nothing.' He continued to puff at his pipe for a time
with slight embarrassment, as I thought--and I fully sympathised with
him. Finally he blew a little cloud and commenced:

'The position appears to be this: Here is a man seen to enter a
certain house, who is shown into a certain room, and shut in. He is
not seen to come out, and yet, when the room is next entered, it is
found to be empty; and that man is never seen again, alive or dead.
That is a pretty tough beginning.

'Now, it is evident that one of three things must have happened.
Either he must have remained in that room, or at least in that house,
alive; or he must have died, naturally or otherwise, and his body have
been concealed; or he must have left the house unobserved. Let us take
the first case. Now, he couldn't have remained alive in the house for
two years. This affair happened nearly two years ago. He would have
been noticed. The servants, for instance, when cleaning out the rooms,
would have observed him.'

Here Thorndyke interposed with an indulgent smile at his junior: 'My
learned friend is treating the inquiry with unbecoming levity. We
accept the conclusion that the man did not remain in the house alive.'

'Very well. Then did he remain in it dead? Apparently not. The report
says that as soon as the man was missed, Hurst and the servants
together searched the house thoroughly. But there had been no time or
opportunity to dispose of the body, whence the only possible
conclusion is that the body was not there. Moreover, if we admit the
possibility of his having been murdered--for that is what concealment
of the body would imply--there is the question: Who could have
murdered him? Not the servants, obviously, and as to Hurst--well, of
course, we don't know what his relations with the missing man may have
been--at least, I don't.'--

'Neither do I,' said Thorndyke. 'I know nothing beyond what is in the
newspaper report and what Berkeley has told us.'

'Then we know nothing. He may have had a motive for murdering the man
or he may not. The point is that he doesn't seem to have had the
opportunity. Even if we suppose that he managed to conceal the body
temporarily, still there was the final disposal of it. He couldn't
have buried it in the garden with the servants about; neither could he
have burned it. The only conceivable method by which he could have got
rid of it would have been that of cutting it up into fragments and
burying the dismembered parts in some secluded spots or dropping them
into ponds or rivers. But no remains of the kind have been found, as
some of them probably would have been by now, so that there is nothing
to support this suggestion; indeed, the idea of murder, in this house
at least, seems to be excluded by the search that was made the instant
the man was missed.

'Then to take the third alternative: Did he leave the house
unobserved? Well, it is not impossible, but it would be a queer thing
to do. He may have been an impulsive or eccentric man. We can't say.
We know nothing about him. But two years have clasped and he has never
turned up, so that if he left the house secretly he must have gone
into hiding and be hiding still. Of course, he may have been the sort
of lunatic who would behave in that manner or he may not. We have no
information as to his personal character.

'Then there is the complication of the scarab that was picked up in
the grounds of his brother's house at Woodford. That seems to show
that he visited that house at some time. But no one admits having seen
him there; and it is uncertain, therefore, whether he went first to
his brother's house or to Hurst's. If he was wearing the scarab when
he arrived at the Eltham house, he must have left that house
unobserved and gone to Woodford; but if he was not wearing it he
probably went from Woodford to Eltham, and there finally disappeared.
As to whether he was or was not wearing the scarab when he was last
seen alive by Hurst's housemaid, there is at present no evidence.

'If he went to his brother's house after his visit to Hurst, the
disappearance is more understandable if we don't mind flinging
accusations of murder about rather casually; for the disposal of the
body would be much less difficult in that case. Apparently no one saw
him enter the house, and, if he did enter, it was by a back gate which
communicated with the library--a separate building some distance from
the house. In that case it would have been physically possible for the
Bellinghams to have made away with him. There was plenty of time to
dispose of the body unobserved--temporarily, at any rate. Nobody had
seen him come to the house, and nobody knew that he was there--if he
was there; and apparently no search was made either at the time or
afterwards. In fact, if it could be shown that the missing man left
Hurst's house alive, or that he was wearing the scarab when he arrived
there, things would look rather fishy for the Bellinghams--for, of
course, the girl must have been in it if the father was. But there's
the crux: there is no proof that the man ever did leave Hurst's house
alive. And if he didn't--but there! as I said at first, whichever
turning you take, you find that it ends in a blind alley.'--

'A lame ending to a masterly exposition,' was Thorndyke's comment.

'I know,' said Jervis. 'But what would you have? There are quite a
number of possible solutions, and one of them must be the true one.
But how are we to judge which it is? I maintain that until we know
something of the parties and the financial and other interests
involved we have no data.'

'There,' said Thorndyke, 'I disagree with you entirely. I maintain
that we have ample data. You say that we have no means of judging
which of the various possible solutions is the true one; but I think
that if you read the report carefully and thoughtfully you will find
that the facts now known point clearly to one explanation, and one
only. It may not be the true explanation, and I don't suppose it is.
But we are now dealing with the matter speculatively, academically,
and I contend that our data yield a definite conclusion. What do you
say, Berkeley?'

'I say that it is time for me to be off; the evening consultations
begin at half-past six.'

'Well,' said Thorndyke, 'don't let us keep you from your duties, with
poor Barnard currant-picking in the Grecian Isles. But come in and see
us again. Drop in when you like after your work is done. You won't be
in our way even if we are busy, which we very seldom are after eight
o'clock.'

I thanked Dr. Thorndyke most heartily for making me free of his
chambers in this hospitable fashion and took my leave, setting forth
homewards by way of Middle Temple Lane and the Embankment; not a very
direct route for Fetter Lane, it must be confessed; but our talk had
revived my interest in the Bellingham household and put me in a
reflective vein.

From the remarkable conversation that I had overheard it was evident
that the plot was thickening. Not that I supposed that these two
respectable gentlemen really suspected one another of having made away
with the missing man; but still, their unguarded words, spoken in
anger, made it clear that each had allowed the thought of sinister
possibilities to enter his mind--a dangerous condition that might
easily grow into actual suspicion. And then the circumstances really
were highly mysterious, as I realised with especial vividness now
after listening to my friend's analysis of the evidence.

From the problem itself my mind travelled, not for the first time
during the last few days, to the handsome girl, who had seemed in my
eyes the high-priestess of this temple of mystery in the quaint little
court. What a strange figure she had made against this strange
background, with her quiet, chilly, self-contained manner, her pale
face, so sad and worn, her black, straight brows and solemn grey eyes,
so inscrutable, mysterious, Sibylline. A striking, even impressive,
personality this, I reflected, with something in it sombre and
enigmatic that attracted and yet repelled.

And here I recalled Jervis's words: 'The girl must have been in it if
the father was.' It was a dreadful thought, even though only
speculatively uttered, and my heart rejected it; rejected it with
indignation that rather surprised me. And this notwithstanding that
the sombre black-robed figure that my memory conjured up was one that
associated itself with the idea of mystery and tragedy.



CHAPTER IV. LEGAL COMPLICATIONS AND A JACKAL



MY MEDITATIONS brought me by a circuitous route, and ten minutes late,
to the end of Fetter Lane, where, exchanging my rather abstracted air
for the alert manner of a busy practitioner, I strode briskly forward
and darted into the surgery with knitted brows, as though just
released from an anxious case. But there was only one patient waiting,
and she saluted me as I entered with a snort of defiance.

'Here you are, then?' said she.

'You are perfectly correct, Miss Oman,' I replied; 'in fact, you have
put the case in a nutshell. What can I have the pleasure of doing for
you?'

'Nothing,' was the answer. 'My medical adviser is a lady; but I've
brought a note from Mr. Bellingham. Here it is,' and she thrust the
envelope into my hand.

I glanced through the note and learned that my patient had had a
couple of bad nights and a very harassing day. 'Could I have something
to give me a night's rest?' it concluded.

I reflected for a few moments. One is not very ready to prescribe
sleeping draughts for unknown patients, but still, insomnia is a very
distressing condition. In the end I temporised with a moderate dose of
bromide, deciding to call and see if more energetic measures were
necessary.

'He had better take a dose of this at once, Miss Oman,' said I, as I
handed her the bottle, 'and I will look in later and see how he is.'

'I expect he will be glad to see you,' she answered, 'for he is all
alone to-night and very dumpy. Miss Bellingham is out. But I must
remind you that he's a poor man and pays his way. You must excuse my
mentioning it.'

'I am much obliged to you for the hint, Miss Oman,' I rejoined. 'It
isn't necessary for me to see him, but I should like just to look in
and have a chat.'

'Yes, it will do him good. You have your points, though punctuality
doesn't seem to be one of them,' and with this parting shot Miss Oman
bustled away.

Half-past eight found me ascending the great, dim staircase the house
in Nevill's Court preceded by Miss Oman, by whom I was ushered into
the room. Mr. Bellingham, who had just finished some sort of meal, was
sitting hunched up in his chair gazing gloomily into the empty grate.
He brightened up as I entered, but was evidently in very low spirits.

'I didn't mean to drag you out after your day's work was finished,' he
said, 'though I am very glad to see you.'

'You haven't dragged me out. I heard you were alone, so I just dropped
in for a few minutes' gossip.'

'That is really kind of you,' he said heartily. 'But I'm afraid you'll
find me rather poor company. A man who is full of his own highly
disagreeable affairs is not a desirable companion.'

'You mustn't let me disturb you if you'd rather be alone,' said I,
with a sudden fear that I was intruding.

'Oh, you won't disturb me,' he replied; adding, with a laugh: 'It's
more likely to be the other way about. In fact, if I were not afraid
of boring you to death I would ask you to let me talk my difficulties
over with you.'

'You won't bore me,' I said. 'It is generally interesting to share
another man's experiences without their inconveniences. "The proper
study of mankind is--man," you know, especially to a doctor.'

Mr. Bellingham chuckled grimly. 'You make me feel like a microbe,' he
said. 'However, if you would care to take a peep at me through your
microscope, I will crawl on to the stage for your inspection, though
it is not my actions that furnish the materials for your psychological
studies. It is my poor brother who is the Deus ex machina, who, from
his unknown grave, as I fear, pulls the strings of this infernal
puppet-show.'

He paused and for a space gazed thoughtfully into the grate as if he
had forgotten my presence. At length he looked up and resumed:

'It is a curious story, Doctor--a very curious story. Part of it you
know--the middle part. I will tell you it from the beginning, and then
you will know as much as I do; for, as to the end, that is known to no
one. It is written, no doubt, in the book of destiny, but the page has
yet to be turned.

'The mischief began with my father's death. He was a country clergyman
of very moderate means, a widower with two children, my brother John
and me. He managed to send us both to Oxford, after which John went
into the Foreign Office and I was to have gone into the Church. But I
suddenly discovered that my views on religion had undergone a change
that made this impossible, and just about this time my father came
into a quite considerable property. Now, as it was his expressed
intention to leave the estate equally divided between my brother and
me, there was no need for me to take up any profession for a
livelihood. Archaeology was already the passion of my life, and I
determined to devote myself henceforth to my favourite study, in
which, by the way, I was following a family tendency; for my father
was an enthusiastic student of ancient Oriental history, and John was,
as you know, an ardent Egyptologist.

'Then my father died quite suddenly, and left no will. He had intended
to have one drawn up, but had put it off until it was too late. And
since nearly all the property was in the form of real estate, my
brother inherited practically the whole of it. However, in deference
to the known wishes of my father, he made me an allowance of five
hundred a year, which was about a quarter of the annual income. I
urged him to assign me a lump sum, but he refused to do this. Instead,
he instructed his solicitor to pay me an allowance in quarterly
instalments during the rest of his life; and it was understood that,
on his death, the entire estate should devolve on me, or if I died
first, on my daughter, Ruth. Then, as you know, he disappeared
suddenly, and as the circumstances suggested that he was dead, and
there was no evidence that he was alive, his solicitor--a Mr.
Jellicoe--found himself unable to continue the payment of the
allowance. On the other hand, as there was no positive evidence that
my brother was dead, it was impossible to administer the will.'

'You say the circumstances suggested that your brother was dead. What
circumstances were they?'

'Principally the suddenness and completeness of the disappearance. His
luggage, as you may remember, was found lying unclaimed at the railway
station; and there was another circumstance even more suggestive. My
brother drew a pension from the Foreign Office, for which he had to
apply in person, or, if abroad, produce proof that he was alive on the
date when the payment became due. Now, he was exceedingly regular in
this respect; in fact, he had never been known to fail, either to
appear in person or to transmit the necessary documents to his agent,
Mr. Jellicoe. But from the moment when he vanished so mysteriously to
the present day, nothing whatever has been heard of him.'

'It's a very awkward position for you,' I said, 'but I should think
there will not be much difficulty in obtaining the permission of the
Court to presume death and to proceed to prove the will.'

Mr. Bellingham made a wry face. 'I expect you are right,' he said,
'but that doesn't help me much. You see, Mr. Jellicoe, having waited a
reasonable time for my brother to reappear, took a very unusual but, I
think, in the special circumstances, a very proper step: he summoned
me and the other interested party to his office and communicated to us
the provisions of the will. And very extraordinary provisions they
turned out to be. I was thunderstruck when I heard them. And the
exasperating thing is that I feel sure my poor brother imagined that
he had made everything perfectly safe and simple.'

'They generally do,' I said, rather vaguely.

'I suppose they do,' said Mr. Bellingham; 'but poor John has made the
most infernal hash of his will, and I am certain that he has utterly
defeated his own intentions. You see, we are an old London family. The
house in Queen Square where my brother nominally lived, but actually
kept his collection, has been occupied by us for generations, and most
of the Bellinghams are buried in St George's burial-ground close by,
though some members of the family are buried in other churchyards in the
neighbourhood. Now, my brother--who, by the way, was a bachelor--had a
strong feeling for the family traditions, and he stipulated, not
unnaturally, in his will that he should be buried in St George's
burial-ground among his ancestors, or, at least, in one of the places of
burial appertaining to his native parish. But instead of simply
expressing the wish and directing his executors to carry it out, he made
it a condition affecting the operation of the will.'

'Affecting it in what respect?' I asked.

'In a very vital respect,' answered Mr. Bellingham. 'The bulk of the
property he bequeathed to me, or if I predeceased him, to my daughter
Ruth. But the bequest was subject to the condition I have
mentioned--that he should be buried in a certain place--and if that
condition was not fulfilled, the bulk of the property was to go to my
cousin, George Hurst.'

'But in that case,' said I, 'as you can't produce the body, neither of
you can get the property.'

'I am not so sure of that,' he replied. 'If my brother is dead, it is
pretty certain that he is not buried in St George's or any of the other
places mentioned, and the fact can easily be proved by; production of
the registers. So that a permission to presume death would result in the
handing over to Hurst of almost the entire estate.'

'Who is the executor?' I asked.

'Ah!' he exclaimed, 'there is another muddle. There are two executors;
Jellicoe is one, and the other is the principal beneficiary--Hurst or
myself, as the case may be. But, you see, neither of us can become an
executor until the Court has decided which of us is the principal
beneficiary.'

'But who is to apply to the Court? I thought that was the business of
the executors.'

'Exactly, that is Hurst's difficulty. We were discussing it when you
called the other day, and a very animated discussion it was,' he '.
added, with a grim smile. 'You see, Jellicoe naturally refuses to move
in the matter alone. He says he must have the support of the other
executor. But Hurst is not at present the other executor; neither am I.
But the two of us together are the co-executor, since the duty devolves
upon one or other of us, in any case.'

'It's a complicated position,' I said.

'It is; and the complication has elicited a very curious proposal from
Hurst. He points out--quite correctly, I am afraid--that as the
conditions as to burial have not been complied with, the property must
come to him, and he proposes a very neat little arrangement, which is
this: That I shall support him and Jellicoe in their application for
permission to presume death and to administer the will, and that he
shall pay me four hundred a year for life; the arrangement to hold good
in all eventualities.'

'What does he mean by that?'

'He means,' said Bellingham, fixing me with a ferocious scowl, 'that if
the body should turn up at any future time, so that the conditions as to
burial should be able to be carried out, he should still retain the
property and pay me the four hundred a year.'--

'The deuce!' said I. 'He seems to know how to drive a bargain.'

'His position is that he stands to lose four hundred a year for the term
of my life if the body is never found, and he ought to stand to win if
it is.'

'And I gather that you have refused this offer?'

'Yes; very emphatically, and my daughter agrees with me; but I am not
sure that I have done the right thing. A man should think twice, I
suppose, before he burns his boats.'

'Have you spoken to Mr. Jellicoe about the matter?'

'Yes, I have been to see him to-day. He is a cautious man, and he
doesn't advise me one way or the other. But I think he disapproves of my
refusal; in fact, he remarked that a bird in the hand is worth two in
the bush, especially when the whereabouts of the bush is unknown.'

'Do you think he will apply to the Court without your sanction?'

'He doesn't want to; but I suppose, if Hurst puts pressure on him, he
will have to. Besides, Hurst, as an interested party, could apply on his
own account, and after my refusal he probably will; at least, that is
Jellicoe's opinion.'

'The whole thing is a most astonishing muddle,' I said, 'especially when
one remembers that your brother had a lawyer to advise him. Didn't Mr.
Jellicoe point out to him how absurd the provisions were?'

'Yes, he did. He tells me that he implored my brother to let him draw up
a will embodying the matter in a reasonable form. But John wouldn't
listen to him. Poor old fellow! he could be very pigheaded when he
chose.'

'And is Hurst's proposal still open?'

'No, thanks to my peppery temper. I refused it very definitely, and
sent him off with a flea in his ear. I hope I have not made a false
step; I was quite taken by surprise when Hurst made the proposal and
got rather angry. You remember, my brother was last seen alive at
Hurst's house--but there, I oughtn't to talk like that, and I oughtn't
to pester you with my confounded affairs when you come in for a
friendly chat, though I gave you fair warning, you remember.'

'Oh, but you have been highly entertaining. You don't realise what an
interest I take in your case.'

Mr. Bellingham laughed somewhat grimly. 'My case!' he repeated. 'You
speak as if I were some rare and curious sort of criminal lunatic.
However, I'm glad you find me amusing. It's more than I find myself.'

'I didn't say amusing; I said interesting. I view you with deep
respect as the central figure of a stirring drama. And I am not the
only person who regards you in that light. Do you remember my speaking
to you of Doctor Thorndyke?'

'Yes, of course I do.'

'Well, oddly enough, I met him this afternoon and we had a long talk
at his chambers. I took the liberty of mentioning that I had made your
acquaintance. Did I do wrong?'

'No. Certainly not. Why shouldn't you tell him? Did he remember my
infernal case, as you call it?'

'Perfectly, in all its details. He is quite an enthusiast, you know,
and uncommonly keen to hear how the case develops.'

'So am I, for that matter,' said Mr. Bellingham.

'I wonder,' said I, 'if you would mind my telling him what you have
told me to-night? It would interest him enormously.'

Mr. Bellingham reflected for a while with his eyes fixed on the empty
grate. Presently he looked up, and said slowly:

'I don't know why I should. It's no secret; and if it were, I hold no
monopoly on it. No; tell him, if you think he'd care to hear about
it.'

'You needn't be afraid of his talking,' I said. 'He's as close as an
oyster; and the facts may mean more to him than they do to us. He may
be able to give a useful hint or two.'

'Oh, I'm not going to pick his brains,' Mr. Bellingham said quickly
and with some wrath. 'I'm not the sort of man who goes round cadging
for free professional advice. Understand that, Doctor?'

'I do,' I answered hastily. 'That wasn't what I meant at all. Is that
Miss Bellingham coming in? I heard the front door shut.'

'Yes, that will be my girl, I expect; but don't run away. You're not
afraid of her, are you?' he added as I hurriedly picked up my hat.

'I'm not sure that I'm not,' I answered. 'She is rather a majestic
young lady.'

Mr. Bellingham chuckled and smothered a yawn, and at that moment his
daughter entered the room; and, in spite of her shabby black dress and
a shabbier handbag that she carried, I thought her appearance and
manner fully justified my description.

'You come in, Miss Bellingham,' I said as she shook my hand with cool
civility, 'to find your father yawning and me taking my departure. So
I have my uses, you see. My conversation is the infallible cure for
insomnia.'

Miss Bellingham smiled. 'I believe I am driving you away,' she said.

'Not at all,' I replied hastily. 'My mission was accomplished, that
was all.'

'Sit down for a few moments, Doctor,' urged Mr. Bellingham, 'and let
Ruth sample the remedy. She will be affronted if you run away as soon
as she comes in.'

'Well, you mustn't let me keep you up,' I said.

'Oh, I'll let you know when I fall asleep,' he replied, with a
chuckle; and with this understanding I sat down again--not at all
unwillingly.

At this moment Miss Oman entered with a small tray and a smile of
which I should not have supposed her capable.

'You'll take your toast and cocoa while they're hot, dear, won't you?'
she said coaxingly.

'Yes, I will, Phyllis, thank you,' Miss Bellingham answered. 'I am
only just going to take off my hat,' and she left the room, followed
by the astonishingly transfigured spinster.

She returned almost immediately as Mr. Bellingham was in the midst of
a profound yawn, and sat down to her frugal meal, when her father
mystified me considerably by remarking:

'You're late to-night, chick. Have the Shepherd Kings been giving
trouble?'

'No,' she replied; 'but I thought I might as well get them done. So I
dropped in at the Ormond Street library on my way home and finished
them.'

'Then they are ready for stuffing now?'

'Yes.' As she answered she caught my astonished eye (for a stuffed
Shepherd King is undoubtedly a somewhat surprising phenomenon) and
laughed softly.

'We mustn't talk in riddles like this,' she said, 'before Doctor
Berkeley, or he will turn us both into pillars of salt. My father is
referring to my work,' she explained to me.

'Are you a taxidermist, then?' I asked.

She hastily set down the cup that she was raising to her lips and
broke into a ripple of quiet laughter.

'I am afraid my father has misled you with his irreverent expressions.
He will have to atone by explaining.'

'You see, Doctor,' said Mr. Bellingham, 'Ruth is a literary searcher--'

'Oh, don't call me a searcher!' Miss Bellingham protested. 'It
suggests the female searcher at a police-station. Say investigator.'

'Very well, investigator or investigatrix, if you like. She hunts up
references and bibliographies at the Museum for people who are writing
books. She looks up everything that has been written on a given
subject, and then, when she has crammed herself to a bursting-point
with facts, she goes to her client and disgorges and crams him or her,
and he or she finally disgorges into the Press.'

'What a disgusting way to put it!' said his daughter. 'However, that
is what it amounts to. I am a literary jackal, a collector of
provender for the literary lions. Is that quite clear?'

'Perfectly. But I don't think that, even now, I quite understand about
the stuffed Shepherd Kings.'

'Oh, it was not the Shepherd Kings who were to be stuffed. It was the
author! That was mere obscurity of speech on the part of my father.
The position is this: A venerable Archdeacon wrote an article on the
patriarch Joseph--'

'And didn't know anything about him,' interrupted Mr. Bellingham, 'and
got tripped up by a specialist who did, and then got shirty--'

'Nothing of the kind,' said Miss Bellingham. 'He knew as much as
venerable archdeacons ought to know; but the expert knew more. So the
archdeacon commissioned me to collect the literature on the state of
Egypt at the end of the seventeenth dynasty, which I have done; and
to-morrow I shall go and stuff him, as my father expresses it, and
then--'

'And then,' Mr. Bellingham interrupted, 'the archdeacon will rush
forth and pelt that expert with Shepherd Kings and Sequenen-Ra and the
whole tag-rag and bobtail of the seventeenth dynasty. Oh, there'll be
wigs on the green, I can tell you.'

'Yes, I expect there will be quite a skirmish,' said Miss Bellingham.
And thus dismissing the subject she made an energetic attack on the
toast while her father refreshed himself with a colossal yawn.

I watched her with furtive admiration and deep and growing interest.
In spite of her pallor, her weary eyes, and her drawn and almost
haggard face, she was an exceedingly handsome girl; and there was in
her aspect a suggestion of purpose, of strength and character that
marked her off from the rank and file of womanhood. I noted this as I
stole an occasional glance at her or turned to answer some remark
addressed to me; and I noted, too, that her speech, despite a general
undertone of depression, was yet not without a certain caustic,
ironical humour. She was certainly a rather enigmatical young person,
but very decidedly interesting.

When she had finished her repast she put aside the tray and, opening
the shabby handbag, asked:

'Do you take any interest in Egyptian history? We are as mad as
hatters on the subject. It seems to be a family complaint.'

'I don't know much about it,' I answered. 'Medical studies are rather
engrossing and don't leave much time for general reading.'

'Naturally,' she said. 'You can't specialise in everything. But if you
would care to see how the business of a literary jackal is conducted,
I will show you my notes.'

I accepted the offer eagerly (not, I fear, from pure enthusiasm for
the subject), and she brought forth from the bag four blue-covered,
quarto notebooks, each dealing with one of the four dynasties from the
fourteenth to the seventeenth. As I glanced through the neat and
orderly extracts with which they were filled we discussed the
intricacies of the peculiarly difficult and confused period that they
covered, gradually lowering our voices as Mr. Bellingham's eyes closed
and his head fell against the back of his chair. We had just reached
the critical reign of Apepa II when a resounding snore broke in upon
the studious quiet of the room and sent us both into a fit of silent
laughter.

'Your conversation has done its work,' she whispered as I stealthily
picked up my hat, and together we stole on tiptoe to the door, which
she opened without a sound. Once outside, she suddenly dropped her
bantering manner and said quite earnestly:

'How kind it was of you to come and see him to-night! You have done
him a world of good, and I am most grateful. Good-night!'

She shook hands with me really cordially, and I took my way down the
creaking stairs in a whirl of happiness that I was quite at a loss to
account for.





CHAPTER V. THE WATERCRESS-BED



BARNARD'S PRACTICE, like most others, was subject to those
fluctuations that fill the struggling practitioner alternately with
hope and despair. The work came in paroxysms with intervals of almost
complete stagnation. One of these intermissions occurred on the day
after my visit to Nevill's Court, with the result that by half-past
eleven I found myself wondering what I should do with the remainder of
the day. The better to consider this weighty problem, I strolled down
to the Embankment, and, leaning on the parapet, contemplated the view
across the river; the grey stone bridge with its perspective of
arches, the picturesque pile of the shot-towers, and beyond, the
shadowy shapes of the Abbey and St Stephen's.

It was a pleasant scene, restful and quiet, with a touch of life and a
hint of sober romance, when a barge swept down through the--middle arch
of the bridge with a lugsail hoisted to a jury mast and a white-aproned
woman at the tiller. Dreamily I watched the craft creep by upon the
moving tide, noted the low freeboard, almost awash, the careful
helmswoman, and the dog on the forecastle yapping at the distant
shore--and thought of Ruth Bellingham.

What was there about this strange girl that had made so deep an
impression on me? That was the question that I propounded to myself,
and not for the first time. Of the fact itself there was no doubt. But
what was the explanation? Was it her unusual surroundings? Her
occupation and rather recondite learning? Her striking personality and
exceptional good looks? Or her connection with the dramatic mystery of
her lost uncle?

I concluded that it was all of these. Everything connected with her
was unusual and arresting; but over and above these circumstances
there was a certain sympathy and personal affinity of which I was
strongly conscious and of which I dimly hoped that she, perhaps, was a
little conscious too. At any rate, I was deeply interested in her; of
that there was no doubt whatever. Short as our acquaintance had been,
she held a place in my thoughts that had never been held by any other
woman.

From Ruth Bellingham my reflections passed by a natural transition to
the curious story that her father had told me. It was a queer affair,
that ill-drawn will, with the baffled lawyer protesting in the
background. It almost seemed as if there must be something behind it
all, especially when I remembered Mr. Hurst's very singular proposal.
But it was out of my depth; it was a case for a lawyer, and to a
lawyer it should go. This very night, I resolved, I would go to
Thorndyke and give him the whole story as it had been told to me.

And then there happened one of those coincidences at which we all
wonder when they occur, but which are so frequent as to have become
enshrined in a proverb. For even as I formed the resolution, I
observed two men approaching from the direction of Blackfriars, and
recognised in them my quondam teacher and his junior.

'I was just thinking about you,' I said as they came up.

'Very flattering,' replied Jervis; 'but I thought you had to talk of
the devil.'

'Perhaps,' suggested Thorndyke, 'he was talking to himself. But why
were you thinking of us, and what was the nature of your thoughts?'

'My thoughts had reference to the Bellingham case. I spent the whole
of last evening at Nevill's Court.'

'Ha! And are there any fresh developments?'

'Yes, by Jove! there are. Bellingham gave me a full detailed
description of the will; and a pretty document it seems to be.'

'Did he give you permission to repeat the details to me?'

'Yes. I asked specifically if I might, and he had no objection
whatever.'

'Good. We are lunching at Soho to-day as Polton has his hands full.
Come with us and share our table and tell us your story as we go. Will
that suit you?'

It suited me admirably in the present state of the practice, and I
accepted the invitation with undissembled glee.

'Very well,' said Thorndyke; 'then let us walk slowly and finish with
matters confidential before we plunge into the madding crowd.'

We set forth at a leisurely pace along the broad pavement and I
commenced my narration. As well as I could remember, I related the
circumstances that had led up to the present disposition of the
property and then proceeded to the actual provisions of the will; to
all of which my two friends listened with rapt interest, Thorndyke
occasionally stopping me to jot down a memorandum in his pocket-book.

'Why, the fellow must have been a stark lunatic!' Jervis exclaimed,
when I had finished. 'He seems to have laid himself out with the most
devilish ingenuity to defeat his own ends.'

'That is not an uncommon peculiarity with testators,' Thorndyke
remarked. 'A direct and perfectly intelligible will is rather the
exception. But we can hardly judge until we have seen the actual
document. I suppose Bellingham hasn't a copy?'

'I don't know,' said I; 'but I will ask him.'

'If he has one, I should like to look through it,' said Thorndyke.
'The provisions are very peculiar, and, as Jervis says, admirably
calculated to defeat the testator's wishes if they have been correctly
reported. And, apart from that, they have a remarkable bearing on the
circumstances of the disappearance. I daresay you noticed that.'

'I noticed that it is very much to Hurst's advantage that the body has
not been found.'

'Yes, of course. But there are some other points that are very
significant. However, it would be premature to discuss the terms of
the will until we have seen the actual document or a certified copy.'

'If there is a copy extant,' I said, 'I will try to get hold of it.
But Bellingham is terribly afraid of being suspected of a desire to
get professional advice gratis.'

'That,' said Thorndyke, 'is natural enough, and not discreditable. But
you must overcome his scruples somehow. I expect you will be able to.
You are a plausible young gentleman, as I remember of old, and you
seem to have established yourself as quite the friend of the family.'

'They are rather interesting people,' I explained; 'very cultivated
and with a strong leaning towards archaeology. It seems to be in the
blood.'

'Yes,' said Thorndyke; 'a family tendency, probably due to contact and
common surroundings rather than heredity. So you like Godfrey
Bellingham?'

'Yes. He is a trifle peppery and impulsive, but quite an agreeable,
genial old butler.'

'And the daughter,' said Jervis, 'what is she like?'

'Oh, she is a learned lady; works up bibliographies and references at
the Museum.'

'Ah!' Jervis exclaimed with disfavour, 'I know the breed. Inky
fingers; no chest to speak of; all side and spectacles.'

'You're quite wrong,' I exclaimed indignantly, contrasting Jervis's
hideous presentment with the comely original. 'She is an exceedingly
good-looking girl, and her manners all that a lady's should be. A
little stiff, perhaps, but then I am only an acquaintance--almost a
stranger.'

'But,' Jervis persisted, 'what is she like, in appearance I mean.
Short? fat? sandy? Give us intelligible details.'

I made a rapid mental inventory, assisted by my recent cogitations.

'She is about five feet seven, slim but rather plump, very erect in
carriage and graceful in movements; black hair, loosely parted in the
middle and falling very prettily away from the forehead; pale, clear
complexion, dark grey eyes, straight eyebrows, straight, well-shaped
nose, short mouth, rather full; round chin--what the deuce are you
grinning at, Jervis?' For my friend had suddenly unmasked his
batteries and now threatened, like the Cheshire cat, to dissolve into
a mere abstraction of amusement.

'If there is a copy of that will, Thorndyke,' he said, 'we shall get
it. I think you agree with me, reverend senior?'

'I have already said,' was the reply, 'that I put my trust in
Berkeley. And now let us dismiss professional topics. This is our
hostelry.'

He pushed open an unpretentious glazed door, and we followed him into
the restaurant, whereof the atmosphere was pervaded by an appetising
mealiness mingled with less agreeable suggestions of the destructive
distillation of fat.

It was some two hours later when I wished my friends adieu under the
golden-leaved plane trees of King's Bench Walk.

'I won't ask you to come in now,' said Thorndyke, 'as we have some
consultations this afternoon. But come in and see us soon; don't wait
for that copy of the will.'

'No,' said Jervis. 'Drop in in the evening when your work is done;
unless, of course, there is more attractive society elsewhere. Oh, you
needn't turn that colour, my dear child; we have all been young once;
there is even a tradition that Thorndyke was young some time back in
the pre-dynastic period.'

'Don't take any notice of him, Berkeley,' said Thorndyke. 'The egg-shell
is sticking to his head still. He'll know better when he is my age.'

'Methuselah!' exclaimed Jervis; 'I hope I shan't have to wait as long
as that!'

Thorndyke smiled benevolently at his irrepressible junior, and,
shaking my hand cordially, turned into the entry.

From the Temple I wended northward, to the adjacent College of
Surgeons, where I spent a couple of profitable hours examining the
'pickles' and refreshing my memory on the subjects of pathology and
anatomy; marvelling afresh (as every practical anatomist must marvel)
at the incredibly perfect technique of the dissections, and inwardly
paying tribute to the founder of the collection. At length the warning
of the clock, combined with an increasing craving for tea, drove me
forth and bore me towards the scene of my not very strenuous labours.
My mind was still occupied with the contents of the cases and the
great glass jars, so that I found myself at the corner of Fetter Lane
without a very clear idea of how I had got there. But at that point I
was aroused from my reflections rather abruptly by a raucous voice in
my ear.

'Orrible discovery at Sidcup!'

I turned wrathfully--for a London street-boy's yell, let off at
point-blank range, is, in effect, like the smack of an open hand--but
the inscription on the staring yellow poster that was held up for my
inspection changed my anger to curiosity.

'Horrible discovery in a watercress-bed!'

Now, let prigs deny it if they will, but there is something very
attractive in a 'horrible discovery'. It hints at tragedy, at mystery,
at romance. It promises to bring into our grey and commonplace life
that element of the dramatic which is the salt that our existence is
savoured withal. 'In a watercress-bed,' too! The rusticity of the
background seemed to emphasise the horror of the discovery, whatever
it might be.

I bought a copy of the paper, and, tucking it under my arm, hurried on
to the surgery, promising myself a mental feast of watercress; but as
I opened the door I found myself confronted by a corpulent woman of
piebald and pimply aspect who saluted me with a deep groan. It was the
lady from the coal shop in Fleur-de-Lys Court.

'Good-evening, Mrs. Jablett,' I said briskly; 'not come about
yourself, I hope.'

'Yes, I have,' she answered, rising and following me gloomily into the
consulting-room; and then, when I had seated her in the patient's
chair and myself at the writing table, she continued: 'It's my inside,
you know, doctor.'

The statement lacked anatomical precision and merely excluded the
domain of the skin specialist. I accordingly waited for enlightenment
and speculated on the watercress-beds, while Mrs. Jablett regarded me
expectantly with a dim and watery eye.

'Ah!' I said at length; 'it's your--your inside, is it, Mrs. Jablett?'

'Yus. And my 'ead,' she added, with a voluminous sigh that filled the
apartment with odorous reminiscences of 'unsweetened'.

'Your head aches, does it?'

'Something chronic!' said Mrs. Jablett. 'Feels as if it was a-opening
and a-shutting, a-opening and a-shutting, and when I sit down I feel
as if I should bust.'

This picturesque description of her sensations--not wholly
inconsistent with her figure--gave the clue to Mrs. Jablett's
sufferings. Resisting a frivolous impulse to reassure her as to the
elasticity of the human integument, I considered her case in
exhaustive detail, coasting delicately round the subject of
'unsweetened' and finally sent her away, revived in spirits and
grasping a bottle of Mist. Sodae cum Bismutho from Barnard's big
stock-jar. Then I went back to investigate the Horrible Discovery; but
before I could open the paper, another patient arrived (Impetigo
contagiosa, this time, affecting the 'wide and arched-front sublime'
of a juvenile Fetter Laner), and then yet another, and so on through
the evening, until at last I forgot the watercress-beds altogether. It
was only when I had purified myself from the evening consultations
with hot water and a nail-brush and was about to sit down to a frugal
supper, that I remembered the newspaper and fetched it from the drawer
of the consulting-room table, where it had been hastily thrust out of
sight. I folded it into a convenient form, and, standing it upright
against the water-jug, read the report at my ease as I supped.

There was plenty of it. Evidently the reporter had regarded it as a
'scoop', and the editor had backed him up with ample space and
hair-raising head-lines.

'HORRIBLE DISCOVERY

IN A WATERCRESS-BED

AT SIDCUP!'

'A startling discovery was made yesterday afternoon in the course of
clearing out a watercress-bed near the erstwhile rural village of
Sidcup in Kent; a discovery that will occasion many a disagreeable
qualm to those persons who have been in the habit of regaling
themselves with this refreshing esculent. But before proceeding to a
description of the circumstances of the actual discovery or of the
objects found--which, however, it may be stated at once, are nothing
more or less than the fragments of a dismembered human body--it will
be interesting to trace the remarkable chain of coincidences by virtue
of which the discovery was made.

'The beds in question have been laid out in a small artificial lake fed
by a tiny streamlet which forms one of the numerous tributaries of the
River Cray. Its depth is greater than usual in the watercress-beds,
otherwise the gruesome relics could never have been concealed beneath
its surface, and the flow of water through it, though continuous, is
slow. The tributary streamlet meanders through a succession of pasture
meadows, in one of which the beds themselves are situated, and here
throughout most of the year the fleecy victims of the human carnivore
carry on the industry of converting grass into mutton. Now it happened
some years ago that the sheep frequenting these pastures became affected
with the disease known as "liver-rot"; and here we must make a short
digression into the domain of pathology.

'"Liver-rot" is a disease of quite romantic antecedents. Its cause is a
small flat worm--the liver-fluke--which infests the liver and bile-ducts
of the affected sheep.

'Now how does the worm get into the sheep's liver? That is where the
romance comes in. Let us see.

'The cycle of transformations begins with the deposit of the eggs of the
fluke in some shallow stream or ditch running through pasture lands. Now
each egg has a sort of lid, which presently opens and lets out a minute,
hairy creature who swims away in search of a particular kind of
water-snail--the kind called by naturalists Limnosa truncatula. If he
finds a snail, he bores his way into its flesh and soon begins to grow
and wax fat. Then he brings forth a family--of tiny worms quite unlike
himself, little creatures called rediae, which soon give birth to
families of young redice. So they go on for several generations, but at
last there comes a generation of redia which, instead of giving birth to
fresh redia, produce families of totally different offspring;
big-headed, long-tailed creatures like miniature tadpoles, called by the
learned cercarice. The cercarice soon wriggle their way out of the body
of the snail, and then complications arise: for it is the habit of this
particular snail to leave the water occasionally and take a stroll in
the fields. Thus the cercarice, escaping from the snail, find themselves
on the grass, whereupon they promptly drop their tails and stick
themselves to the grass-blades. Then comes the unsuspecting sheep to
take his frugal meal, and, cropping the grass, swallows it, cercarice
and all. But the latter, when they find themselves in the sheep's
stomach, make their way straight to the bile-ducts, up which they travel
to the liver. Here, in a few weeks, they grow up into full-blown flukes
and begin the important business of producing eggs.

'Such is the pathological romance of the "liver-rot"; and now what is
its connection with this mysterious discovery? It is this. After the
outbreak of "liver-rot" above referred to, the ground landlord, a Mr.
John Bellingham, instructed his solicitor to insert a clause in the
lease of the beds directing that the latter should be periodically
cleared and examined by an expert to make sure that they were free
from the noxious water-snails. The last lease expired about two years
ago, and since then the beds have been out of cultivation; but, for
the safety of the adjacent pastures, it was considered necessary to
make the customary periodical inspection, and it was in the course of
cleaning the beds for this purpose that r the present discovery was
made.

'The operation began two days ago. A gang of three men proceeded
systematically to grub up the plants and collect the multitudes of
water-snails that they might be examined by the expert to see if any
obnoxious species were present. They had cleared nearly half of the
beds when, yesterday afternoon, one of the men working in the deepest
part came upon some bones, the appearance of which excited his
suspicion. Thereupon he called his mates, and they carefully picked
away the plants piece-meal, a process that soon laid bare an
unmistakable human hand lying on the mud amongst the roots.
Fortunately they had the wisdom not to disturb the remains, but at
once sent off a message to the police. Very soon, an inspector and a
sergeant, accompanied by the divisional surgeon, arrived on the scene,
and were able to view the remains lying as they had been found. And
now another very strange fact came to light; for it was seen that the
hand--a left one--lying on the mud was minus its third finger. This is
regarded by the police as a very important fact as bearing on the
question of identification, seeing that the number of persons having
the third finger of the left hand missing must be quite small. After a
thorough examination on the spot, the bones were carefully collected
and conveyed to the mortuary, where they now lie awaiting further
inquiries.

'The divisional surgeon, Dr. Brandon, in an interview with our
representative, made the following statements:

'"The bones are those of the left arm of a middle-aged or elderly man
about five feet eight inches in height. All the bones of the arm are
present, including the scapula, or shoulder-blade, and the clavicle,
or collar-bone, but the three bones of the third finger are missing."

'"Is this a deformity or has the finger been cut off?" our
correspondent asked.

'"The finger has been amputated," was the reply. "If it had been
absent from birth, the corresponding hand bone, or metacarpal, would
have been wanting or deformed, whereas it is present and quite
normal."

'"How long have the bones been in the water?" was the next question.

'"More than a year, I should say. They are quite clean; there is not a
vestige of the soft structures left."

'"Have you any theory as to how the arm came to be deposited where it
was found?"

'"I should rather not answer that question," was the guarded response.

'"One more question," our correspondent urged. "The ground landlord,
Mr. John Bellingham; is he not the gentleman who disappeared so
mysteriously some time ago?"

'"So I understand," Dr. Brandon replied.

'"Can you tell me if Mr. Bellingham had lost the third finger of his
left hand?"

'"I cannot say," said Dr. Brandon; and he added with a smile, "you had
better ask the police."

'That is how the matter stands at present. But we understand that the
police are making active inquiries for any missing man who has lost
the third finger of his left hand, and if any of our readers know of
such a person, they are earnestly requested to communicate at once,
either with us or with the authorities.

'Also we believe that a systematic search is to be made for further
remains.'

I laid the newspaper down and fell into a train of reflection. It was
certainly a most mysterious affair. The thought that had evidently
come to the reporter's mind stole naturally into mine. Could these
remains be those of John Bellingham? It was obviously possible, though
I could not but see that the fact of the bones having been found on
his land, while it undoubtedly furnished the suggestion, did not in
any way add to its probability. The connection was accidental and in
nowise relevant.

Then, too, there was the missing finger. No reference to any such
deformity had been made in the original report of the disappearance,
though it could hardly have been overlooked. I should be seeing
Thorndyke in the course of the next few days, and, undoubtedly, if the
discovery had any bearing upon the disappearance of John Bellingham, I
should hear of it. With such a reflection I rose from the table, and,
adopting the advice contained in the spurious Johnsonian quotation,
proceeded to 'take a walk in Fleet Street' before settling down for
the evening.



CHAPTER VI. SIDELIGHTS



THE association of coal with potatoes is one upon which I have
frequently speculated, without arriving at any more satisfactory
explanation than that both products are of the earth, earthy. Of the
connection itself Barnard's practice furnished several instances
besides Mrs. Jablett's establishment in Fleur-de-Lys Court, one of
which was a dark and mysterious cavern a foot below the level of the
street, that burrowed under an ancient house on the west side of
Fetter Lane--a crinkly, timber house of the three-decker type that
leaned back drunkenly from the road as if about to sit down in its own
back yard.

Passing this repository of the associated products about ten o'clock
in the morning, I perceived in the shadows of the cavern no less a
person than Miss Oman. She saw me at the same moment, and beckoned
peremptorily with a hand that held a large Spanish onion. I approached
with a deferential smile.

'What a magnificent onion, Miss Oman! and how generous of you to offer
it to me--'

'I wasn't offering it to you. But there! Isn't it just like a man--'

'Isn't what just like a man?' I interrupted. 'If you mean the onion--'

'I don't!' she snapped; 'and I wish you wouldn't talk such a parcel of
nonsense. A grown man and a member of a serious profession, too! You
ought to know better.'

'I suppose I ought,' I said reflectively. And she continued:

'I called in at the surgery just now.'--

'To see me?'--

'What else should I come for? Do you suppose that I called to consult
the bottle-boy?'

'Certainly not, Miss Oman. So you find the lady doctor no use, after
all?'

Miss Oman gnashed her teeth at me (and very fine teeth they were too).

'I called,' she said majestically, 'on behalf of Miss Bellingham.'

My facetiousness evaporated instantly. 'I hope Miss Bellingham is not
ill,' I said with a sudden anxiety that elicited a sardonic smile from
Miss Oman.

'No,' was the reply, 'she is not ill, but she has cut her hand rather
badly. It's her right hand too, and she can't afford to lose the use
of it, not being a great, hulky, lazy, lolloping man. So you had
better go and put some stuff on it.'

With this advice, Miss Oman whisked to the right-about and vanished
into the depths of the cavern like the witch of Wokey, while I hurried
on to the surgery to provide myself with the necessary instruments and
materials, and thence proceeded to Nevill's Court.

Miss Oman's juvenile maidservant, who opened the door to me, stated
the existing conditions with epigrammatic conciseness.

'Mr. Bellingham is hout, sir; but Miss Bellingham is hin.'

Having thus delivered herself she retreated towards the kitchen and I
ascended the stairs, at the head of which I found Miss Bellingham
awaiting me with her right hand encased in what looked like a white
boxing-glove.

'I'm glad you have come,' she said. 'Phyllis--Miss Oman, you know--has
kindly bound up my hand, but I should like you to see that it is all
right.'

We went into the sitting-room, where I laid out my paraphernalia on
the table while I inquired into the particulars of the accident.

'It is most unfortunate that it should have happened just now,' she
said, as I wrestled with one of those remarkable feminine knots that,
while they seem to defy the utmost efforts of human ingenuity to
untie, yet have a singular habit of untying themselves at inopportune
moments.

'Why just now in particular?' I asked.

'Because I have some specially important work to do. A very learned
lady who is writing an historical book has commissioned me to collect
all the literature relating to the Tell el Amarna letters--the
cuneiform tablets, you know, of Amenhotep the Fourth.'

'Well,' I said soothingly, 'I expect your hand will soon be well.'

'Yes, but that won't do. The work has to be done immediately. I have
to send in completed notes not later than this day week, and it will
be quite impossible. I am dreadfully disappointed.'

By this time I had unwound the voluminous wrappings and exposed the
injury--a deep gash in the palm that must have narrowly missed a
good-sized artery. Obviously the hand would be useless for fully a week.

'I suppose,' she said, 'you couldn't patch it up so that I could write
with it?'

I shook my head.

'No, Miss Bellingham. I shall have to put it on a splint. We can't run
any risks with a deep wound like this.'

'Then I shall have to give up the commission, and I don't know how my
client will get the work done in the time. You see, I am pretty well
up in the literature of Ancient Egypt; in fact, I was to receive
special payment on that account. And it would have been such an
interesting task, too. However, it can't be helped.'

I proceeded methodically with the application of the dressings, and
meanwhile reflected. It was evident that she was deeply disappointed.
Loss of work meant loss of money, and it needed but a glance at her
rusty black dress to see that there was little margin for that.
Possibly, too, there was some special need to be met. Her manner
seemed almost to imply that there was. And at this point I had a
brilliant idea.

'I'm not sure that it can't be helped,' said I.

She looked at me inquiringly, and I continued: 'I am going to make a
proposition, and I shall ask you to consider it with an open mind.'

'That sounds rather portentous,' said she; 'but I promise. What is
it?'

'It is this: When I was a student I acquired the useful art of writing
shorthand. I am not a lightning reporter, you understand, but I can
take matter down from dictation at quite respectable speed.'

'Yes.'

'Well, I have several hours free every day--usually the whole
afternoon up to six or half-past--and it occurs to me that if you were
to go to the Museum in the mornings you could get out your book, look
up passages (you could do that without using your right hand), and put
in bookmarks. Then I could come along in the afternoon and you could
read out the selected passages to me, and I could take them down in
shorthand. We should get through as much in a couple of hours as you
could in a day using long-hand.'

'Oh, but how kind of you, Dr. Berkeley!' she exclaimed. 'How very
kind! Of course, I couldn't think of taking up all your leisure in
that way; but I do appreciate your kindness very much.'

I was rather chapfallen at this very definite refusal, but persisted
feebly:

'I wish you would. It may seem rather a cheek for a comparative
stranger like me to make such a proposal to a lady: but if you'd been
a man--in those special circumstances--I should have made it all the
same, and you would have accepted as a matter of course.'

'I doubt that. At any rate, I am not a man. I sometimes wish I were.'

'Oh, I am sure you are much better as you are!' I exclaimed, with such
earnestness that we both laughed. And at this moment Mr. Bellingham
entered the room carrying several large brand-new books in a strap.

'Well, I'm sure!' he exclaimed genially; 'here are pretty goings on.
Doctor and patient giggling like a pair of schoolgirls! What's the
joke?'

He thumped his parcel of books down on the table and listened
smilingly while my unconscious witticism was expounded.

'The doctor's quite right,' he said. 'You'll do as you are, chick; but
the Lord knows what sort of man you would make. You take his advice
and let well alone.'

Finding him in this genial frame of mind, I ventured to explain my
proposition to him and to enlist his support. He considered it with
attentive approval, and when I had finished turned to his daughter.

'What is your objection, chick?' he asked.

'It would give Doctor Berkeley such a fearful lot of work,' she
answered.

'It would give him a fearful lot of pleasure,' I said. 'It would
really.'

'Then why not?' said Mr. Bellingham. 'We don't mind being under an
obligation to the Doctor, do we?'

'Oh, it isn't that!' she exclaimed hastily.

'Then take him at his word. He means it. It is a kind action and he'll
like doing it, I'm sure. That's all right, Doctor; she accepts, don't
you, chick?'

'Yes, if you say so, I do; and most thankfully.'

She accompanied the acceptance with a gracious smile that was in
itself a large repayment on account, and when we had made the
necessary arrangements, I hurried away in a state of the most perfect
satisfaction to finish my morning's work and order an early lunch.

When I called for her a couple of hours later I found her waiting in
the garden with the shabby handbag, of which I relieved her, and we
set forth together, watched jealously by Miss Oman, who had
accompanied her to the gate.

As I walked up the court with this wonderful maid by my side I could
hardly believe in my good fortune. By her presence and my own
resulting happiness the mean surroundings became glorified and the
commonest objects transfigured into things of beauty. What a
delightful thoroughfare, for instance, was Fetter Lane, with its
quaint charm and mediaeval grace! I snuffed the cabbage-laden
atmosphere and seemed to breathe the scent of the asphodel. Holborn
was even as the Elysian Fields; the omnibus that bore us westward was
a chariot of glory; and the people who swarmed verminously on the
pavements bore the semblance of the children of light.

Love is a foolish thing judged by workaday standards, and the thoughts
and actions of lovers foolish beyond measure. But the workaday
standard is the wrong one, after all; for the utilitarian mind does
but busy itself with the trivial and transitory interests of life,
behind which looms the great and everlasting reality of the love of
man and woman. There is more significance in a nightingale's song in
the hush of a summer night than in all the wisdom of Solomon (who, by
the way, was not without his little experiences of the tender
passion).

The janitor in the little glass box by the entrance to the library
inspected us and passed us on, with a silent benediction, to the
lobby, whence (when I had handed my stick to a bald-headed demigod and
received a talismanic disc in exchange) we entered the enormous
rotunda of the reading-room.

I have often thought that, if some lethal vapour of highly
preservative properties--such as formaldehyde, for instance--could be
shed into the atmosphere of this apartment, the entire and complete
collection of books and book-worms would be well worth preserving, for
the enlightenment of posterity, as a sort of anthropological appendix
to the main collection of the Museum. For, surely, nowhere else in the
world are so many strange and abnormal human beings gathered together
in one place. And a curious question that must have occurred to many
observers is: Whence do these singular creatures come, and whither do
they go when the very distinct-faced clock (adjusted to literary
eyesight) proclaims closing time? The tragic-faced gentleman, for
instance, with the corkscrew ringlets that bob up and down like spiral
springs as he walks? Or the short, elderly gentleman in the black
cassock and bowler hat, who shatters your nerves by turning suddenly
and revealing himself as a middle-aged woman? Whither do they go? One
never sees them elsewhere. Do they steal away at closing time into the
depths of the Museum and hide themselves until morning in sarcophagi
or mummy cases? Or do they creep through spaces in the book-shelves
and spend the night behind the volumes in a congenial atmosphere of
leather and antique paper? Who can say? What I do know is that when
Ruth Bellingham entered the reading-room she appeared in comparison
with these like a creature of another order; even as the head of
Antinous, which formerly stood (it has since been moved) amidst the
portrait-busts of the Roman Emperors, seemed like the head of a god
set in a portrait gallery of illustrious baboons.

'What have we got to do?' I asked when we had found a vacant seat. 'Do
you want to look up the catalogue?'

'No, I have the tickets in my bag. The books are waiting in the "kept
books" department.'

I placed my hat on the leather-covered shelf, dropped her gloves into
it--how delightfully intimate and companionable it seemed!--altered
the numbers on the tickets, and then we proceeded together to the
'kept books' desk to collect the volumes that contained the material
for our day's work.

It was a blissful afternoon. Two and a half hours of happiness
unalloyed did I spend at that shiny, leather-clad desk, guiding my
nimble pen across the pages of the notebook. It introduced me to a
newt world--a world in which love and learning, sweet intimacy and
crusted archaeology, were mingled into the oddest, most whimsical and
most delicious confection that the mind of man can conceive. Hitherto,
these recondite histories had been far beyond my ken. Of the wonderful
heretic, Amenhotep the Fourth, I had already heard--at the most he had
been a mere name; the Hittites a mythical race of undetermined
habitat; while cuneiform tablets had presented themselves to my mind
merely as an uncouth kind of fossil biscuit suited to the digestion of
a prehistoric ostrich.

Now all this was changed. As we sat with our chairs creaking together
and she whispered the story of those stirring times into my receptive
ear--talking is strictly forbidden in the reading-room--the
disjointed fragments arranged themselves into a romance of supreme
fascination. Egyptian, Babylonian, Aramaean, Hittite, Memphis,
Babylon, Hamath, Megiddo--I swallowed them all thankfully, wrote them
down, and asked for more. Only once did I disgrace myself. An elderly
clergyman of ascetic and acidulous aspect had passed us with a glance
of evident disapproval, clearly setting us down as intruding
philanderers; and when I contrasted the parson's probable conception
of the whispered communications that were being poured into my ear so
tenderly and confidentially with the dry reality, I chuckled aloud.
But my fair taskmistress only paused, with her finger on the page,
smilingly to rebuke me, and then went on with the dictation. She was
certainly a Tartar for work.

It was a proud moment for me when, in response to my interrogative
'Yes?' my companion said 'That is all' and closed the book. We had
extracted the pith and marrow of six considerable volumes in two and a
half hours.

'You have been better than your word,' she said. 'It would have taken
me two full days of really hard work to make the notes that you have
written down since we commenced. I don't know how to thank you.'

'There's no need to. I've enjoyed myself and polished up my shorthand.
What is the next thing? We shall want some books for to-morrow, shan't
we?'

'Yes. I have made out a list, so if you will come with me to the
catalogue desk I will look out the numbers and ask you to write the
tickets.'

The selection of a fresh batch of authorities occupied us for another
quarter of an hour, and then, having handed in the volumes that we had
squeezed dry, we took our way out of the reading-room.

'Which way shall we go?' she asked as we passed out of the gate, where
stood a massive policeman, like the guardian angel at the gate of
Paradise (only, thank Heaven! he bore no flaming sword forbidding
re-entry).

'We are going,' I replied, 'to Museum Street, where is a milkshop in
which one can get an excellent cup of tea.'

She looked as if she would have demurred, but eventually followed
obediently, and we were soon settled side by side at the little
marble-topped table, retracing the ground we had covered in the
afternoon's work and discussing various points of interest over a
joint teapot.

'Have you been doing this sort of work long?' I asked, as she handed
me my second cup of tea.

'Professionally,' she answered, 'only about two years; since we broke
up our home, in fact. But long before that I used to come to the
Museum with my Uncle John--the one who disappeared, you know, in that
dreadfully mysterious way--and help him to look up references. We were
good friends, he and I.'

'I suppose he was a very learned man?' I suggested.

'Yes, in a certain way; in the way of the better-class collector he
was very learned indeed. He knew the contents of every museum in the
world, in so far as they were connected with Egyptian antiquities, and
had studied them specimen by specimen. Consequently, as Egyptology is
largely a museum science, he was a learned Egyptologist. But his real
interest was in things rather than events. Of course, he knew a great
deal--a very great deal--about Egyptian history, but still he was,
before all, a collector.'

'And what will happen to his collection if he is really dead?'

'The greater part of it goes to the British Museum by his will, and
the remainder he has left to his solicitor, Mr. Jellicoe.'

'To Mr. Jellicoe! Why, what will Mr. Jellicoe do with Egyptian
antiquities?'

'Oh, he is an Egyptologist too, and quite an enthusiast. He has really
a fine collection of scarabs and other small objects such as it is
possible to keep in a private house. I have always thought that it was
his enthusiasm for everything Egyptian that brought him and my uncle
together on terms of such intimacy; though I believe he is an
excellent lawyer, and he is certainly a very discreet, cautious man.'

'Is he? I shouldn't have thought so, judging by your uncle's will.'

'Oh, but that was not Mr. Jellicoe's fault. He assures us that he
entreated my uncle to let him draw up a fresh document with more
reasonable provisions. But he says Uncle John was immovable; and he
really was a rather obstinate man. Mr. Jellicoe repudiates any
responsibility in the matter. He washes his hands of the whole affair,
and says that it is the will of a lunatic. And so it is. I was
glancing through it only a night or two ago, and really I cannot
conceive how a sane man could have written such nonsense.'

'You have a copy then?' I asked eagerly, remembering Thorndyke's
parting instructions.

'Yes. Would you like to see it? I know my father has told you about
it, and it is worth reading as a curiosity of perverseness.'

'I should very much like to show it to my friend, Doctor Thorndyke,' I
replied. 'He said he would be interested to read it and learn the
exact provisions; and it might be well to let him, and hear what he
has to say about it.'

'I see no objection,' she rejoined; 'but you know what my father is:
his horror, I mean, of what he calls "cadging for advice gratis".'

'Oh, but he need have no scruples on that score. Doctor Thorndyke
wants to see the will because the case interests him. He is an
enthusiast, you know, and he put the request as a personal favour to
himself.'

'That is very nice and delicate of him, and I will explain the
position to my father. If he is willing for Doctor Thorndyke to see
the copy, I will send or bring it over this evening. Have we
finished?'

I regretfully admitted that we had, and, when I had paid the modest
reckoning, we sallied forth, turning back with one accord into Great
Russell Street to avoid the noise and bustle of the larger
thoroughfares.

'What sort of man was your uncle?' I asked presently, as we walked
along the quiet, dignified street. And then I added hastily: 'I hope
you don't think me inquisitive, but, to my mind, he presents himself
as a kind of mysterious abstraction; the unknown quantity of a legal
problem.'

'My Uncle John,' she answered reflectively, 'was a very peculiar man,
rather obstinate, very self-willed, what people call "masterful", and
decidedly wrong-headed and unreasonable.'

'That is certainly the impression that the terms of his will convey,'
I said.

'Yes, and not the will only. There was the absurd allowance that he
made to my father. That was a ridiculous arrangement, and very unfair
too. He ought to have divided the property up as my grandfather
intended. And yet he was by no means ungenerous, only he would have
his own way, and his own way was very commonly the wrong way.'

'I remember,' she continued, after a short pause, 'a very odd instance
of his wrong-headedness and obstinacy. It was a small matter, but very
typical of him. He had in his collection a beautiful little ring of
the eighteenth dynasty. It was said to have belonged to Queen Ti, the
mother of our friend Amenhotep the Fourth; but I don't think that
could have been so, because the device on it was the Eye of Osiris,
and Ti, as you know, was an Aten-worshipper. However, it was a very
charming ring, and Uncle John, who had a queer sort of devotion to the
mystical eye of Osiris, commissioned a very clever goldsmith to make
two exact copies of it, one for himself and one for me. The goldsmith
naturally wanted to take the measurements of our fingers, but this
Uncle John would not hear of; the rings were to be exact copies, and
an exact copy must be the same size as the original. You can imagine
the result; my ring was so loose that I couldn't keep it on my finger,
and Uncle John's was so tight that though he did manage to get it on,
he was never able to get it off. And it was only the circumstance that
his left hand was decidedly smaller than his right that made it
possible for him to wear it at all.'

'So you never wore your copy?'

'No. I wanted to have it altered to make it fit, but he objected
strongly; so I put it away, and have it in a box still.'

'He must have been an extraordinarily pig-headed old fellow,' I
remarked.

'Yes; he was very tenacious. He annoyed my father a good deal, too, by
making unnecessary alterations in the house in Queen Square when he
fitted up his museum. We have a certain sentiment with regard to that
house. Our people have lived in it ever since it was built, when the
square was first laid out in the reign of Queen Anne, after whom it
was named. It is a dear old house. Would you like to see it? We are
quite near it now.'

I assented eagerly. If it had been a coal-shed or a fried-fish shop I
would still have visited it with pleasure, for the sake of prolonging
our walk; but I was also really interested in this old house as a part
of the background of the mystery of the vanished John Bellingham.

We crossed into Cosmo Place, with its quaint row of the now rare,
cannon-shaped iron posts, and passing through stood for a few moments
looking into the peaceful, stately old square. A party of boys
disported themselves noisily on the range of stone posts that form a
bodyguard round the ancient lamp-surmounted pump, but otherwise the
place was wrapped in dignified repose suited to its age and station.
And very pleasant it looked on this summer afternoon with the sunlight
gilding the foliage of its widespreading plane trees and lighting up
the warm-toned brick of the house-fronts. We walked slowly down the
shady west side, near the middle of which my companion halted.

'This is the house,' she said. 'It looks gloomy and forsaken now; but
it must have been a delightful house in the days when my ancestors
could look out of the windows through the open end of the square
across the fields of meadows to the heights of Hampstead and
Highgate.'

She stood at the edge of the pavement looking up with a curious
wistfulness at the old house; a very pathetic figure, I thought, with
her handsome face and proud carriage, her threadbare dress and shabby
gloves, standing at the threshold of the home that had been her
family's for generations, that should now have been hers, and that was
shortly to pass away into the hands of strangers.

I, too, looked up at it with a strange interest, impressed by
something gloomy and forbidding in its aspect. The windows were
shuttered from basement to attic, and no sign of life was visible.
Silent, neglected, desolate, it breathed an air of tragedy. It seemed
to mourn in sackcloth and ashes for its lost master. The massive door
within the splendid carven portico was crusted with grime, and seemed
to have passed out of use as completely as the ancient lamp-irons or
the rusted extinguishers wherein the footmen were wont to quench their
torches when some Bellingham dame was borne up the steps in her gilded
chair, in the days of good Queen Anne.

It was in a somewhat sobered frame of mind that we presently turned
away and started homeward by way of Great Ormond Street. My companion
was deeply thoughtful, relapsing for a while into that sombreness of
manner that had so impressed me when I first met her. Nor was I
without a certain sympathetic pensiveness; as if, from the great,
silent house, the spirit of the vanished man had issued forth to bear
us company.

But still it was a delightful walk, and I was sorry when at last we
arrived at the entrance to Nevill's Court, and Miss Bellingham halted
and held out her hand.

'Good-bye,' she said; 'and many, many thanks for your invaluable help.
Shall I take the bag?'

'If you want it. But I must take out the note-books.'

'Why must you take them?' she asked.

'Why, haven't I got to copy the notes out into long-hand?'

An expression of utter consternation spread over her face; in fact,
she was so completely taken aback that she forgot to release my hand.

'Heavens!' she exclaimed. 'How idiotic of me! But it is impossible,
Doctor Berkeley! It will take you hours!'

'It is perfectly possible, and it is going to be done; otherwise the
notes would be useless. Do you want the bag?'

'No, of course not. But I am positively appalled. Hadn't you better
give up the idea?'

'And this is the end of our collaboration?' I exclaimed tragically,
giving her hand a final squeeze (whereby she became suddenly aware of
its position, and withdrew it rather hastily). 'Would you throw away a
whole afternoon's work? I won't certainly; so, goodbye until to-morrow.
I shall turn up in the reading-room as early as I can. You had better
take the tickets. Oh, and you won't forget a bin t the copy of the will
for Doctor Thorndyke, will you?'

'No; if my father agrees, you shall have it this evening.'

She took the tickets from me, and, thanking me yet again, retired into
the court.



CHAPTER VII. JOHN BELLINGHAM'S WILL



THE task upon which I had embarked so light-heartedly, when considered
in cold blood, did certainly appear, as Miss Bellingham had said,
rather appalling. The result of two and a half hours' pretty steady
work at an average speed of nearly a hundred words a minute, would
take some time to transcribe into long-hand; and if the notes were to
be delivered punctually on the morrow, the sooner I got to work the
better.

Recognising this truth, I lost no time, but, within five minutes of my
arrival at the surgery, was seated at the writing-table with my copy
before me busily converting the sprawling, inexpressive characters
into good, legible round-hand.

The occupation was by no means unpleasant, apart from the fact that it
was a labour of love; for the sentences, as I picked them up, were
fragrant with the reminiscences of the gracious whisper in which they
had first come to me. And then the matter itself was full of interest.
I was gaining a fresh outlook on life, was crossing the threshold of a
new world (which was her world); and so the occasional interruptions
from the patients, while they gave me intervals of enforced rest, were
far from welcome.

The evening wore on without any sign from Nevill's Court, and I began
to fear that Mr. Bellingham's scruples had proved insurmountable. Not,
I am afraid, that I was so much concerned for the copy of the will as
for the possibility of a visit, no matter howsoever brief, from my
fair employer; and when, on the stroke of half-past seven, the surgery
door flew open with startling abruptness, my fears were allayed and my
hopes shattered simultaneously. For it was Miss Oman who stalked in,
holding out a blue foolscap envelope with a warlike air as if it were
an ultimatum.

'I've brought you this from Mr. Bellingham,' she said. 'There's a note
inside.'

'May I read the note, Miss Oman?' I asked.

'Bless the man!' she exclaimed. 'What else would you do with it? Isn't
that what it's brought for?'

I supposed it was; and, thanking her for her gracious permission, I
glanced through the note--a few lines authorising me to show the copy
of the will to Dr. Thorndyke. When I looked up from the paper I found
her eyes fixed on me with an expression critical and rather
disapproving.

'You seem to be making yourself mighty agreeable in a certain
quarter,' she remarked.

'I make myself universally agreeable. It is my nature to.'

'Ha!' she snorted.

'Don't you find me rather agreeable?' I asked.

'Oily,' said Miss Oman. And then with a sour smile at the open
notebooks, she remarked:

'You've got some work to do now; quite a change for you.'

'A delightful change, Miss Oman. "For Satan findeth"--but no doubt you
are acquainted with the philosophical works of Dr. Watts?'

'If you are referring to "idle hands",' she replied, 'I'll give you a
bit of advice. Don't you keep that hand idle any longer than is really
necessary. I have my suspicions about that splint--oh, you know what I
mean,' and before I had time to reply, she had taken advantage of the
entrance of a couple of patients to whisk out of the surgery with the
abruptness that had distinguished her arrival.

The evening consultations were considered to be over by half-past
eight; at which time Adolphus was wont with exemplary punctuality to
close the outer door of the surgery. To-night he was not less prompt
than usual; and having performed this, his last daily office, and
turned down the surgery gas, he reported the fact and took his
departure.

As his retreating footsteps died away and the slamming of the outer
door announced his final disappearance, I sat up and stretched myself.
The envelope containing the copy of the will lay on the table, and I
considered it thoughtfully. It ought to be conveyed to Thorndyke with
as little delay as possible, and, as it certainly could not be trusted
out of my hands, it ought to be conveyed by me.

I looked at the notebooks. Nearly two hours' work had made a
considerable impression on the matter that I had to transcribe, but
still, a great deal of the task yet remained to be done. However, I
reflected, I could put in a couple of hours or more before going to
bed and there would be an hour or two to spare in the morning. Finally
I locked the notebooks, open as they were, in the writing-table
drawer, and slipping the envelope into my pocket, set out for the
Temple.

The soft chime of the Treasury clock was telling out, in confidential
tones, the third quarter as I rapped with my stick on the forbidding
'oak' of my friends' chambers. There was no response, nor had I
perceived any gleam of light from the windows as I approached, and I
was considering the advisability of trying the laboratory on the next
floor, when footsteps on the stone stairs and familiar voices
gladdened my ear.

'Hallo, Berkeley!' said Thorndyke, 'do we find you waiting like a Peri
at the gates of Paradise? Polton is upstairs, you know, tinkering at
one of his inventions. If you ever find the nest empty, you had better
go up and bang at the laboratory door. He's always there in the
evenings.'

'I haven't been waiting long,' said I, 'and I was just thinking of
rousing him up when you came.'

'That was right,' said Thorndyke, turning up the gas. 'And what news
do you bring? Do I see a blue envelope sticking out of your pocket?'

'You do.'

'Is it a copy of the will?' he asked.

I answered 'yes', and added that I had full permission to show it to
him.

'What did I tell you?' exclaimed Jervis. 'Didn't I say that he would
get the copy for us if it existed?'

'We admit the excellence of your prognosis,' said Thorndyke, 'but
there is no need to be boastful. Have you read through the document,
Berkeley?'

'No, I haven't taken it out of the envelope.'

'Then it will be equally new to us all, and we shall see if it tallies
with your description.'

He placed three easy chairs at a convenient distance from the light,
and Jervis, watching him with a smile, remarked:

'Now Thorndyke is going to enjoy himself. To him, a perfectly
unintelligible will is a thing of beauty and a joy for ever;
especially if associated with some kind of recondite knavery.'

'I don't know,' said I, 'that this will is particularly
unintelligible. The mischief seems to be that it is rather too
intelligible. However, here it is,' and I handed it over to Thorndyke.

'I suppose that we can depend on this copy,' said the latter, as he
drew out the document and glanced at it. 'Oh, yes,' he added, 'I see
it is copied by Godfrey Bellingham, compared with the original and
certified correct. In that case I will get you to read it out slowly,
Jervis, and I will make a rough copy for reference. Let us make
ourselves comfortable and light our pipes before we begin.'

He provided himself with a writing-pad, and, when we had seated
ourselves and got our pipes well alight, Jervis opened the document,
and with a premonitory 'hem!' commenced the reading.

'In the name of God, Amen. This is the last will and testament of me
John Bellingham of number 141 Queen Square in the parish of St George
Bloomsbury London in the county of Middlesex Gentleman made this
twenty-first day of September in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and ninety-two.

'1. I give and bequeath unto Arthur Jellicoe of number 184 New Square
Lincoln's Inn London in the county of Middlesex Attorney-at-law the
whole of my collection of seals and scarabs and those in my cabinets
marked A, B, and D together with the contents thereof and the sum of
two thousand pounds sterling free of legacy duty.

'Unto the trustees of the British Museum the residue of my collection
of antiquities.

'Unto my cousin George Hurst of The Poplars Eltham in the county of
Kent the sum of five thousand pounds free of legacy duty and unto my
brother Godfrey Bellingham or if he should die before the occurrence
of my death unto his daughter Ruth Bellingham the residue of my estate
and effects real and personal subject to the conditions set forth
hereinafter namely:

'2. That my body shall be deposited with those of my ancestors in the
churchyard appertaining to the church and parish of St George the
Martyr or if that shall not be possible in some other churchyard
cemetery burial ground church or chapel or other authorised place for
the reception of bodies of the dead situate within or appertaining to
the parishes of St Andrew above the Bars and St George the Martyr or
St George Bloomsbury and St Giles in the Fields. But if the condition
in this clause be not carried out then:

'3. I give and devise the said residue of my estate and effects unto
my cousin George Hurst aforesaid and I hereby revoke all wills and
codicils made by me at any time heretofore and I appoint Arthur
Jellicoe aforesaid to be the executor of this my will jointly with the
principal beneficiary and residuary legatee that is to say with the
aforesaid Godfrey Bellingham if the conditions set forth hereinbefore
in clause 2 shall be duly carried out but with the aforesaid George
Hurst if the said conditions in the said clause 2 be not carried out.

'john bellingham

'Signed by the said testator John Bellingham in the presence of us
present at the same time who at his request and in his presence and in
the presence of each other have subscribed our names as witnesses.

'Frederick Wilton, 16 Medford Road, London, N, clerk.

'James Barber, 32 Wadbury Crescent, London, SW, clerk.'

'Well,' said Jervis, laying down the document as Thorndyke detached
the last sheet from his writing-pad, 'I have met with a good many
idiotic wills, but this one can give them all points. I don't see how
it is ever going to be administered. One of the two executors is a
mere abstraction--a sort of algebraical problem with no answer.'

'I think that difficulty could be overcome,' said Thorndyke.

'I don't see how,' retorted Jervis. 'If the body is deposited in a
certain place, A is the executor; if it is somewhere else, B is the
executor. But as you cannot produce the body, and no one has the least
idea where it is, it is impossible to prove either that it is or that
it is not in any specified place.'

'You are magnifying the difficulty, Jervis,' said Thorndyke. 'The body
may, of course, be anywhere in the entire world, but the place where
it is lying is either inside or out the general boundary of those two
parishes. If it has been deposited within the boundary of those two
parishes, the fact must be ascertainable by examining the burial
certificates issued since the date when the missing man was last seen
alive and by consulting the registers of those specified places of
burial. I think that if no record can be found of any such interment
within the boundary of those two parishes, that fact will be taken by
the Court as proof that no such interment has taken place, and that
therefore the body must have been deposited somewhere else. Such a
decision would constitute George Hurst the co-executor and residuary
legatee.'

'That is cheerful for your friends, Berkeley,' Jervis remarked, 'for
we may take it as pretty certain that the body has not been deposited
in any of the places named.'

'Yes,' I agreed gloomily, 'I'm afraid there is very little doubt of
that. But what an ass the fellow must have been to make such a to-do
about his beastly carcass! What the deuce could it have mattered to
him where it was dumped, when he had done with it?'

Thorndyke chuckled softly. 'Thus the irreverent youth of to-day,' said
he. 'But yours is hardly a fair comment, Berkeley. Our training makes
us materialists, and puts us a little out of sympathy with those in
whom primitive beliefs and emotions survive. A worthy priest who came
to look at our dissecting-room expressed surprise to me that the
students, thus constantly in the presence of relics of mortality,
should be able to think of anything but the resurrection and the life
hereafter. He was a bad psychologist. There is nothing so dead as a
dissecting-room "subject"; and the contemplation of the human body in
the process of being quietly taken to pieces--being resolved into its
structural units like a worn-out clock or an old engine in the
scrapper's yard--is certainly not conducive to a vivid realisation of
the doctrine of the resurrection.'

'No; but this absurd anxiety to be buried in some particular place has
nothing to do with religious belief; it is merely silly sentiment.'

'It is sentiment, I admit,' said Thorndyke, 'but I wouldn't call it
silly. The feeling is so widespread in time and space that we must look
on it with respect as something inherent in human nature. Think--as
doubtless John Bellingham did--of the ancient Egyptians, whose chief
aspiration was that of everlasting repose for the dead. See the trouble
they took to achieve it. Think of the great Pyramid, or that of
Amenemhat the Fourth with its labyrinth of false passages and its sealed
and hidden sepulchral chambers. Think of Jacob, borne after death all
those hundreds of weary miles in order that he might sleep with his
fathers, and then remember Shakespeare and his solemn adjuration to
posterity to let him rest undisturbed in his grave. No, Berkeley, it is
not a silly sentiment. I am as indifferent as you as to what becomes of
my body "when I have done with it," to use your irreverent phrase; but I
recognise the solicitude that some other men display on the subject as a
natural feeling that has to be taken seriously.'

'But even so,' I said, 'if this man had a hankering for a freehold
residence in some particular bone-yard, he might have gone about the
business in a. more reasonable way.'

'There I am entirely with you,' Thorndyke replied. 'It is the absurd way
in which this provision is worded that not only creates all the trouble
but also makes the whole document so curiously significant in view of
the testator's disappearance.'

'How significant?' Jervis demanded eagerly.

'Let us consider the provisions of the will point by point,' said
Thorndyke; 'and first note that the testator commanded the services of a
very capable lawyer.'

'But Mr. Jellicoe disapproved of the will,' said I; 'in fact, he
protested strongly against the form of it.'

'We will bear that in mind too,' Thorndyke replied. 'And now with
reference to what we may call the contentious clauses: the first thing
that strikes us is their preposterous injustice. Godfrey's inheritance
is made conditional on a particular disposal of the testator's body. But
this is a matter not necessarily under Godfrey's control. The testator
might have been lost at sea, or killed in a fire or explosion, or have
died abroad and been buried where his grave could not have been
identified. There are numerous probable contingencies besides the
improbable one that has happened that might prevent the body from being
recovered.

'But even if the body had been recovered, there is another difficulty.
The places of burial in the parishes have all been closed for many
years. It would be impossible to reopen any of them without a special
faculty, and I doubt whether such a faculty would be granted. Possibly
cremation might meet the difficulty, but even that is doubtful; and, in
any case, the matter would not be in the control of Godfrey Bellingham.
Yet, if the required interment should prove impossible, he is to be
deprived of his legacy.'

'It is a monstrous and absurd injustice,' I exclaimed.

'It is,' Thorndyke agreed; 'but this is nothing to the absurdity that
comes to light when we consider clauses two and three in detail. Observe
that the testator presumably wished to be buried in a certain place;
also he wished his brother should benefit under the will. Let us take
the first point and see how he has set about securing the accomplishment
of what he desired. Now if we read clauses two and three carefully, we
shall see that he has rendered it virtually impossible that his wishes
can be carried out. He desires to be buried in a certain place and makes
Godfrey responsible for his being so buried. But he gives Godfrey no
power or authority to carry out the provision, and places insuperable
obstacles in his way. For until Godfrey is an executor, he has no power
or authority to carry out the provisions; and until the provisions are
carried out, he does not become an executor.'

'It is a preposterous muddle,' exclaimed Jervis.

'Yes, but that is not the worst of it,' Thorndyke continued. 'The moment
John Bellingham dies, his dead body has come into existence; and it is
"deposited", for the time being, wherever he happens to have died. But
unless he should happen to have died in one of the places of burial
mentioned--which is in the highest degree unlikely--his body will be,
for the time being, "deposited" in some place other than those
specified. In that case clause two is--for the time being--not complied
with, and consequently George Hurst becomes, automatically, the
co-executor.

'But will George Hurst carry out the provisions of clause two? Probably
not. Why should he? The will contains no instructions to that effect. It
throws the whole duty on Godfrey. On the other hand, if he should carry
out clause two, what happens? He ceases to be an executor and he loses
some seventy thousand pounds. We may be pretty certain that he will do
nothing of the kind. So that, on considering the two clauses, we see
that the wishes of the testator could only be carried out in the
unlikely event of his dying in one of the burial-places mentioned, or
his body being conveyed immediately after death to p. public mortuary in
one of the said parishes. In any other event, it is virtually certain
that he will be buried in some place other than that which he desired,
and that his brother will be left absolutely without provision or
recognition.'

'John Bellingham could never have intended that,' I said.

'Clearly not,' agreed Thorndyke; 'the provisions of the will furnish
internal evidence that he did not. You note that he bequeathed five
thousand pounds to George Hurst, in the event of clause two being
carried out; but he has made no bequest to his brother in the event of
its not being carried out. Obviously, he had not entertained the
possibility of this contingency at all. He assumed, as a matter of
course, that the conditions of clause two would be fulfilled, and
regarded the conditions themselves as a mere formality.'

'But,' Jervis objected, 'Jellicoe must have seen the danger of a
miscarriage and pointed it out to his client.'

'Exactly,' said Thorndyke. 'There is the mystery. We understand that he
objected strenuously, and that John Bellingham was obdurate. Now it is
perfectly understandable that a man should adhere obstinately to the
most stupid and perverse disposition of his property; but that a man
should persist in retaining a particular form of words after it has been
proved to him that the use of such form will almost certainly result in
the defeat of his own wishes; that, I say, is a mystery that calls for
very careful consideration.'

'If Jellicoe had been an interested party,' said Jervis, 'one would have
suspected him of lying low. But the form of clause two doesn't affect
him at all.'

'No,' said Thorndyke; 'the person who stands to profit by the muddle is
George Hurst. But we understand that he was unacquainted with the terms
of the will, and there is certainly nothing to suggest that he is in any
way responsible for it.'

'The practical question is,' said I, 'what is going to happen? and what
can be done for the Bellinghams?'

'The probability is,' Thorndyke replied, 'that the next move will be
made by Hurst. He is the party immediately interested. He will probably
apply to the Court for permission to presume death and administer the
will.'

'And what will the Court do?'

Thorndyke smiled dryly. 'Now you are asking a very pretty conundrum. The
decisions of Courts depend on idiosyncrasies of temperament that no one
can foresee. But one may say that a Court does not lightly grant
permission to presume death. There will be a rigorous inquiry--and a
decidedly unpleasant one, I suspect--and the evidence will be reviewed
by the judge with a strong predisposition to regard the testator as
being still alive. On the other hand, the known facts point very
distinctly to the probability that he is dead; and, if the will were
less complicated and all the parties interested were unanimous in
supporting the application, I don't see why it might not be granted. But
it will clearly be to the interest of Godfrey to oppose the application,
unless he can show that the conditions of clause two have been complied
with--which it is virtually certain he cannot; and he may be able to
bring forward reasons for believing John to be still alive. But even if
he is unable to do this, inasmuch as it is pretty clear that he was
intended to be the chief beneficiary, his opposition is likely to have
considerable weight with the Court.'

'Oh, is it?' I exclaimed eagerly. 'Then that accounts for a very
peculiar proceeding on the part of Hurst. I have stupidly forgotten to
tell you about it. He has been trying to come to a private agreement
with Godfrey Bellingham.'

'Indeed!' said Thorndyke. 'What sort of agreement?'

'His proposal was this: that Godfrey should support him and Jellicoe in
an application to the Court for permission to presume death and to
administer the will, that if it was successful, Hurst should pay him
four hundred pounds a year for life: the arrangement to hold good in all
eventualities.'

'By which he means?'

'That if the body should be discovered at any future time, so that the
conditions of clause two could be carried out, Hurst should still retain
the property and continue to pay Godfrey the four hundred a year for
life.'

'Hey, ho!' exclaimed Thorndyke; 'that is a queer proposal; a very queer
proposal indeed.'

'Not to say fishy,' added Jervis. 'I don't fancy the Court would look
with approval on that little arrangement.'

'The law does not look with much favour on any little arrangements that
aim at getting behind the provisions of a will,' Thorndyke replied;
'though there would be nothing to complain of in this proposal if it
were not for the reference to "all eventualities". If a will is
hopelessly impracticable, it is not unreasonable or improper for the
various beneficiaries to make such private arrangements among themselves
as may seem necessary to avoid useless litigation and delay in
administering the will. If, for instance, Hurst had proposed to pay four
hundred a year to Godfrey so long as the body remained undiscovered on
condition that, in the event of its discovery, Godfrey should pay him a
like sum for life, there would have been nothing to comment upon. It
would have been an ordinary sporting chance. But the reference to "all
eventualities" is an entirely different matter. Of course, it may be
mere greediness, but all the same it suggests some very curious
reflections.'

'Yes, it does,' said Jervis. 'I wonder if he has any reason to expect
that the body will be found? Of course it doesn't follow that he has. He
may be merely taking the opportunity offered by the other man's poverty
to make sure of the bulk of the property whatever happens. But it is
uncommonly sharp practice, to say the least.'

'Do I understand that Godfrey declined the proposal?' Thorndyke asked.

'Yes, he did, very emphatically; and I fancy the two gentlemen proceeded
to exchange opinions on the circumstances of the disappearance with more
frankness than delicacy.'

'Ah,' said Thorndyke, 'that is a pity. If the case comes into Court,
there is bound to be a good deal of unpleasant discussion and still more
unpleasant comment in the newspapers. But if the parties themselves
begin to express suspicions of one another there is no telling where the
matter will end.'

'No, by Jove!' said Jervis. 'If they begin flinging accusations of
murder about, the fat will be in the fire with a vengeance. That way
lies the Old Bailey.'

'We must try to prevent them from making an unnecessary scandal,' said
Thorndyke. 'It may be that an exposure will be unavoidable, and that
must be ascertained in advance. But to return to your question,
Berkeley, as to what is to be done. Hurst will probably make some move
pretty soon. Do you know if Jellicoe will act with him?'

'No, he won't. He declines to take any steps without Godfrey's
assent--at least, that is what he says at present. His attitude is one
of correct neutrality.'

'That is satisfactory so far,' said Thorndyke, 'though he may alter his
tone when the case comes into Court. From what you said just now I
gathered that Jellicoe would prefer to have the will administered and be
quit of the whole business; which is natural enough, especially as he
benefits under the will to the extent of two thousand pounds and a
valuable collection. Consequently, we may fairly assume that, even if he
maintains an apparent neutrality, his influence will be exerted in
favour of Hurst rather than of Bellingham; from which it follows that
Bellingham ought certainly to be properly advised, and, when the case
goes into Court, properly represented.'

'He can't afford either the one or the other,' said I. 'He's as poor as
an insolvent church mouse and as proud as the devil. He wouldn't accept
professional aid that he couldn't pay for.'

'H'm,' grunted Thorndyke, 'that's awkward. But we can't allow the case
to go "by default", so to speak--to fail for the mere lack of technical
assistance. Besides, it is one of the most interesting cases that I have
ever met with, and I am not going to see it bungled. He couldn't object
to a little general advice in a friendly, informal way--amicus curia, as
old Brodribb is so fond of saying; and there is nothing to prevent us
from pushing forward the preliminary inquiries.'

'Of what nature would they be?'

'Well, to begin with, we have to satisfy ourselves that the conditions
of clause two have not been complied with: that John Bellingham has not
been buried within the parish boundaries mentioned. Of course he has
not, but we must not take anything for granted. Then we have to satisfy
ourselves that he is not still alive and accessible. It is perfectly
possible that he is, after all, and it is our business to trace him, if
he is still in the land of the living. Jervis and I can carry out these
investigations without saying anything to Bellingham; my learned brother
will look through the register of burials--not forgetting the
cremations--in the metropolitan area, and I will take the other matter
in hand.'

'You really think that John Bellingham may still be alive?' said I.

'Since his body has not been found, it is obviously a possibility. I
think it in the highest degree improbable, but the improbable has to be
investigated before it can be excluded.'

'It sounds rather a hopeless quest,' I remarked. 'How do you propose to
begin?'

'I think of beginning at the British Museum. The people there may be
able to throw some light on his movements. I know that there are some
important evacuations in progress at Heliopolis--in fact, the Director
of the Egyptian Department is out there at the present moment; and
Doctor Norbury, who is taking his place temporarily, is an old friend of
Bellingham's. I shall call on him and try to discover if there is
anything that might have induced Bellingham suddenly to go abroad--to
Heliopolis, for instance. Also he may be able to tell me what it was
that took the missing man to Paris on that last, rather mysterious
journey. That might turn out to be an important clue. And meanwhile,
Berkeley, you must endeavour tactfully to reconcile your friend to the
idea of letting us give an eye to the case. Make it clear to him that I
am doing this entirely for the enlargement of my own knowledge.'

'But won't you have to be instructed by a solicitor?' I asked.

'Yes, nominally; but only as a matter of etiquette. We shall do all the
actual work. Why do you ask?'

'I was thinking of the solicitor's costs, and I was going to mention
that I have a little money of my own--'

'Then you keep it, my dear fellow. You'll want it when you go into
practice. There will be no difficulty about the solicitor; I shall ask
one of my friends to act nominally as a personal favour to me--Marchmont
would take the case for us, Jervis, I am sure.'

'Yes,' said Jervis. 'Or old Brodribb, if we put it to him amicus curia.'

'It is excessively kind of both of you to take this benevolent interest
in the case of my friends,' I said; 'and it is to be hoped that they
won't be foolishly proud and stiff-necked about it. It's rather the way
with poor gentlefolk.'

'I'll tell you what!' exclaimed Jervis. 'I have a most brilliant idea.
You shall give us a little supper at your rooms and invite the
Bellinghams to meet us. Then you and I will attack the old gentleman,
and Thorndyke shall exercise his persuasive powers on the lady. These
chronic incurable old bachelors, you know, are quite irresistible.'

'You observe that my respected junior condemns me to lifelong celibacy,'
Thorndyke remarked. 'But,' he added, 'his suggestion is quite a good
one. Of course, we mustn't put any sort of pressure on Bellingham to
employ us--for that is what it amounts to, even if we accept no
payment--but a friendly talk over the supper-table would enable us to
put the matter delicately and yet convincingly.'

'Yes,' said I, 'I see that, and I like the idea immensely. But it won't
be possible for several days, because I've got a job that takes up all
my spare time--and that I ought to be at work on now,' I added, with a
sudden qualm at the way in which I had forgotten the passage of time in
the interest of Thorndyke's analysis.

My two friends looked at me inquiringly and I felt it necessary to
explain about the injured hand and the Tell el Amarna tablets; which I
accordingly did rather shyly and with a nervous eye upon Jervis. The
slow grin, however, for which I was watching, never came; on the
contrary, he not only heard me through quite gravely, but when I had
finished said with some warmth, and using my old hospital pet name:

'I'll say one thing for you, Polly; you're a good chum, and you always
were. I hope your Nevill's Court friends appreciate the fact.'

They are far more appreciative than the occasion warrants,' I answered.
'But to return to this question: how will this day week suit you?'

'It will suit me,' Thorndyke answered, with a glance at his junior.

'And me too,' said the latter; 'so, if it will do for the Bellinghams,
we will consider it settled; but if they can't come, you must fix
another night.'

'Very well,' I said, rising and knocking out my pipe, 'I will issue the
invitation to-morrow. And now I must be off to have another slog at
those notes.'

As I walked homewards I speculated cheerfully on the prospect of
entertaining my friends under my own (or rather Barnard's) roof, if they
could be lured out of their eremitical retirement. The idea had, in
fact, occurred to me already, but I had been deterred by the
peculiarities of Barnard's housekeeper. For Mrs. Gummer was one of those
housewives who make up for an archaic simplicity of production by
preparations on the most portentous and alarming scale. But this time I
would not be deterred. If only the guests could be enticed into my
humble lair it would be easy to furnish the raw materials of the feast
from outside; and the consideration of ways and means occupied me
pleasantly until I found myself once more at my writing-table,
confronted by my voluminous notes on the incidents of the North Syrian
War.



CHAPTER VIII. A MUSEUM IDYLL



WHETHER it was that practice revived a forgotten skill on my part, or
that Miss Bellingham had over-estimated the amount of work to be done,
I am unable to say. But whichever may have been the explanation, the
fact is that the fourth afternoon saw our task so nearly completed
that I was fain to plead that a small remainder might be left over to
form an excuse for yet one more visit to the reading-room.

Short, however, as had been the period of our collaboration, it had
been long enough to produce a great change in our relations to one
another. For there is no friendship so intimate and satisfying as that
engendered by community of work, and none--between man and woman, at
any rate--so frank and wholesome.

Every day had arrived to find a pile of books with the places duly
marked and the blue-covered quarto notebooks in readiness. Every day we
had worked steadily at the allotted task, had then handed in the books
and gone forth together to enjoy a most companionable tea in the
milk-shop; thereafter to walk home by way of Queen Square, talking over
the day's work and discussing the state of the world in the far-off days
when Ahkhenaten was king and the Tell el Amarna tablets were a-writing.

It had been a pleasant time, so pleasant, that as I handed in the books
for the last time, I sighed to think that it was over; that not only was
the task finished, but that the recovery of my fair patient's hand, from
which I had that morning removed the splint, had put an end to the need
of my help.

'What shall we do?' I asked, as we came out into the central hall. 'It
is too early for tea. Shall we go and look at some of the galleries?'

'Why not?' she answered. 'We might look over some of the things
connected with what we have been doing. For instance, there is a relief
of Ahkhenaten upstairs in the Third Egyptian Room; we might go and look
at it.'

I fell in eagerly with the suggestion, placing myself under her
experienced guidance, and we started by way of the Roman Gallery, past
the long row of extremely commonplace and modern-looking Roman Emperors.

'I don't know,' she said, pausing for a moment opposite a bust labelled
'Trajan' (but obviously a portrait of Phil May), 'how I am ever even to
thank you for all that you have done, to say nothing of repayment.'

'There is no need to do either,' I replied. 'I have enjoyed working with
you so I have had my reward. But still,' I added, 'if you want to do me
a great kindness, you have it in your power.'

'How?'

'In connection with my friend, Doctor Thorndyke. I told you he was an
enthusiast. Now he is, for some reason, most keenly interested in
everything relating to your uncle, and I happen to know that, if any
legal proceedings should take place, he would very much like to keep a
friendly eye on the case.'

'And what do you want me to do?'

'I want you, if an opportunity should occur for him to give your father
advice or help of any kind, to use your influence with your father in
favour of, rather than in opposition to, his accepting it--always
assuming that you have no real feeling against his doing so.'

Miss Bellingham looked at me thoughtfully for a few moments, and then
laughed softly.

'So the great kindness that I am to do you is to let you do me a
further kindness through your friend!'

'No,' I protested; 'that is where you are mistaken. It isn't
benevolence on Doctor Thorndyke's part; it's professional enthusiasm.'

She smiled sceptically.

'You don't believe in it,' I said; 'but consider other cases. Why does
a surgeon get out of bed on a winter's night to do an emergency
operation at a hospital? He doesn't get paid for it. Do you think it
is altruism?'

'Yes, of course. Isn't it?'

'Certainly not. He does it because it is his job, because it is his
business to fight with disease--and win.'

'I don't see much difference,' she said. 'It's work done for love
instead of for payment. However, I will do as you ask if the
opportunity arises; but I shan't suppose that I am repaying your
kindness to me.'

'I don't mind so long as you do it,' I said, and we walked on for some
time in silence.

'Isn't it odd,' she said presently, 'how our talk always seems to come
back to my uncle? Oh, and that reminds me that the things he gave to
the Museum are in the same room as the Ahkhenaten relief. Would you
like to see them?'

'Of course I should.'

'Then we will go and look at them first.' She paused, and then, rather
shyly and with a rising colour, she continued: 'And I think I should
like to introduce you to a very dear friend of mine--with your
permission, of course.'

This last addition she made hastily, seeing, I suppose, that I looked
rather glum at the suggestion. Inwardly I consigned her friend to the
devil, especially if of the masculine gender; outwardly I expressed my
felicity at making the acquaintance of any person whom she should
honour with her friendship. Whereat, to my discomfiture, she laughed
enigmatically; a very soft laugh, low-pitched and musical, like the
cooing of a glorified pigeon.

I strolled on by her side, speculating a little anxiously on the
coming introduction. Was I being conducted to the lair of one of the
servants attached to the establishment? and would he add a superfluous
third to our little party of two, so complete and companionable, solus
cum sola, in this populated wilderness? Above all, would he turn out
to be a young man, and bring my aerial castles tumbling about my ears.
The shy look and the blush with which she had suggested the
introduction were ominous indications, upon which I mused gloomily as
we ascended the stairs and passed through the wide doorway. I glanced
apprehensively at my companion, and met a quiet, inscrutable smile;
and at that moment she halted opposite a wall-case and faced me.

'This is my friend,' she said. 'Let me present you to Artemidorus,
late of the Fayyum. Oh, don't smile!' she pleaded. 'I am quite
serious. Have you never heard of pious Catholics who cherish a
devotion to some long-departed saint? That is my feeling towards
Artemidorus, and if you only knew what comfort he has shed into the
heart of a lonely woman; what a quiet, unobtrusive friend he has been
to me in my solitary, friendless days, always ready with a kindly
greeting on his gentle, thoughtful face, you would like him for that
alone. And I want you to like him and to share our silent friendship.
Am I very silly, very sentimental?'

A wave of relief swept over me, and the mercury of my emotional
thermometer, which had shrunk almost into the bulb, leaped up to
summer heat. How charming it was of her and how sweetly intimate, to
wish to share this mystical friendship with me! And what a pretty
conceit it was, too, and how like this strange, inscrutable maiden, to
come here and hold silent converse with this long-departed Greek. And
the pathos of it all touched me deeply amidst the joy of this new-born
intimacy.

'Are you scornful?' she asked, with a shade of disappointment, as I
made no reply.

'No, indeed I am not,' I answered earnestly. 'I want to make you aware
of my sympathy and my appreciation without offending you by seeming to
exaggerate, and I don't know how to express it.' Oh, never mind about
the expression, so long as you feel it. I thought you would
understand,' and she gave me a smile that made me tingle to my finger-tips.

We stood awhile gazing in silence at the mummy--for such, indeed, was
her friend Artemidorus. But not an ordinary mummy. Egyptian in form,
it was entirely Greek in feeling; and brightly coloured as it was, in
accordance with the racial love of colour, the tasteful refinement
with which the decoration of the case was treated made those around
look garish and barbaric. But the most striking feature was a charming
panel picture which occupied the place of the usual mask. This
painting was a revelation to me. Except that it was executed in
tempera instead of oil, it differed in no respect from modern work.
There was nothing archaic or ancient about it. With its freedom of
handling and its correct rendering of light and shade, it might have
been painted yesterday; indeed, enclosed in an ordinary gilt frame, it
might have passed without remark in an exhibition of modern portraits.

Miss Bellingham observed my admiration and smiled approvingly.

'It is a charming little portrait, isn't it?' she said; 'and such a
sweet face too; so thoughtful and human, with a shade of melancholy.
But the whole thing is full of charm. I fell in love with it the first
time I saw it. And it is so Greek!'

'Yes, it is, in spite of the Egyptian gods and symbols.'

'Rather because of them, I think,' said she. 'There we have the
typical Greek attitude, the genial, cultivated electicism that
appreciated the fitness of even the most alien forms of art. There is
Anubis standing beside the bier; there are Isis and Nephthys, and
there below Horus and Tahuti. But we can't suppose Artemidorus
worshipped or believed in those gods. They are there because they are
splendid decoration and perfectly appropriate in character. The real
feeling of those who loved the dead man breaks out in the
inscription.' She pointed to a band below the pectoral, where, in gilt
capital letters, was written the two words, (Greek).'

'Yes,' I said, 'it is very dignified and very human.'

'And so sincere and full of real emotion,' she added. 'I find it
unspeakably touching. "O Artemidorus, farewell!" There is the real
note of human grief, the sorrow of eternal parting. How much finer it
is than the vulgar boastfulness of the Semitic epitaphs, or our own
miserable, insincere make-believe of the "Not lost but gone before"
type. He has gone from them for ever; they would look on his face and
hear his voice no more; they realised that this was their last
farewell. Oh, there is a world of love and sorrow in those two simple
words!'

For some time neither of us spoke. The glamour of this touching
memorial of a long-buried grief had stolen over me, and I was content
to stand silent by my beloved companion and revive, with a certain
pensive pleasure, the ghosts of human emotions over which the many
centuries had rolled. Presently she turned to me with a frank smile.
'You have been weighed in the balance of friendship,' she said, 'and
not found wanting. You have the gift of sympathy, even with a woman's
sentimental fancies.'

I suspected that a good many men would have developed this precious
quality under the circumstances, but I refrained from saying so. There
is no use in crying down one's own wares. I was glad enough to have
earned her good opinion so easily, and when she at length turned away
from the case and passed through into the adjoining room, it was a
very complacent young man who bore her company.

'Here is Ahkhenaten--or Khu-en-aten, as the authorities here render
the hieroglyphics. She indicated a fragment of a coloured relief
labelled: 'Portion of a painted stone tablet with a portrait figure of
Amenhotep IV, and we stopped to look at the frail, effeminate figure
of the great king, with his large cranium, his queer, pointed chin,
and the Aten rays stretching out their weird hands as if caressing
him.

'We mustn't stay here if you want to see my uncle's gift, because this
room closes at four to-day.' With this admonition she moved on to the
other end of the room, where she halted before a large floor-case
containing a mummy and a large number of other objects. A black label
with white lettering set forth the various contents with a brief
explanation as follows:

'Mummy of Sebekhotep, a scribe of the twenty-second dynasty, together
with the objects found in the tomb. These include the four Canopic
jars, in which the internal organs were deposited, the Ushabti
figures, tomb provisions and various articles that had belonged to the
deceased; his favourite chair, his head-rest, his ink-palette,
inscribed with his name and the name of the king, Osorkon I, in whose
reign he lived, and other smaller articles. Presented by John
Bellingham, Esq.'

'They have put all the objects together in one case,' Miss Bellingham
explained, 'to show the contents of an ordinary tomb of the better
class. You see that the dead man was provided with all his ordinary
comforts: provisions, furniture, the ink-palette that he had been
accustomed to use in writing on papyri, and a staff of servants to
wait on him.'

'Where are the servants?' I asked.

'The little Ushabti figures,' she answered; 'they were the attendants
of the dead, you know, his servants in the under-world. It was a
quaint idea, wasn't it? But it was all very complete and consistent,
and quite reasonable, too, if one once accepts the belief in the
persistence of the individual apart from the body.'

'Yes,' I agreed, 'and that is the only fair way to judge a religious
system, by taking the main beliefs for granted. But what a business it
must have been, bringing all these things from Egypt to London.'

'It was worth the trouble, though, for it is a fine and instructive
collection. And the work is all very good of its kind. You notice that
the Ushabti figures and the heads that form the stoppers of the
Canopic jars are quite finely modelled. The mummy itself, too, is
rather handsome, though that coat of bitumen on the back doesn't
improve it. But Sebekhotep must have been a fine-looking man.'

'The mask on the face is a portrait, I suppose?'

'Yes; in fact, it's rather more. To some extent it is the actual face
of the man himself. This mummy is enclosed in what is called a
cartonnage, that is a case moulded on the figure. The cartonnage was
formed of a number of layers of linen or papyrus united by glue or
cement, and when the case had been fitted to a mummy it was moulded to
the body, so that the general form of the features and limbs was often
apparent. After the cement was dry the case was covered with a thin
layer of stucco and the face modelled more completely, and then
decorations and inscriptions were painted on. So that, you see, in a
cartonnage, the body was sealed up like a nut in its shell, unlike the
more ancient forms in which the mummy was merely rolled up and
enclosed in a wooden coffin.'

At this moment there smote upon our ears a politely protesting voice
announcing in sing-song tones that it was closing time; and
simultaneously a desire for tea suggested the hospitable milk-shop.
With leisurely dignity that ignored the official who shepherded us
along the galleries, we made our way to the entrance, still immersed
in conversation on matters sepulchral.

It was rather earlier than our usual hour for leaving the Museum and,
moreover, it was our last day--for the present. Wherefore we lingered
over our tea to an extent that caused the milk-shop lady to view us
with some disfavour, and when at length we started homeward, we took
so many short cuts that six o'clock found us no nearer our destination
than Lincoln's Inn Fields; whither we had journeyed by a slightly
indirect route that traversed (among other places) Russell Square, Red
Lion Square, with the quaint passage of the same name, Bedford Row,
Jockey's Fields, Hand Court, and Great Turnstile.

It was in the latter thoroughfare that our attention was attracted by
a flaming poster outside a newsvendor's bearing the startling
inscription:

MORE MEMENTOES

OF MURDERED MAN

Miss Bellingham glanced at the poster and shuddered.

'Horrible, isn't it?' she said. 'Have you read about them?'

'I haven't been noticing the papers the last few days,' I replied.

'No, of course you haven't. You've been slaving at those wretched
notes. We don't very often see the papers, at least we don't take them
in, but Miss Oman has kept us supplied during the last day or two. She
is a perfect little ghoul; she delights in horrors of every kind, and
the more horrible the better.'

'But,' I asked, 'what is it they have found?'

'Oh, they are the remains of some poor creature who seems to have been
murdered and cut into pieces. It is dreadful. It made me shudder to
read of it, for I couldn't help thinking of poor Uncle John, and, as
for my father, he was really quite upset.'

'Are these the bones that were found in a watercress-bed at Sidcup?'

'Yes, but they have found several more. The police have been most
energetic. They seem to have been making a systematic search, and the
result has been that they have discovered several portions of the
body, scattered about in very widely separated places--Sidcup, Lee,
St Mary Cray; and yesterday it was reported that an arm had been found
in one of the ponds called "the Cuckoo Pits," close to our old home.'

'What! in Essex?' I exclaimed.

'Yes, in Epping Forest, quite near Woodford. Isn't it dreadful to
think of it? They were probably hidden when we were living there. I
think it was that that horrified my father so much. When he read it he
was so upset that he gathered up the whole bundle of newspapers and
tossed them out of the window; and they blew over the wall, and poor
Miss Oman had to rush and pursue them up the court.'

'Do you think he suspects that these remains may be those of your
uncle?'

'I think so, though he has said nothing to that effect, and, of
course, I have not made any suggestion to him. We always preserve the
fiction between ourselves of believing that Uncle John is still
alive.'

'But you don't think he is, do you?'

'No, I'm afraid I don't; and I feel pretty sure that my father doesn't
think so either, but he doesn't like to admit it to me.'

'Do you happen to remember what bones have been found?'

'No, I don't. I know that an arm was found in the Cuckoo Pits, and I
think a thigh-bone was dredged up out of a pond near St Mary Cray. But
Miss Oman will be able to tell you all about it, if you are
interested. She will be delighted to meet a kindred spirit,' Miss
Bellingham added, with a smile.

'I don't know that I claim spiritual kinship with a ghoul,' said I;
'especially such a very sharp-tempered ghoul.'

'Oh, don't disparage her, Doctor Berkeley!' Miss Bellingham pleaded.
'She isn't really bad-tempered; only a little prickly on the surface.
I oughtn't to have called her a ghoul; she is just the sweetest, most
affectionate, most unselfish little angelic human hedgehog that you
could find if you travelled the wide world through. Do you know that
she has been working her fingers to the bone making an old dress of
mine presentable because she is so anxious that I shall look nice at
your little supper party.'

'You are sure to do that, in any case,' I said; 'but I withdraw my
remark as to her temper unreservedly. And I really didn't mean it, you
know; I have always liked the little lady.'

'That's right; and now won't you come in and have a few minutes' chat
with my father? We are quite early in spite of the short cuts.'

I accepted readily, and the more so inasmuch as I wanted a few words
with Miss Oman on the subject of catering and did not want to discuss
it before my friends. Accordingly I went and gossiped with Mr.
Bellingham, chiefly about the work we had done at the Museum, until it
was time for me to return to the surgery.

Having taken my leave, I walked down the stairs with reflective
slowness and as much creaking of my boots as I could manage; with the
result, hopefully anticipated, that as I approached the door of Miss
Oman's room it opened and the lady's head protruded.

'I'd change my cobbler if I were you,' she said.

I thought of the 'angelic human hedgehog', and nearly sniggered in her
face.

'I am sure you would, Miss Oman, instantly; though, mind you, the poor
fellow can't help his looks.'

'You are a very flippant young man,' she said severely. Whereat I
grinned, and she regarded me silently with a baleful glare. Suddenly I
remembered my mission and became serious and sober.

'Miss Oman,' I said, 'I very much want to take your advice on a matter
of some importance--to me, at least.' (That ought to fetch her, I
thought. The 'advice fly'--strangely neglected by Izaak Walton--is
guaranteed to kill in any weather.) And it did fetch her. She rose in
a flash and gorged it, cock's feathers, worsted body and all.

'What is it about?' she asked eagerly. 'But don't stand out here where
everybody can hear but me. Come in and sit down.'

Now I didn't want to discuss the matter here, and, besides, there was
not time. I therefore assumed an air of mystery.

'I can't, Miss Oman. I'm due at the surgery now. But if you should be
passing and should have a few minutes to spare, I should be greatly
obliged if you would look in. I really don't quite know how to act.'

'No, I expect not. Men very seldom do. But you're better than most,
for you know when you are in difficulties and have the sense to
consult a woman. But what is it about? Perhaps I might be thinking it
over.'

'Well, you know,' I began evasively, 'it's a simple matter, but I
can't very well--no, by Jove!' I added, looking at my watch, 'I must
run, or I shall keep the multitude waiting.' And with this I bustled
away, leaving her literally dancing with curiosity.



CHAPTER IX. THE SPHINX OF LINCOLN'S INN



AT the age of twenty-six one cannot claim to have attained to the
position of a person of experience. Nevertheless, the knowledge of
human nature accumulated in that brief period sufficed to make me feel
confident that, at some time during the evening, I should receive a
visit from Miss Oman. And circumstances justified my confidence; for
the clock yet stood at two minutes to seven when a premonitory tap at
the surgery door heralded her arrival.

'I happened to be passing,' she explained, and I forbore to smile at
the coincidence, 'so I thought I might as well drop in and hear what
you wanted to ask me about.'

She seated herself in the patients' chair and laying a bundle of
newspapers on the table, glared at me expectantly.

'Thank you, Miss Oman,' said I. 'It is very good of you to look in on
me. I am ashamed to give you all this trouble about such a trifling
matter.'

She rapped her knuckles impatiently on the table.

'Never mind about the trouble,' she exclaimed tartly.
'What--is--it--that--you--want--to--ask--me about?'

I stated my difficulties in respect of the supper-party, and, as I
proceeded, an expression of disgust and disappointment spread over her
countenance.

'I don't see why you need have been so mysterious about it,' she said
glumly.

'I didn't mean to be mysterious; I was only anxious not to make a mess
of the affair. It's all very fine to assume a lofty scorn of the
pleasures of the table, but there is great virtue in a really good feed,
especially when low-living and high-thinking have been the order of the
day.'

'Coarsely put,' said Miss Oman, 'but perfectly true.'

'Very well. Now, if I leave the management to Mrs. Gummer, she will
probably provide a tepid Irish stew with flakes of congealed fat on it,
and a plastic suet-pudding or something of that kind, and turn the house
upside down in getting it ready. So I thought of having a cold spread
and getting the things from outside. But I don't want it to look as if I
had been making enormous preparations.'

'They won't think the things came down from heaven,' said Miss Oman.

'No, I suppose they won't. But you know what I mean. Now, where do you
advise me to go for the raw materials of conviviality?'

Miss Oman reflected. 'You had better let me do your shopping and manage
the whole business,' was her final verdict.

This was precisely what I wanted, and I accepted thankfully, regardless
of the feelings of Mrs. Gummer. I handed her two pounds, and, after some
protests at my extravagance, she bestowed them in her purse; a process
that occupied time, since that receptacle, besides being a sort of
miniature Record Office of frayed and time-stained bills, already bulged
with a lading of draper's samples, ends of tape, a card of linen
buttons, another of hooks and eyes, a lump of beeswax, a rat-eaten stump
of lead-pencil, and other trifles that I have forgotten. As she closed
the purse at the imminent risk of wrenching off its fastenings she
looked at me severely and pursed her lips.

'You're a very plausible young man,' she remarked.

'What makes you say that?' I asked.

'Philandering about museums,' she continued, 'with handsome young ladies
on the pretence of work. Work, indeed! Oh, I heard her telling her
father about it. She thinks you were perfectly enthralled by the mummies
and dried cats and chunks of stone and all the other trash. She doesn't
know what humbugs men are.'

'Really, Miss Oman--' I began.

'Oh, don't talk to me!' she snapped. 'I can see it all. You can't impose
upon me. I can see you staring into those glass cases, egging her on to
talk and listening open-mouthed and bulging-eyed and sitting at her
feet--now, didn't you?'

'I don't know about sitting at her feet,' I said, 'though it might
easily have come to that with those infernal slippery floors; but I had
a very jolly time, and I mean to go again if I can. Miss Bellingham is
the cleverest and most accomplished woman I have ever spoken to.'

This was a poser for Miss Oman, whose admiration and loyalty, I knew,
were only equalled by my own. She would have liked to contradict me, but
the thing was impossible. To cover her defeat she snatched up the bundle
of newspapers and began to open them out.

'What sort of stuff is "hibernation"?' she demanded suddenly.

'Hibernation!' I exclaimed.

'Yes. They found a patch of it on a bone that was discovered in a pond
at St Mary Cray, and a similar patch on one that was found at some other
place in Essex. Now, I want to know what "hibernation" is.'

'You must mean "eburnation,"' I said, after a moment's reflection.

'The newspapers say "hibernation," and I suppose they know what they are
talking about. If you don't know what it is, don't be ashamed to say
so.'

'Well, then, I don't.'

'In that case you had better read the papers and find out,' she said, a
little illogically. And then: 'Are you fond of murders? I am, awfully.'

'What a shocking little ghoul you must be!' I exclaimed.

She stuck out her chin at me. I'll trouble you,' she said, 'to be a
little more respectful in your language. Do you realise that I am old
enough to be your mother?'

'Impossible!' I ejaculated.

'Fact,' said Miss Oman.

'Well, anyhow,' said I, 'age is not the only qualification. And besides,
you are too late for the billet. The vacancy's filled.'

Miss Oman slapped the papers down on the table and rose abruptly.

'You had better read the papers and see if you can learn a little
sense,' she said severely as she turned to go. 'Oh, and don't forget the
finger!' she added eagerly. 'That is really thrilling.'

'The finger?' I repeated.

'Yes. They found a hand with one missing. The police think it is an
important clue. I don't know what they mean; but you read the account
and tell me what you think.'

With this parting injunction she bustled out through the surgery, and I
followed to bid her a ceremonious adieu on the doorstep. I watched her
little figure tripping with quick, bird-like steps down Fetter Lane, and
was about to turn back into the surgery when my attention was attracted
by the evolutions of an elderly gentleman on the opposite side of the
street. He was a somewhat peculiar-looking man, tall, gaunt, and bony,
and the way in which he carried his head suggested to the medical mind a
pronounced degree of near sight and a pair of deep spectacle glasses.
Suddenly he espied me and crossed the road with his chin thrust forward
and a pair of keen blue eyes directed at me through the centres of his
spectacles.

'I wonder if you can and will help me,' said he, with a courteous
salute. 'I wish to call on an acquaintance, and I have forgotten his
address. It is in some court, but the name of that court has escaped me
for the moment. My friend's name is Bellingham. I suppose you don't
chance to know it? Doctors know a great many people, as a rule.'

'Do you mean Mr. Godfrey Bellingham?'

'Ah! Then you do know him. I have not consulted the oracle in vain. He
is a patient of yours, no doubt?'

'A patient and personal friend. His address is Forty-nine Nevill's
Court.'

'Thank you, thank you. Oh, and as you are a friend, perhaps you can
inform me as to the customs of the household. I am not expected, and I
do not wish to make an untimely visit. What are Mr. Bellingham's habits
as to his evening meal? Would this be a convenient time to call?'

'I generally make my evening visits a little later than this--say about
half-past eight; they have finished their meal by then.'

'Ah! Half-past eight, then? Then I suppose I had better take a walk
until that time. I don't want to disturb them.'

'Would you care to come in and smoke a cigar until it is time to make
your call? If you would, I could walk over with you and show you the
house.'

'That is very kind of you,' said my new acquaintance, with an
inquisitive glance at me through his spectacles. 'I think I should like
to sit down. It's a dull affair, mooning about the streets, and there
isn't time to go back to my chambers--in Lincoln's Inn.'

'I wonder,' said I, as I ushered him into the room lately vacated by
Miss Oman, 'if you happen to be Mr. Jellicoe?'

He turned his spectacles full on me with a keen, suspicious glance.
'What makes you think I am Mr. Jellicoe?' he asked.

'Oh, only that you live in Lincoln's Inn.'

'Ha! I see. I live in Lincoln's Inn; Mr. Jellicoe lives in Lincoln's
Inn; therefore I am Mr. Jellicoe. Ha! ha! Bad logic, but a correct
conclusion. Yes, I am Mr. Jellicoe. What do you know about me?'

'Mighty little, excepting that you were the late John Bellingham's man
of business.'

'The "late John Bellingham," hey! How do you know he is the late John
Bellingham?'

'As a matter of fact, I don't; only I rather understood that that was
your own belief.'

'You understood! Now from whom did you "understand" that? From Godfrey
Bellingham? H'm! And how did he know what I believe? I never told him.
It is a very unsafe thing, my dear sir, to expound another man's
beliefs.'

'Then you think that John Bellingham is alive?'

'Do I? Who said so? I did not, you know.'

'But he must be either dead or alive.'

'There,' said Mr. Jellicoe, 'I am entirely with you. You have stated an
undeniable truth.'

'It is not a very illuminating one, however,' I replied, laughing.

'Undeniable truths often are not,' he retorted. 'They are apt to be
extremely general. In fact, I would affirm that the certainty of the
truth of a given proposition is directly proportional to its
generality.'

'I suppose that is so,' said I.

'Undoubtedly. Take an instance from your own profession. Given a million
normal human beings under twenty, and you can say with certainty that a
majority of them will die before reaching a certain age, that they will
die in certain circumstances and of certain diseases. Then take a single
unit from that million, and what can you predict concerning him?
Nothing. He may die to-morrow; he may live to be a couple of hundred. He
may die of a cold in the head or a cut finger, or from falling off the
cross of St Paul's. In a particular case you can predict nothing.'

'That is perfectly true,' said I. And then realising that I had been led
away from the topic of John Bellingham, I ventured to return to it.

'That was a very mysterious affair--the disappearance of John
Bellingham, I mean.'

'Why mysterious?' asked Mr. Jellicoe. 'Men disappear from time to time,
and when they reappear, the explanations that they give (when they give
any) seem more or less adequate.'

'But the circumstances were surely rather mysterious.'

'What circumstances?' asked Mr. Jellicoe.

'I mean the way in which he vanished from Mr. Hurst's house.'

'In what way did he vanish from it?'

'Well, of course, I don't know.'

'Precisely. Neither do I. Therefore I can't say whether that way was a
mysterious one or not.'

'It is not even certain that he did leave it,' I remarked, rather
recklessly.

'Exactly,' said Mr. Jellicoe. 'And if he did not, he is there still. And
if he is there still, he has not disappeared--in the sense understood.
And if he has not disappeared, there is no mystery.'

I laughed heartily, but Mr. Jellicoe preserved a wooden solemnity and
continued to examine me through his spectacles (which I, in my turn,
inspected and estimated at about minus five dioptres). There was
something highly diverting about this grim lawyer, with his dry
contentiousness and almost farcical caution. His ostentatious reserve
encouraged me to ply him with fresh questions, the more indiscreet the
better.

'I suppose,' said I, 'that, under these circumstances, you would hardly
favour Mr. Hurst's proposal to apply for permission to presume death?'

'Under what circumstances?' he inquired.

'I was referring to the doubt you have expressed as to whether John
Bellingham is, after all, really dead.'

'My dear sir,' said he, 'I fail to see your point. If it were certain
that the man was alive, it would be impossible to presume that he was
dead; and if it were certain that he was dead, presumption of death
would still be impossible. You do not presume a certainty. The
uncertainty is of the essence of the transaction.'

'But,' I persisted, 'if you really believe that he may be alive, I
should hardly have thought that you would take the responsibility of
presuming his death and dispersing his property.'

'I don't,' said Mr. Jellicoe. 'I take no responsibility. I act in
accordance with the decision of the Court and have no choice in the
matter.'

'But the Court may decide that he is dead and he may nevertheless be
alive.'

'Not at all. If the Court decides that he is presumably dead, then he is
presumably dead. As a mere irrelevant, physical circumstance he may, it
is true, be alive. But legally speaking, and for testamentary purposes,
he is dead. You fail to perceive the distinction, no doubt?'

'I am afraid I do,' I admitted.

'Yes; the members of your profession usually do. That is what makes them
such bad witnesses in a court of law. The scientific outlook is
radically different from the legal. The man of science relies on his own
knowledge and observation and judgment, and disregards testimony. A man
comes to you and tells you he is blind in one eye. Do you accept his
statement? Not in the least. You proceed to test his eyesight with some
infernal apparatus of coloured glasses, and you find that he can see
perfectly well with both eyes. Then you decide that he is not blind in
one eye; that is to say, you reject his testimony in favour of facts of
your own ascertaining.'

'But surely that is the rational method of coming to a conclusion?'

'In science, no doubt. Not in law. A court of law must decide according
to the evidence which is before it; and that evidence is of the nature
of sworn testimony. If a witness is prepared to swear that black is
white and no evidence to the contrary is offered, the evidence before
the Court is that black is white, and the Court must decide accordingly.
The judge and the jury may think otherwise--they may even have private
knowledge to the contrary--but they have to decide according to the
evidence.'

'Do you mean to say that a judge would be justified in giving a decision
which he knew to be contrary to the facts? Or that he might sentence a
man whom he knew to be innocent?'

'Certainly. It has been done. There is a case of a judge who sentenced a
man to death and allowed the execution to take place, notwithstanding
that he--the judge--had actually seen the murder committed by another
man. But that was carrying correctness of procedure to the verge of
pedantry.'

'It was, with a vengeance,' I agreed. 'But to return to the case of John
Bellingham. Supposing that after the Court has decided that he is dead
he should return alive? What then?'

'Ah! It would then be his turn to make an application, and the Court,
having fresh evidence laid before it, would probably decide that he was
alive.'

'And meantime his property would have been dispersed?'

'Probably. But you will observe that the presumption of death would have
arisen out of his own proceedings. If a man acts in such a way as to
create a belief that he is dead, he must put up with the consequences.'

'Yes, that is reasonable enough,' said I. And then, after a pause, I
asked: 'Is there any immediate likelihood of proceedings of the kind
being commenced?'

'I understood from what you said just now that Mr. Hurst was
contemplating some action of the kind. No doubt you had your information
from a reliable quarter.' This answer Mr. Jellicoe delivered without
moving a muscle, regarding me with the fixity of a spectacled
figurehead.

I smiled feebly. The operation of pumping Mr. Jellicoe was rather like
the sport of boxing with a porcupine, being chiefly remarkable as a
demonstration of the power of passive resistance. I determined, however,
to make one more effort, rather, I think, for the pleasure of witnessing
his defensive manoeuvres than with the expectation of getting anything
out of him. I accordingly 'opened out' on the subject of the 'remains.'

'Have you been following these remarkable discoveries of human bones
that have been appearing in the papers?' I asked.

He looked at me stonily for some moments, and then replied:

'Human bones are rather more within your province than mine, but, now
that you mention it, I think I recall having read of some such
discoveries. They were disconnected bones, I believe.'

'Yes; evidently parts of a dismembered body.'

'So I should suppose. No, I have not followed the accounts. As we get on
in life our interests tend to settle into grooves, and my groove is
chiefly connected with conveyancing. These discoveries would be of more
interest to a criminal lawyer.'

'I thought you might, perhaps, have connected them with the
disappearance of your client?'

'Why should I? What could be the nature of the connection?'

'Well,' I said, 'these are the bones of a man--'

'Yes; and my client was a man with bones. That is a connection,
certainly, though not a very specific or distinctive one. But perhaps
you had something more particular in your mind?'

'I had,' I replied. 'The fact that some of the bones were actually found
on land belonging to your client seemed to me rather significant.'

'Did it, indeed?' said Mr. Jellicoe. He reflected for a few moments,
gazing steadily at me the while, and then continued: 'In that I am
unable to follow you. It would have seemed to me that the finding of
human remains upon a certain piece of land might conceivably throw a
prima fade suspicion upon the owner or occupant of the land as being the
person who deposited them. But the case that you suggest is the one case
in which this would be impossible. A man cannot deposit his own
dismembered remains.'

'No, of course not. I was not suggesting that he deposited them himself,
but merely that the fact of their being deposited on his land, in a way,
connected these remains with him.'

'Again,' said Mr. Jellicoe, 'I fail to follow you, unless you are
suggesting that it is customary for murderers who mutilate bodies to be
punctilious in depositing the dismembered remains upon land belonging to
their victims. In which case I am sceptical as to your facts. I am not
aware of the existence of any such custom. Moreover, it appears that
only a portion of the body was deposited on Mr. Bellingham's land, the
remaining portions having been scattered broadcast over a wide area. How
does that agree with your suggestion?'

'It doesn't, of course,' I admitted. 'But there is another fact that I
think you will admit to be more significant. The first remains that were
discovered were found at Sidcup. Now, Sidcup is close to Eltham; and
Eltham is the place where Mr. Bellingham was last seen alive.'

'And what is the significance of this? Why do you connect the remains
with one locality rather than the various other localities in which
other portions of the body were found?'

'Well,' I replied, rather gravelled by this very pertinent question,
'the appearances seem to suggest that the person who deposited these
remains started from the neighbourhood of Eltham, where the missing man
was last seen.'

Mr. Jellicoe shook his head. 'You appear,' said he, 'to be confusing the
order of deposition with the order of discovery. What evidence is there
that the remains found at Sidcup were deposited before those found
elsewhere?'

'I don't know that there is any,' I admitted.

'Then,' said he, 'I don't see how you support your suggestion that the
person started from the neighbourhood of Eltham.'

On consideration, I had to admit that I had nothing to offer in support
of my theory; and having thus shot my last arrow in this very unequal
contest, I thought it time to change the subject.

'I called in at the British Museum the other day,' said I, 'and had a
look at Mr. Bellingham's last gift to the nation. The things are very
well shown in that central case.'

'Yes. I was very pleased with the position they have given to the
exhibit, and so would my poor old friend have been. I wished, as I
looked at the case, that he could have seen it. But perhaps he may,
after all.'

'I am sure I hope he will,' said I, with more sincerity, perhaps, than
the lawyer gave me credit for. For the return of John Bellingham would
most effectually have cut the Gordian knot of my friend Godfrey's
difficulties. 'You are a good deal interested in Egyptology yourself,
aren't you?' I added.

'Greatly interested,' replied Mr. Jellicoe, with more animation than I
had thought possible in his wooden face. 'It is a fascinating subject,
the study of this venerable civilisation, extending back to the
childhood of the human race, preserved for ever for our instruction in
its own unchanging monuments like a fly in a block of amber. Everything
connected with Egypt is full of an impressive solemnity. A feeling of
permanence, of stability, defying time and change, pervades it. The
place, the people, and the monuments alike breathe of eternity.'

I was mightily surprised at this rhetorical outburst on the part of this
dry, taciturn lawyer. But I liked him the better for the touch of
enthusiasm that made him human, and determined to keep him astride of
his hobby.

'Yet,' said I, 'the people must have changed in the course of
centuries.'

'Yes, that is so. The people who fought against Cambyses were not the
race who marched into Egypt five thousand years before--the dynastic
people whose portraits we see on the early monuments. In those fifty
centuries the blood of Hyksos and Syrians and Ethiopians and Hittites,
and who can say how many more races, must have mingled with that of the
old Egyptians. But still the national life went on without a break; the
old culture leavened the new peoples, and the immigrant strangers ended
by becoming Egyptians. It is a wonderful phenomenon. Looking back on it
from our own time, it seems more like a geological period than the life
history of a single nation. Are you at all interested in the subject?'

'Yes, decidedly, though I am completely ignorant of it. The fact is that
my interest is of quite recent growth. It is only of late that I have
been sensible of the glamour of things Egyptian.'

'Since you made Miss Bellingham's acquaintance, perhaps?' suggested Mr.
Jellicoe, himself as unchanging in aspect as an Egyptian effigy.

I suppose I must have reddened--I certainly resented the remark--for he
continued in the same even tone: 'I made the suggestion because I know
that she takes an intelligent interest in the subject and is, in fact,
quite well informed on it.'

'Yes; she seems to know a great deal about the antiquities of Egypt, and
I may as well admit that your surmise was correct. It was she who showed
me her uncle's collection.'

'So I had supposed,' said Mr. Jellicoe. 'And a very instructive
collection it is, in a popular sense; very suitable for exhibition in a
public museum, though there is nothing in it of unusual interest to the
expert. The tomb furniture is excellent of its kind and the cartonnage
case of the mummy is well made and rather finely decorated.'

'Yes, I thought it quite handsome. But can you explain to me why, after
taking all that trouble to decorate it, they should have disfigured it
with those great smears of bitumen?'

'Ah!' said Mr. Jellicoe, 'that is quite an interesting question. It is
not unusual to find mummy cases smeared with bitumen; there is a mummy
of a priestess in the next gallery which is completely coated with
bitumen except the gilded face. Now, this bitumen was put on for a
purpose--for the purpose of obliterating the inscriptions and thus
concealing the identity of the deceased from the robbers and desecrators
of tombs. And there is the oddity of this mummy of Sebekhotep. Evidently
there was an intention of obliterating the inscriptions. The whole of
the back is covered thickly with bitumen, and so are the feet. Then the
workers seem to have changed their minds and left the inscriptions and
decoration untouched. Why they intended to cover it, and why, having
commenced, they left it partially covered only, is a mystery. The mummy
was found in its original tomb and quite undisturbed, so far as
tomb-robbers are concerned. Poor Bellingham was greatly puzzled as to
what the explanation could be.'

'Speaking of bitumen,' said I, 'reminds me of a question that has
occurred to me. You know that this substance has been used a good deal
by modern painters and that it has a very dangerous peculiarity; I mean
its tendency to liquefy, without any obvious reason, long after it has
dried.'

'Yes, I know. Isn't there some story about a picture of Reynolds' in
which bitumen had been used? A portrait of a lady, I think. The bitumen
softened, and one of the lady's eyes slipped down on to her cheek; and
they had to hang the portrait upside down and keep it warm until the eye
slipped back again into its place. But what was your question?'

'I was wondering whether the bitumen used by the Egyptian artists has
ever been known to soften after this great lapse of time.'

'Yes, I think it has. I have heard of instances in which the bitumen
coatings have softened under certain circumstances and become quite
"tacky". But, bless my soul! here am I gossiping with you and wasting
your time, and it is nearly a quarter to nine!'

My guest rose hastily, and I, with many apologies for having detained
him, proceeded to fulfil my promise to guide him to his destination. As
we sallied forth together the glamour of Egypt faded by degrees, and
when he shook my hand stiffly at the gate of the Bellinghams' house, all
his vivacity and enthusiasm had vanished, leaving the taciturn lawyer,
dry, uncommunicative, and not a little suspicious.



CHAPTER X. THE NEW ALLIANCE



THE 'Great Lexicographer'--tutelary deity of my adopted habitat--has
handed down to shuddering posterity a definition of the act of eating
which might have been framed by a dyspeptic ghoul, 'Eat: to devour with
the mouth.' It is a shocking view to take of so genial a function:
cynical, indelicate, and finally unforgivable by reason of its very
accuracy. For, after all, that is what eating amounts to, if one must
needs express it with such crude brutality. But if 'the ingestion of
alimentary substances'--to ring a modern change upon the older
formula--is in itself a process material even unto carnality, it is
undeniable that it forms a highly agreeable accompaniment to more
psychic manifestations.

And so, as the lamplight, reinforced by accessory candles, falls on the
little first-floor room looking on Fetter Lane--only now the curtains
are drawn--the conversation is not the less friendly and bright for a
running accompaniment executed with knives and forks, for clink of
goblet, and jovial gurgle of wine-flask. On the contrary, to one of us,
at least--to wit, Godfrey Bellingham--the occasion is one of uncommon
festivity, and his boyish enjoyment of the simple feast makes pathetic
suggestions of hard times, faced uncomplainingly, but keenly felt
nevertheless.

The talk flitted from topic to topic, mainly concerning itself with
matters artistic, and never for one moment approaching the critical
subject of John Bellingham's will. From the stepped pyramid of Sakkara
with its encaustic tiles to mediaeval church floors; from Elizabethan
woodwork to Mycenaean pottery, and thence to the industrial arts of the
Stone age and the civilisation of the Aztecs, began to suspect that my
two legal friends were so carried away by the interest of the
conversation that they had forgotten the secret purpose of the meeting,
for the dessert had been placed on the table (by Mrs. Gummer with the
manner of a bereaved dependant dispensing funeral bakemeats), and still
no reference had been made to the 'case'. But it seemed that Thorndyke
was but playing a waiting game; was only allowing the intimacy to ripen
while he watched for the opportunity. And that opportunity came, even as
Mrs. Gummer vanished spectrally with a tray of plates and glasses.

'So you had a visitor last night, Doctor,' said Mr. Bellingham. 'I mean
my friend Jellicoe. He told us he had seen you, and mighty curious he
was about you. I have never known Jellicoe to be so inquisitive before.
What did you think of him?'

'A quaint old cock. I found him highly amusing. We entertained one
another for quite a long time with questions and crooked answers; I
affecting eager curiosity, he replying with a defensive attitude of
universal ignorance. It was a most diverting encounter.'

'He needn't have been so close,' Miss Bellingham remarked, 'seeing that
all the world will be regaled with our affairs before long.'

'They are proposing to take the case into Court, then?' said Thorndyke.

'Yes,' said Mr. Bellingham. 'Jellicoe came to tell me that my cousin,
Hurst, has instructed his solicitors to make the application and to
invite me to join him. Actually he came to deliver an ultimatum from
Hurst--but I mustn't disturb the harmony of this festive gathering with
litigious discords.'

'Now, why mustn't you?' asked Thorndyke. 'Why is a subject in which we
are all keenly interested to be taboo? You don't mind telling us about
it, do you?'

'No, of course not. But what do you think of a man who buttonholes a
doctor at a dinner-party to retail a list of ailments?'

'It depends on what his ailments are,' replied Thorndyke. 'If he is a
chronic dyspeptic and wishes to expound the virtues of Doctor Snaffler's
Purple Pills for Pimply People, he is merely a bore. But if he chances
to suffer from some rare and choice disease, such as Trypanosomiasis or
Acromegaly, the doctor will be delighted to listen.'

'Then are we to understand,' Miss Bellingham asked, 'that we are rare
and choice products, in a legal sense?'

'Undoubtedly,' replied Thorndyke. 'The case of John Bellingham is, in
many respects, unique. It will be followed with the deepest interest by
the profession at large, and especially by medical jurists.'

'How gratifying that should be to us!' said Miss Bellingham. 'We may
even attain undying fame in textbooks and treatises; and yet we are not
so very much puffed up with our importance.'

'No,' said her father; 'we could do without the fame quite well, and so,
I think, could Hurst. Did Berkeley tell you of the proposal that he
made?'

'Yes,' said Thorndyke; 'and I gather from what you say that he has
repeated it.'

'Yes. He sent Jellicoe to give me another chance, and I was tempted to
take it; but my daughter was strongly against any compromise, and
probably she is right. At any rate, she is more concerned than I am.'

'What view did Mr. Jellicoe take?' Thorndyke asked.

'Oh, he was very cautious and reserved, but he didn't disguise his
feeling that I should be wise to take a certainty in lieu of a very
problematical fortune. He would certainly like me to agree, for he
naturally wishes to get the affair settled and pocket his legacy.'

'And have you definitely refused?'

'Yes; quite definitely. So Hurst will apply for permission to presume
death and prove the will, and Jellicoe will support him; he says he has
no choice.'

'And you?'

'I suppose I shall oppose the application, though I don't quite know on
what grounds.'

'Before you take definite steps,' said Thorndyke, 'you ought to give the
matter very careful consideration. I take it that you have very little
doubt that your brother is dead. And if he is dead, any benefit that you
may receive under the will must be conditional on the previous
presumption or proof of death. But perhaps you have taken advice?'

'No, I have not. As our friend the Doctor has probably told you, my
means--or rather, the lack of them--do not admit of my getting
professional advice. Hence my delicacy about discussing the case with
you.'

'Then do you propose to conduct your case in person?'

'Yes; if it is necessary for me to appear in Court, as I suppose it will
be, if I oppose the application.'

Thorndyke reflected for a few moments and then said gravely:

'You had much better not appear in person to conduct your case, Mr.
Bellingham, for several reasons. To begin with, Mr. Hurst is sure to be
represented by a capable counsel, and you will find yourself quite
unable to meet the sudden exigencies of a contest in Court. You will be
out-maneuvered. Then there is the judge to be considered.'

'But surely one can rely on the judge dealing fairly with a man who is
unable to afford a solicitor and counsel?'

'Undoubtedly, as a rule, a judge will give an unrepresented litigant
every assistance and consideration. English judges in general are
high-minded men with a deep sense of their great responsibilities. But
you cannot afford to take any chances. You must consider the exceptions.
A judge has been a counsel, and he may carry to the bench some of the
professional prejudices of the bar. Indeed, if you consider the absurd
licence permitted to counsel in their treatment of witnesses, and the
hostile attitude adopted by some judges towards medical and other
scientific men who have to give their evidence, you will see that the
judicial mind is not always quite as judicial as one would wish,
especially when the privileges and immunities of the profession are
concerned. Now, your appearance in person to conduct your case must
unavoidably, cause some inconvenience to the Court. Your ignorance of
procedure and legal details must occasion some delay; and if the judge
should happen to be an irritable man he might resent the inconvenience
and delay. I don't say that would affect his decision--I don't think it
would--but I am sure it would be wise to avoid giving offence to the
judge. And, above all, it is most desirable to be able to detect and
reply to any manoeuvres on the part of the opposing counsel, which you
certainly would not be able to do.'

'This is excellent advice, Doctor Thorndyke,' said Bellingham, with a
grim smile; 'but I'm afraid I shall have to take my chance.'

'Not necessarily,' said Thorndyke. 'I am going to make a little
proposal, which I will ask you to consider without prejudice as a mutual
accommodation. You see, your case is one of exceptional interest--it
will become a textbook case, as Miss Bellingham prophesied; and, since
it lies within my speciality, it will be necessary for me to follow it
in the closest detail. Now, it would be much more satisfactory for me to
study it from within than from without, to say nothing of the credit
which would accrue to me if I should be able to conduct it to a
successful issue. I am therefore going to ask you to put your case in my
hands and let me see what can be done with it. I know this is an unusual
course for a professional man to take, but I think it is not improper
under the circumstances.'

Mr. Bellingham pondered in silence for a few moments, and then, after a
glance at his daughter, began rather hesitatingly: 'It's very generous
of you, Doctor Thorndyke--'

'Pardon me,' interrupted Thorndyke, 'it is not. My motives, as I have
explained, are purely egoistic.'

Mr. Bellingham laughed uneasily and again glanced at his daughter, who,
however, pursued her occupation of peeling a pear with calm deliberation
and without lifting her eyes. Getting no help from her he asked: 'Do you
think that there is any possibility whatever of a successful issue?'

'Yes, a remote possibility--very remote, I fear, as things look at
present; but if I thought the case absolutely hopeless I should advise
you to stand aside and let events take their course.'

'Supposing the case should come to a favourable termination, would you
allow me to settle your fees in the ordinary way?'

'If the choice lay with me,' replied Thorndyke, 'I should say "yes" with
pleasure. But it does not. The attitude of the profession is very
definitely unfavourable to "speculative" practice. You may remember the
well-known firm of Dodson and Fogg, who gained thereby much profit, but
little credit. But why discuss contingencies of this kind? If I bring
your case to a successful issue I shall have done very well for myself.
We shall have benefited one another mutually. Come now, Miss Bellingham,
I appeal to you. We have eaten salt together, to say nothing of pigeon
pie and other cakes. Won't you back me up, and at the same time do a
kindness to Doctor Berkeley?'

'Why, is Doctor Berkeley interested in our decision?'

'Certainly he is, as you will appreciate when I tell you that he
actually tried to bribe me secretly out of his own pocket.'

'Did you?' she asked, looking at me with an expression that rather
alarmed me.

'Well, not exactly,' I replied, mighty hot and uncomfortable, and
wishing Thorndyke at the devil with his confidences. 'I merely mentioned
that the--the--solicitor's costs, you know, and that sort of thing--but
you needn't jump on me, Miss Bellingham; Doctor Thorndyke did all that
was necessary in that way.'

She continued to look at me thoughtfully as I stammered out my excuses,
and then said: 'I wasn't going to. I was only thinking that poverty has
its compensations. You are all so very good to us; and, for my part, I
should accept Doctor Thorndyke's generous offer most gratefully, and
thank him for making it so easy for us.'

'Very well, my dear,' said Mr. Bellingham; 'we will enjoy thesweets of
poverty, as you say--we have sampled the other kind of I thing pretty
freely--and do ourselves the pleasure of accepting a | great kindness,
most delicately offered.'

'Thank you,' said Thorndyke. 'You have justified my faith in you, Miss
Bellingham, and in the power of Dr. Berkeley's salt. I understand that
you place your affairs in my hands?'

'Entirely and thankfully,' replied Mr. Bellingham. 'Whatever you think
best to be done we agree to beforehand.'

'Then,' said I, 'let us drink success to the cause. Port, if you please,
Miss Bellingham; the vintage is not recorded, but it is quite wholesome,
and a suitable medium for the sodium chloride of friendship.' I filled
her glass, and when the bottle had made its circuit, we stood up and
solemnly pledged the new alliance.

There is just one thing I would say before we dismiss the subject for
the present,' said Thorndyke. 'It is a good thing to keep one's own
counsel. When you get formal notice from Mr. Hurst's solicitors that
proceedings are being commenced, you may refer them to Mr. Marchmont of
Gray's Inn, who will nominally act for you. He will actually have
nothing to do, but we must preserve the fiction that I am instructed by
a solicitor. Meanwhile, and until the case goes into Court, I think it
very necessary that neither Mr. Jellicoe nor anyone else should know
that I am connected with it. We must keep the other side in the dark, if
we can.'

'We will be as secret as the grave,' said Mr. Bellingham; 'and, as a
matter of fact, it will be quite easy, since it happens, by a curious
coincidence, that I am already acquainted with Mr. Marchmont. He acted
for Stephen Blackmore, you remember, in that case that you unravelled so
wonderfully well. I knew the Blackmores.'

'Did you?' said Thorndyke. 'What a small world it is. And what a
remarkable affair that was! The intricacies and cross-issues made it
quite absorbingly interesting; and it is noteworthy for me in another
respect, for it was one of the first cases in which I was associated
with Doctor Jervis.'

'Yes, and a mighty useful associate I was,' remarked Jervis, 'though I
did pick up one or two facts by accident. And, by the way, the Blackmore
case had certain points in common with your case, Mr. Bellingham. There
was a disappearance and a disputed will, and the man who vanished was a
scholar and an antiquarian.'

'Cases in our speciality are apt to have certain general resemblances,'
Thorndyke said; and as he spoke he directed a keen glance at his junior,
the significance of which I partly understood when he abruptly changed
the subject.

'The newspaper reports of your brother's disappearance, Mr. Bellingham,
were remarkably full of detail. There were even plans of your house and
that of Mr. Hurst. Do you know who supplied the information?'

'No, I don't,' replied Mr. Bellingham. 'I know that I didn't. Some
newspaper men came to me for information, but I sent them packing. So, I
understand, did Hurst; and as for Jellicoe, you might as well
cross-examine an oyster.'

'Well,' said Thorndyke, 'the pressmen have queer methods of getting
"copy"; but still, some one must have given them that description of
your brother and those plans. It would be interesting to know who it
was. However, we don't know; and now let us dismiss these legal topics,
with suitable apologies for having introduced them.'

'And perhaps,' said I, 'we may as well adjourn to what we call the
drawing-room--it is really Barnard's den--and leave the housekeeper to
wrestle with the debris.'

We migrated to the cheerfully shabby little apartment, and, when Mrs.
Gummer had served coffee, with gloomy resignation (as who should say:
'If you will drink this sort of stuff I suppose you must, but don't
blame me for the consequences'), I settled Mr. Bellingham in Barnard's
favourite lop-sided easy chair--the depressed seat of which suggested
its customary use by an elephant of sedentary habits--and opened the
diminutive piano.

'I wonder if Miss Bellingham would give us a little music?' I said.

'I wonder if she could?' was the smiling response. 'Do you know,' she
continued, 'I have not touched a piano for nearly two years? It will be
quite an interesting experiment--to me; but if it fails, you will be the
sufferers. So you must choose.'

'My verdict,' said Mr. Bellingham, 'is fiat experimentum, though I won't
complete the quotation, as that would seem to disparage Doctor Barnard's
piano. But before you begin, Ruth, there is one rather disagreeable
matter that I want to dispose of, so that I may not disturb the harmony
with it later.'

He paused and we all looked at him expectantly.

'I suppose, Doctor Thorndyke,' he said, 'you read the newspapers?'

'I don't,' replied Dr. Thorndyke. 'But I ascertain, for purely business
purposes, what they contain.'

'Then,' said Mr. Bellingham, 'you have probably met with some accounts
of the finding of certain human remains, apparently portions of a
mutilated body.'

'Yes, I have seen those reports and filed them for future reference.'

'Exactly. Well, now, it can hardly be necessary for me to tell you that
those remains--the mutilated remains of some poor murdered creature, as
there can be no doubt they are--have seemed to have a very dreadful
significance for me. You will understand what I mean; and I want to ask
you if--if they have made a similar suggestion to you?'

Thorndyke paused before replying, with his eyes bent thoughtfully on the
floor, and we all looked at him anxiously.

'It's very natural,' he said at length, 'that you should associate these
remains with the mystery of your brother's disappearance. I should like
to say that you are wrong in doing so, but if I did I should be
uncandid. There are certain facts that do, undoubtedly, seem to suggest
a connection, and, up to the present, there are no definite facts of a
contrary significance.'

Mr. Bellingham sighed deeply and shifted uncomfortably in his chair.

'It is a horrible affair!' he said huskily; 'horrible! Would you mind,
Doctor Thorndyke, telling us just how the matter stands in your
opinion--what the probabilities are, for and against?'

Again Thorndyke reflected awhile, and it seemed to me that he was not
very willing to discuss the subject. However, the question had been
asked pointedly, and eventually he answered:

'At the present stage of the investigation it is not very easy to state
the balance of probabilities. The matter is still quite speculative. The
bones which have been found hitherto (for we are dealing with a
skeleton, not with a body) have been exclusively those which are useless
for personal identification; which is, in itself, a rather curious and
striking fact. The general character and dimension of the bones seem to
suggest a middle-aged man of about your brother's height, and the date
of deposition appears to be in agreement with the date of his
disappearance.'

'Is it known, then, when they were deposited?' asked Mr. Bellingham.

'In the case of those found at Sidcup it seems possible to deduct an
approximate date. The watercress-bed was cleaned out about two years
ago, so they could not have been lying there longer than that; and their
condition suggests that they could not have been there much less than
two years, as there is apparently no vestige of the soft structures
left. Of course, I am speaking from the newspaper reports only; I have
no direct knowledge of the matter.'

'Have they found any considerable part of the body yet? I haven't been
reading the papers myself. My little friend, Miss Oman, brought a great
bundle of 'em for me to read, but I couldn't stand it; I pitched the
whole boiling of 'em out of the window.'

I thought I detected a slight twinkle in Thorndyke's eye, but he
answered quite gravely:

'I think I can give you the particulars from memory, though I won't
guarantee the dates. The original discovery was made, apparently quite
accidentally, at Sidcup on the fifteenth of July. It consisted of a
complete left arm, minus the third finger and including the bones of the
shoulder--the shoulder-blade and collar bone. This discovery seems to
have set the local population, especially the juvenile part of it,
searching all the ponds and streams of the neighbourhood--'

'Cannibals!' interjected Mr. Bellingham.

'With the result that there was dredged up out of a pond near St Mary
Cray, in Kent, a right thigh-bone. There is a slight clue to identity in
respect of this bone, since the head of it has a small patch of
"eburnation"--that is a sort of porcelain-like polish that occurs on the
parts of bones that form a joint when the natural covering of cartilage
is destroyed by disease. It is produced by the unprotected surface of
the bone grinding against the similarly unprotected surface of another.'

'And how,' Mr. Bellingham asked, 'would that help the identification?'

'It would indicate,' Thorndyke replied, 'that the deceased had probably
suffered from rheumatoid arthritis--what is commonly I known as
rheumatic gout--and he would probably have limped! slightly and
complained of some pain in the right hip.'

'I'm afraid that doesn't help us very much,' said Mr. Bellingham;
'for, you see, John had a pretty pronounced limp from another cause,
an old injury to his left ankle; and as to complaining of pain--well,
he was a hardy old fellow and not much given to making complaints of
any kind. But don't let me interrupt you.'

'The next discovery,' continued Thorndyke, 'was made near Lee, by the
police this time. They seem to have developed sudden activity in the
matter, and in searching the neighbourhood of West Kent they dragged
out of a pond near Lee the bones of a right foot. Now, if it had been
the left instead of the right we might have a clue, as I understand
your brother had fractured his left ankle, and there might have been
some traces of the injury on the foot itself.'

'Yes,' said Mr. Bellingham. 'I suppose there might. The injury was
described as a Pott's fracture.'

'Exactly. Well, now, after this discovery at Lee it seems that the
police set on foot a systematic search of all the ponds and small
pieces of water around London, and, on the twenty-third, they found in
the Cuckoo Pits in Epping Forest, not far from Woodford, the bones of
a right arm (including those of the shoulder, as before), which seem
to be part of the same body.'

'Yes,' said Mr. Bellingham, 'I heard of that. Quite close to my old
house. Horrible! horrible! It gave me the shudders to think of it--to
think that poor old John may have been waylaid and murdered when he
was actually coming to see me. He may even have got into the grounds
by the back gate, if it was left unfastened, and been followed in
there and murdered. You remember that a scarab from his watch-chain
was found there? But is it clear that this arm was the fellow of the
arm that was found at Sidcup?'

'It seems to agree in character and dimensions,' said Thorndyke, 'and
the agreement is strongly supported by a discovery made two days
later.'

'What is that?' Mr. Bellingham demanded.

'It is the lower half of a trunk which the police dragged out of a
rather deep pond on the skirts of the forest at Loughton--Staple's
Pond, it is called. The bones found were the pelvis--that is, the two
hip-bones--and six vertebrae, or joints of the backbone. Having
discovered these, the police dammed the stream and pumped the pond
dry, but no other bones were found; which is rather odd, as there
should have been a pair of ribs belonging to the upper vertebra--the
twelfth dorsal vertebra. It suggests some curious questions as to the
method of dismemberment; but I mustn't go into unpleasant details. The
point is that the cavity of the right hip-joint showed a patch of
eburnation corresponding to that on the head of the right thigh-bone
that was found at St Mary Cray. So there can be very little doubt that
these bones are all part of the same body.'

'I see,' grunted Mr. Bellingham; and he added, after a moment's
thought: 'Now, the question is, Are these bones the remains of my
brother John? What do you say, Doctor Thorndyke?'

'I say that the question cannot be answered on the facts at present
known to us. It can only be said that they may be, and that some of
the circumstances suggest that they are. But we can only wait for
further discoveries. At any moment the police may light upon some
portion of the skeleton which will settle the question definitely one
way or the other.'

'I suppose,' said Mr. Bellingham, 'I can't be of any service to you in
the matter of identification?'

'Indeed you can,' said Thorndyke, 'and I was going to ask you to
assist me. What I want you to do is this: Write down a full
description of your brother, including every detail known to you,
together with an account of every illness or injury from which you
know him to have suffered; also the names and, if possible, the
addresses of any doctors, surgeons, or dentists who may have attended
him at any time. The dentists are particularly important, as their
information would be invaluable if the skull belonging to these bones
should be discovered.'

Mr. Bellingham shuddered.

'It's a shocking idea,' he said, 'but, of course you are right. You
must have the facts if you are to form an opinion. I will write out
what you want and send it to you without delay. And now, for God's
sake, let us throw off this nightmare, for a little while, at least!
What is there, Ruth, among Doctor Barnard's music that you can
manage?'

Barnard's collection in general inclined to the severely classical, but
we disinterred from the heap a few lighter works of an old-fashioned
kind, including a volume of Mendelssohn's Lieder ohne Worte, and with
one of these Miss Bellingham made trial of her skill, playing it with
excellent taste and quite adequate execution. That, at least, was her
father's verdict; for, as to me, I found it the perfection of happiness
merely to sit and look at her--a state of mind that would have been in
no wise disturbed even by 'Silvery Waves' or 'The Maiden's Prayer'.

Thus with simple, homely music, and conversation always cheerful and
sometimes brilliant, slipped away one of the pleasantest evenings of
my life, and slipped away all too soon. St Dunstan's clock was the fly
in the ointment, for it boomed out intrusively the hour of eleven just
as my guests were beginning to thoroughly appreciate one another, and
thereby carried the sun (with a minor paternal satellite) out of the
firmament of my heaven. For I had, in my professional capacity, given
strict injunctions that Mr. Bellingham should on no account sit up
late; and now, in my social capacity, I had smilingly to hear 'the
doctor's orders' quoted. It was a scurvy return for all my care.

When Mr. and Miss Bellingham departed, Thorndyke and Jervis would have
gone too; but noting my bereaved condition, and being withal
compassionate and tender of heart, they were persuaded to stay awhile
and bear me company in a consolatory pipe.



CHAPTER XI. THE EVIDENCE REVIEWED



'SO THE game has opened,' observed Thorndyke, as he struck a match.
'The play has begun with a cautious lead off by the other side. Very
cautious and not very confident.'

'Why do you say "not very confident"?' I asked.

'Well, it is evident that Hurst--and, I fancy, Jellicoe too--is
anxious to buy off Bellingham's opposition, and at a pretty long
price, under the circumstances. And when we consider how very little
Bellingham has to offer against the presumption of his brother's
death, it looks as if Hurst hadn't much to say on his side.'

'No,' said Jervis, 'he can't hold many trumps or he wouldn't be
willing to pay four hundred a year for his opponent's chances; and
that is just as well, for it seems to me that our own hand is a pretty
poor one.'

'We must look through our hand and see what we do hold,' said
Thorndyke. 'Our trump card at present--a rather small one, I'm
afraid--is the obvious intention of the testator that the bulk of the
property should go to his brother.'

'I suppose you will begin your inquiries now?' I said.

'We began them some time ago--the day after you brought us the will,
in fact. Jervis had been through the registers and has ascertained
that no interment under the name of John Bellingham has taken place
since the disappearance; which was just what we expected. He has also
discovered that some other person has been making similar inquiries;
which, again, is what we expected.'

'And your own investigations?'

'Have given negative results for the most part. I found Doctor
Norbury, at the British Museum, very friendly and helpful; so
friendly, in fact, that I am thinking whether I may not be able to
enlist his help in certain private researches of my own, with
reference to the change effected by time in the physical properties of
certain substances.'

'Oh; you haven't told me about that,' said Jervis.

'No; I haven't really commenced to plan my experiments yet, and they
will probably lead to nothing when I do. It occurred to me that,
possibly, in the course of time, certain molecular changes might take
place in substances such as wood, bone, pottery, stucco, and other
common materials, and that these changes might alter their power of
conducting or transmitting molecular vibrations. Now, if this should
turn out to be the case, it would be a fact of considerable
importance, medico-legally and otherwise; for it would be possible to
determine approximately the age of any object of known composition by
testing its reactions to electricity, heat, light and other molecular
vibrations. I thought of seeking Doctor Norbury's assistance because
he can furnish me with materials for experiment of such great age that
the reactions, if any, should be extremely easy to demonstrate. But to
return to our case. I learned from him that John Bellingham had
certain friends in Paris--collectors and museum officials--whom he
was in the habit of visiting for the purpose of study and exchange of
specimens. I have made inquiries of all these, and none of them had
seen him during his last visit. In fact, I have not yet discovered
anyone who had seen Bellingham in Paris on this occasion. So his visit
there remains a mystery for the present.'

'It doesn't seem to be of much importance, since he undoubtedly came
back,' I remarked; but to this Thorndyke demurred.

'It is impossible to estimate the importance of the unknown,' said he.

'Well, how does the matter stand,' asked Jervis, 'on the evidence that
we have? John Bellingham disappeared on a certain date. Is there
anything to show what was the manner of his disappearance?'

'The facts in our possession,' said Thorndyke, 'which are mainly those
set forth in the newspaper report, suggest several alternative
possibilities; and in view of the coming inquiry--for they will, no
doubt, have to be gone into in Court, to some extent--it may be worth
while to consider them. There are five conceivable hypotheses'--here
Thorndyke checked them on his fingers as he proceeded--'First, he may
still be alive. Second, he may have died and been buried without
identification. Third, he may have been murdered by some unknown
person. Fourth, he may have been murdered by Hurst and his body
concealed. Fifth, he may have been murdered by his brother. Let us
examine these possibilities seriatim.

'First, he may still be alive. If he is, he must either have
disappeared voluntarily, have lost his memory suddenly and not been
identified, or have been imprisoned--on a false charge or otherwise.
Let us take the first case--that of voluntary disappearance.
Obviously, its improbability is extreme.'

'Jellicoe doesn't think so,' said I. 'He thinks it quite on the cards
that John Bellingham is alive. He says that it is not a very unusual
thing for a man to disappear for a time.'

'Then why is he applying for a presumption of death?'

'Just what I asked him. He says that it is the correct thing to do;
that the entire responsibility rests on the Court.'

'That is all nonsense,' said Thorndyke. 'Jellicoe is the trustee for
his absent client, and, if he thinks that client is alive, it is his
duty to keep the estate intact; and he knows that perfectly well. We
may take it that Jellicoe is of the same opinion as I am: that John
Bellingham is dead.'

'Still,' I urged, 'men do disappear from time to time, and turn up
again after years of absence.'

'Yes, but for a definite reason. Either they are irresponsible
vagabonds who take this way of shuffling of their responsibilities, or
they are men who have been caught in a net of distasteful
circumstances. For instance, a civil servant or a solicitor or a
tradesman finds himself bound for life to a locality and an occupation
of intolerable monotony. Perhaps he has an ill-tempered wife, who
after the amiable fashion of a certain type of woman, thinking that
her husband is pinned down without a chance of escape, gives a free
rein to her temper. The man puts up with it for years, but at last it
becomes unbearable. Then he suddenly disappears; and small blame to
him. But this was not Bellingham's case. He was a wealthy bachelor
with an engrossing interest in life, free to go whither he would and
to do whatsoever he wished. Why should he disappear? The thing is
incredible.

'As to his having lost his memory and remained unidentified, that,
also, is incredible in the case of a man who had visiting-cards and
letters in his pocket, whose linen was marked, and who was being
inquired for everywhere by the police. As to his being in prison, we
may dismiss that possibility, inasmuch as a prisoner, both before and
after conviction, would have full opportunity of communicating with
his friends.

'The second possibility, that he may have died suddenly and been
buried without identification, is highly improbable; but, as it is
conceivable that the body might have been robbed and the means of
identification thus lost, it remains as a possibility that has to be
considered, remote as it is.

'The third hypothesis, that he may have been murdered by some unknown
person, is, under the circumstances, not wildly improbable; but, as
the police were on the lookout and a detailed description of the
missing man's person was published in the papers, it would involve the
complete concealment of the body. But this would exclude the most
probable form of crime--the casual robbery with violence. It is
therefore possible, but highly improbable.

'The fourth hypothesis is that Bellingham was murdered by Hurst. Now
the one fact which militates against this view is that Hurst
apparently had no motive for committing the murder. We are assured by
Jellicoe that no one but himself knew the contents of the will, and if
this is so--but mind, we have no evidence that it is so--Hurst would
have no reason to suppose that he had anything material to gain by his
cousin's death. Otherwise the hypothesis presents no inherent
improbabilities. The man was last seen alive at Hurst's house. He was
seen to enter it and he was never seen to leave it--we are still
taking the facts as stated in the newspapers, remember--and it now
appears that he stands to benefit enormously by that man's death.'

'But,' I objected, 'you are forgetting that, directly the man was
missed Hurst and the servants together searched the entire house.'

'Yes. What did they search for?'

'Why, for Mr. Bellingham, of course.'

'Exactly; for Mr. Bellingham. That is, for a living man. Now how do
you search a house for a living man? You look in all the rooms. When
you look in a room if he is there, you see him; if you do not see him,
you assume that he is not there. You don't look under the sofa or
behind the piano, you don't pull out large drawers or open cupboards.
You just look into the rooms. That is what these people seem to have
done. And they did not see Mr. Bellingham. Mr. Bellingham's corpse
might have been stowed away out of sight in any one of the rooms that
they looked into.'

'That is a grim thought,' said Jervis; 'but it is perfectly true.
There is no evidence that the man was not lying dead in the house at
the very time of the search.'

'But even so,' said I, 'there was the body to be disposed of somehow.
Now how could he possibly have got rid of the body without being
observed?'

'Ah!' said Thorndyke, 'now we are touching on a point of crucial
importance. If anyone should ever write a treatise on the art of
murder--not an exhibition of literary fireworks like De Quincey's, but
a genuine working treatise--he might leave all other technical details
to take care of themselves if he could describe to me some really
practicable plan for disposing of the body. That is, and always has
been, the great stumbling-block to the murderer: to get rid of the
body. The human body,' he continued, thoughtfully regarding his pipe,
just as, in the days of my pupilage, he was wont to regard the
black-board chalk, 'is a very remarkable object. It presents a
combination of properties that makes it singularly difficult to conceal
permanently. It is bulky and of an awkward shape, it is heavy, it is
completely incombustible, it is chemically unstable, and its
decomposition yields great volumes of highly odorous gases, and it
nevertheless contains identifiable structures of the highest degree of
permanence. It is extremely difficult to preserve unchanged, and it is
still more difficult completely to destroy. The essential permanence of
the human body is well known in the classical case of Eugene Aram; but a
still more striking instance is that of Sekenen-Ra the Third, one of the
last kings of the seventeenth Egyptian dynasty. Here, after a lapse of
four thousand years, it has been possible to determine not only the
cause of death and the manner of its occurrence, but the way in which
the king fell, the nature of the weapon with which the fatal wound was
inflicted, and even the position of the assailant. And the permanence of
the body under other conditions is admirably shown in the case of Doctor
Parkman, of Boston, USA, in which identification was actually effected
by means of remains collected from the ashes of a furnace.'

'Then we may take it,' said Jervis, 'that the world has not yet seen the
last of John Bellingham.'

'I think we may regard that as almost a certainty,' replied Thorndyke.
'The only question--and a very important one--is to when the
reappearance may take place. It may be to-morrow or it may be centuries
hence, when all the issues involved have been! forgotten.'

'Assuming,' said I, 'for the sake of argument, that Hurst did murder him
and that the body was concealed in the study at the time the search was
made. How could it have been disposed of? If you had been in Hurst's
place, how would you have gone to work?'

Thorndyke smiled at the bluntness of my question.

'You are asking me for an incriminating statement,' said he, 'delivered
in the presence of a witness too. But, as a matter of fact, there is no
use in speculating a priori', we should have to reconstruct a purely
imaginary situation, the circumstances of which are unknown to us, and
we should almost certainly reconstruct it wrong. What we may fairly
assume is that no reasonable person, no matter how immoral, would find
himself in the position that you suggest. Murder is usually a crime of
impulse, and the murderer a person of feeble self-control. Such persons
are most unlikely to make elaborate and ingenious arrangements for the
disposal of the bodies of their victims. Even the cold-blooded
perpetrators of the most carefully planned murders appear as I have
said, to break down at this point. The almost insuperable difficulty of
getting rid of the human body is not appreciated until the murderer
suddenly finds himself face to face with it.

'In the case you are suggesting, the choice would seem to lie between
burial on the premises or dismemberment and dispersal of the fragments;
and either method would be pretty certain to lead to discovery.'

'As illustrated by the remains of which you were speaking to Mr.
Bellingham,' Jervis remarked.

'Exactly,' Thorndyke answered, 'though we could hardly imagine a
reasonably intelligent criminal adopting a watercress-bed as a hiding
place.'

'No. That was certainly an error of judgment. By the way, I thought it
best to say nothing while you were talking to Bellingham, but I noticed
that, in discussing the possibility of those being the bones of his
brother, you made no comment on the absence of the third ringer of the
left hand. I am sure you didn't overlook it, but isn't it a point of
some importance?'

'As to identification? Under the present circumstances, I think not! If
there were a man missing who had lost that finger it would, of course,
be an important fact. But I have not heard of any such man. Or, again,
if there were any evidence that the finger had been removed before
death, it would be highly important. But there is no such evidence. It
may have been cut off after death, and that is where the real
significance of its absence lies.'

'I don't see quite what you mean,' said Jervis.

'I mean that, if there is no report of any missing man who had lost that
particular finger, the probability is that the finger was removed after
death. And then arises the interesting question of motive. Why should it
have been removed? It could hardly have become detached accidentally.
What do you suggest?'

'Well,' said Jervis, 'it might have been a peculiar finger; a finger,
for instance, with some characteristic deformity such as an ankylosed
joint, which would be easy to identify.'

'Yes; but that explanation introduces the same difficulty. No person
with a deformed or ankylosed finger has been reported as missing.'

Jervis puckered up his brows, and looked at me.

'I'm hanged if I see any other explanation,' he said. 'Do you,
Berkeley?'

I shook my head.

'Don't forget which finger it is that is missing,' said Thorndyke. 'The
third finger of the left hand.'

'Oh, I see!' said Jervis. 'The ring-finger. You mean that it may have
been removed for the sake of a ring that wouldn't come off.'

'Yes. It would not be the first instance of the kind. Fingers have been
severed from dead hands--and even from living ones--for the sake of
rings that were too tight to be drawn off. And the fact that it is the
left hand supports the suggestion; for a ring that was inconveniently
tight would be worn by preference on the left hand, as that is usually
slightly smaller than the right. What is the matter, Berkeley?'

A sudden light had burst upon me, and I suppose my countenance betrayed
the fact.

'I am a confounded fool!' I exclaimed.

'Oh, don't say that,' said Jervis. 'Give your friends a chance.'

'I ought to have seen this long ago and told you about it. John
Bellingham did wear a ring, and it was so tight that, when once he had
got it on, he could never get it off again.'

'Do you happen to know on which hand he wore it?' Thorndyke asked.

'Yes. It was on the left hand; because Miss Bellingham, who told me
about it, said that he would never have been able to get the ring on at
all but for the fact this his left hand was slightly smaller than his
right.'

'There it is, then,' said Thorndyke. 'With this new fact in our
possession, the absence of the finger furnishes the starting-point of
some very curious speculations.'

'As, for instance,' said Jervis.

'Ah, under the circumstances, I must leave you to pursue those
speculations independently. I am now acting for Mr. Bellingham.'

Jervis grinned and was silent for a while, refilling his pipe
thoughtfully; but when he had got it alight he resumed.

'To return to the question of the disappearance; you don't consider it
highly improbable that Bellingham might have been murdered by Hurst?'

'Oh, don't imagine I am making an accusation. I am considering the
various probabilities merely in the abstract. The same reasoning applies
to the Bellinghams. As to whether any of them did commit the murder,
that is a question of personal character. I certainly do not suspect the
Bellinghams after having seen them, and with regard to Hurst, I know
nothing, or at least very little, to his disadvantage.'

'Well,' Thorndyke said, with some hesitation, 'it seems a thought unkind
to rake up the little details of a man's past, and yet it has to be
done. I have, of course, made the usual routine inquiries concerning the
parties to this affair, and this is what they have brought to light:

'Hurst, as you know, is a stockbroker--a man of good position and
reputation; but, about ten years ago, he seems to have committed an
indiscretion, to put it mildly, which nearly got him into rather
serious difficulties. He appears to have speculated rather heavily and
considerably beyond his means, for when a sudden spasm of the markets
upset his calculations, it turned out that he had been employing his
clients' capital and securities. For a time it looked as if there was
going to be serious trouble; then, quite unexpectedly, he managed to
raise the necessary amount in some way and settle all claims. Whence
he got the money has never been discovered to this day, which is a
curious circumstance, seeing that the deficiency was rather over five
thousand pounds; but the important fact is that he did get it and that
he paid up all that he owed. So that he was only a potential
defaulter, so to speak; and discreditable as the affair undoubtedly
was, it does not seem to have any direct bearing on this present
case.'

'No,' Jervis agreed, 'though it makes one consider his position with
more attention than one would otherwise.'

'Undoubtedly,' said Thorndyke. 'A reckless gambler is a man whose
conduct cannot be relied on. He is subject to vicissitudes of fortune
which may force him into other kinds of wrong doing. Many an
embezzlement has been preceded by an unlucky plunge on the turf.'

'Assuming the responsibility for this disappearance to lie between
Hurst and--and the Bellinghams,' said I, with an uncomfortable gulp as
I mentioned the names of my friends, 'to which side does the balance
of probability incline?'

'To the side of Hurst, I should say, without doubt,' replied
Thorndyke. 'The case stands thus--on the facts presented to us: Hurst
appears to have had no motive for killing the deceased (as we will
call him); but the man was seen to enter the house, was never seen to
leave it, and was never again seen alive. Bellingham, on the other
hand, had a motive, as he had believed himself to be the principal
beneficiary under the will. But the deceased was not seen at his
house, and there is no evidence that he went to the house or to the
neighbourhood, excepting the scarab that was found there. But the
evidence of the scarab is vitiated by the fact that Hurst was present
when it was picked up, and that it was found on a spot over which
Hurst had passed only a few minutes previously. Until Hurst is
cleared, it seems to me that the presence of the scarab proves nothing
against the Bellinghams.'

'Then your opinions on the case,' said I, 'are based entirely on the
facts that have been made public.'

'Yes, mainly. I do not necessarily accept those facts just as they are
presented, and I may have certain views of my own on the case. But if
I have, I do not feel in a position to discuss them. For the present,
discussion has to be limited to the facts and inferences offered by
the parties concerned.'

'There!' exclaimed Jervis, rising to knock his pipe out, 'that is
where Thorndyke has you. He lets you think you're in the thick of the
"know" until one fine morning you wake up and discover that you have
only been a gaping outsider; and then you are mightily astonished--and
so are the other side, too, for that matter. But we must really be off
now, mustn't we, reverend senior?'

'I suppose we must,' replied Thorndyke; and, as he drew on his gloves,
he asked: 'Have you heard from Barnard lately?'

'Oh, yes,' I answered. 'I wrote to him at Smyrna to say that the
practice was flourishing and that I was quite happy and contented, and
that he might stay away as long as he liked. He writes by return that
he will prolong his holiday if an opportunity offers, but will let me
know later.'

'Gad,' said Jervis, 'it was a stroke of luck for Barnard that
Bellingham happened to have such a magnificent daughter--there! don't
mind me, old man. You go in and win--she's worth it, isn't she,
Thorndyke?'

'Miss Bellingham's a very charming young lady,' replied Thorndyke. 'I
am most favourably impressed by both the father and the daughter, and
I only trust that we may be able to be of some service to them.' With
this sedate little speech Thorndyke shook my hand, and I watched my
two friends go on their way until their fading shapes were swallowed
up in the darkness of Fetter Lane.



CHAPTER XII. A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY



IT was two or three mornings after my little supper party that, as I
stood in the consulting-room brushing my hat preparatory to starting
on my morning round, Adolphus appeared at the door to announce two
gentlemen waiting in the surgery. I told him to bring them in, and a
moment later Thorndyke entered, accompanied by Jervis. I noted that
they looked uncommonly large in that little apartment, especially
Thorndyke, but I had no time to consider this phenomenon, for the
latter, when he had shaken my hand, proceeded at once to explain the
object of their visit.

'We have come to ask a favour, Berkeley,' he said; 'to ask you to do
us a very great service in the interests of your friends the
Bellinghams.'

'You know I shall be delighted,' I said warmly. 'What is it?'

'I will explain. You know--or perhaps you don't--that the police have
collected all the bones that have been discovered and deposited them
in the mortuary at Woodford, where they are to be viewed by the
coroner's jury. Now, it has become imperative that I should have more
definite and reliable information than I can get from the newspapers.
The natural thing for me would be to go down and examine them myself,
but there are circumstances that make it very desirable that my
connection with the case should not leak out. Consequently, I can't go
myself, and, for the same reason, I can't send Jervis. On the other
hand, as it is now stated pretty openly that the police consider the
bones to be almost certainly those of John Bellingham, it would seem
perfectly natural that you, as Godfrey Bellingham's doctor, should go
down to view them on his behalf.'

'I should like to,' I said. 'I would give anything to go; but how is
it to be managed? It would mean a whole day off and leaving the
practice to look after itself.'

'I think it could be managed,' said Thorndyke; 'and the matter is
really important for two reasons. One is that the inquest opens
tomorrow, and someone certainly ought to be there to watch the
proceedings on Godfrey's behalf; and the other is that our client has
received notice from Hurst's solicitors that the application will be
heard in the Probate Court in a few days.'

'Isn't that rather sudden?' I asked.

'It certainly suggests that there has been a good deal more activity
than we were given to understand. But you see the importance of the
affair. The inquest will be a sort of dress rehearsal for the Probate
Court, and it is quite essential that we should have a chance of
estimating the management.'

'Yes, I see that. But how are we to manage about the practice?'

'We shall find you a substitute.'

'Through a medical agent?'

'Yes,' said Jervis. 'Percival will find us a man; in fact, he has done
it. I saw him this morning; he has a man who is waiting up in town to
negotiate for the purchase of a practice and who would do the job for
a couple of guineas. Quite a reliable man. Only say the word, and I
will run off to Adam Street and engage him definitely.'

'Very well. You engage the locum tenens, and I will be prepared to
start for Woodford as soon as he turns up.'

'Excellent!' said Thorndyke. 'That is a great weight off my mind. And
if you could manage to drop in this evening and smoke a pipe with us
we could talk over the plan of campaign and let you know what items of
information we are particularly in want of.'

I promised to turn up at King's Bench Walk as soon after half-past
eight as possible, and my two friends then took their departure,
leaving me to set out in high spirits on my scanty round of visits.

It is surprising what different aspects things present from different
points of view; how relative are our estimates of the conditions and
circumstances of life. To the urban workman--the journeyman baker or
tailor, for instance, labouring year in year out in a single
building--a holiday ramble on Hampstead Heath is a veritable voyage of
discovery; whereas to the sailor the shifting panorama of the whole
wide world is but the commonplace of the day's work.

So I reflected as I took my place in the train at Liverpool Street on
the following day. There had been a time when a trip by rail to the
borders of Epping Forest would have been far from a thrilling
experience; now, after vegetating in the little world of Fetter Lane,
it was quite an adventure.

The enforced inactivity of a railway journey is favourable to thought,
and I had much to think about. The last few weeks had witnessed
momentous changes in my outlook. New interests had arisen, new
friendships had grown up, and above all, there had stolen into my life
that supreme influence that, for good or for evil, according to my
fortune, was to colour and pervade it even to its close. Those few
days of companionable labour in the reading-room, with the homely
hospitalities of the milk-shop and the pleasant walks homeward through
the friendly London streets, had called into existence a new world--a
world in which the gracious personality of Ruth Bellingham was the one
dominating reality. And thus, as I leaned back in the corner of the
railway carriage with an unlighted pipe in my hand, the events of the
immediate past, together with those more problematical ones of the
impending future, occupied me rather to the exclusion of the business
of the moment, which was to review the remains collected in the
Woodford mortuary, until, as the train approached Stratford, the
odours of the soap and bone-manure factories poured in at the open
window and (by a natural association of ideas) brought me back to the
object of my quest.

As to the exact purpose of this expedition, I was not very clear; but
I knew that I was acting as Thorndyke's proxy and thrilled with pride
at the thought. But what particular light my investigations were to
throw upon the intricate Bellingham case I had no very definite idea.
With a view to fixing the procedure in my mind, I took Thorndyke's
written instructions from my pocket and read them over carefully. They
were very full and explicit, making ample allowance for my lack of
experience in medico-legal matters:

'1. Do not appear to make minute investigations or in any way excite
remark.

'2. Ascertain if all the bones belonging to each region are present,
and if not, which are missing.

'3. Measure the extreme length of the principal bones and compare
those of opposite sides.

'4. Examine the bones with reference to age, sex, and muscular
development of the deceased.

'5. Note the presence or absence of signs of constitutional disease,
local disease of bone or adjacent structures, old or recent injuries,
and any other departures from the normal or usual.

'6. Observe the presence or absence of adipocere and its position, if
present.

'7. Note any remains of tendons, ligaments, or other soft structures.

'8. Examine the Sidcup hand with reference to the question as to
whether the finger was separated before or after death.

'9. Estimate the probable period of submersion and note any changes
(as e.g., mineral or organic staining) due to the character of the
water or mud.

'10. Ascertain the circumstances (immediate and remote) that led to
the discovery of the bones and the names of the persons concerned in
those circumstances.

'11. Commit all information to writing as soon as possible, and make
plans and diagrams on the spot, if circumstances permit.

'12. Preserve an impassive exterior: listen attentively but without
eagerness; ask as few questions as possible; pursue any inquiry that
your observations on the spot may suggest.'

These were my instructions, and, considering that I was going merely
to inspect a few dry bones, they appeared rather formidable; in fact,
the more I read them over the greater became my misgivings as to my
qualifications for the task.

As I approached the mortuary it became evident that some, at least, of
Thorndyke's admonitions were by no means unnecessary. The place was in
charge of a police sergeant, who watched my approach suspiciously; and
some half-dozen men, obviously newspaper reporters, hovered about the
entrance like a pack of jackals. I presented the coroner's order which
Mr. Marchmont had obtained, and which the sergeant read with his back
against the wall, to prevent the newspaper men from looking over his
shoulder.

My credentials being found satisfactory, the door was unlocked and I
entered, accompanied by three enterprising reporters, whom, however,
the sergeant summarily ejected and locked out, returning to usher me
into the presence and to observe my proceedings with intelligent but
highly embarrassing interest.

The bones were laid out on a large table and covered with a sheet,
which the sergeant slowly turned back, watching my face intently as he
did so to note the impression that the spectacle made upon me. I
imagine that he must have been somewhat disappointed by my impassive
demeanour, for the remains suggested to me nothing more than a rather
shabby set of 'student's osteology.' The whole collection had been set
out by the police surgeon (as the sergeant informed me) in their
proper anatomical order; notwithstanding which I counted them over
carefully to make sure that none were missing, checking them by the
list with which Thorndyke had furnished me.

'I see you have found the left thigh-bone,' I remarked, observing that
this did not appear in the list.

'Yes,' said the sergeant; 'that turned up yesterday evening in a big
pond called Baldwin's Pond in the Sandpit plain, near Little Monk
Wood.'

'Is that near here?' I asked.

'In the forest up Loughton way,' was the reply.

I made a note of the fact (on which the sergeant looked as if he was
sorry he had mentioned it), and then turned my attention to a general
consideration of the bones before examining them in detail. Their
appearance would have been improved and examination facilitated by a
thorough scrubbing, for they were just as they had been taken from
their respective resting-places, and it was difficult to decide
whether their reddish-yellow colour was an actual stain or due to a
deposit on the surface. In any case, as it affected them all alike, I
thought it an interesting feature and made a note of it. They bore
numerous traces of their sojourn in the various ponds from which they
had been recovered, but these gave me little help in determining the
length of time during which they had been submerged. They were, of
course, encrusted with mud, and little wisps of pond-weed stuck to
them in places; but these facts furnished only the vaguest measure of
time.

Some of the traces were, indeed, more informing. To several of the
bones, for instance, there adhered the dried egg-clusters of the common
pond-snail, and in one of the hollows of the right shoulder-blade (the
'infra-spinous fossa') was a group of the mud-built tubes of the red
river-worm. These remains gave proof of a considerable period of
submersion, and since they could not have been deposited on the bones
until all the flesh had disappeared they furnished evidence that some
time--a month or two, at any rate--had elapsed since this had happened.
Incidentally, too, their distribution showed the position in which the
bones had lain, and though this appeared to be of no importance in the
existing circumstances, I made careful notes of the situation of each
adherent body, illustrating their position by rough sketches.

The sergeant watched my proceedings with an indulgent smile.

'You're making a regular inventory, sir,' he remarked, 'as if you were
going to put 'em up for auction. I shouldn't think those snails' eggs
would be much help in identification. And all that has been done
already,' he added as I produced my measuring-tape.

'No doubt,' I replied; 'but my business is to make independent
observations, to check the others, if necessary.' And I proceeded to
measure each of the principal bones separately and to compare those of
the opposite sides. The agreement in dimensions and general
characteristics of the pairs of bones left little doubt that all were
parts of one skeleton, a conclusion that was confirmed by the eburnated
patch on the head of the right thigh-bone and the corresponding patch in
the socket of the right hip-bone. When I had finished my measurements I
went over the entire series of bones in detail, examining each with the
closest attention for any of those signs which Thorndyke had indicated,
and eliciting nothing but a monotonously reiterated negative. They were
distressingly and disappointingly normal.

'Well, sir, what do you make of 'em?' the sergeant asked cheerfully as I
shut up my notebook and straightened my back. 'Whose bones are they? Are
they Mr. Bellingham's, think ye?'

'I should be very sorry to say whose bones they are,' I replied. 'One
bone is very much like another, you know.'

'I suppose it is,' he agreed; 'but I thought that, with all that
measuring and all those notes, you might have arrived at something
definite.' Evidently he was disappointed in me; and I was somewhat
disappointed in myself when I contrasted Thorndyke's elaborate
instructions with the meagre result of my investigations. For what did
my discoveries amount to? And how much was the inquiry advanced by the
few entries in my notebook?

The bones were apparently those of a man of fair though not remarkable
muscular development; over thirty years of age, but how much older I was
unable to say. His height I judged roughly to be five feet eight inches,
but my measurements would furnish data for a more exact estimate by
Thorndyke. Beyond this the bones were quite uncharacteristic. There were
no signs of diseases either local or general, no indications of injuries
either old or recent, no departures of any kind from the normal or
usual; and the dismemberment had been effected with such care that there
was not a single scratch on any of the separated surfaces. Of adipocere
(the peculiar waxy or soapy substance that is commonly found in bodies
that have slowly decayed in damp situations) there was not a trace; and
the only remnant of the soft structures was a faint indication, like a
spot of dried glue, of the tendon on the tip of the right elbow.

The sergeant was in the act of replacing the sheet, with the air of a
showman who has just given an exhibition, when there came a sharp
rapping on the mortuary door. The officer finished spreading the sheet
with official precision, and having ushered me out into the lobby,
turned the key and admitted three persons, holding the door open after
they had entered for me to go out. But the appearance of the new-comers
inclined me to linger. One of them was a local constable, evidently in
official charge; a second was a labouring man, very wet and muddy, who
carried a small sack; while in the third I thought I scented a
professional brother.

The sergeant continued to hold the door open.

'Nothing more I can do for you, sir?' he asked genially.

'Is that the divisional surgeon?' I inquired.

'Yes. I am the divisional surgeon,' the new-comer answered. 'Did you
want anything of me?'

'This,' said the sergeant, 'is a medical gentleman who has got
permission from the coroner to inspect the remains. He is acting for the
family of the deceased--I mean, for the family of Mr. Bellingham,' he
added in answer to an inquiring glance from the surgeon.

'I see,' said the latter. 'Well, they have found the rest of the trunk,
including, I understand, the ribs that were missing from the other part.
Isn't that so, Davis?'

'Yes, sir,' replied the constable. 'Inspector Badger says all the ribs
is here, and all the bones of the neck as well.'

'The inspector seems to be an anatomist,' I remarked.

The sergeant grinned. 'He is a very knowing gentleman, is Mr. Badger. He
came down here this morning quite early and spent a long time looking
over the bones and checking them by some notes in his pocket-book. I
fancy he's got something on, but he was precious close about it.'

Here the sergeant shut up rather suddenly--perhaps contrasting his own
conduct with that of his superior.

'Let us have these new bones out on the table,' said the police surgeon.
'Take the sheet off, and don't shoot them out as if they were coals.
Hand them out carefully.'

The labourer fished out the wet and muddy bones one by one from the
sack, and as he laid them on the table the surgeon arranged them in
their proper relative positions.

'This has been a neatly executed job,' he remarked; 'none of your clumsy
hacking with a chopper or a saw. The bones have been cleanly separated
at the joints. The fellow who did this must have had some anatomical
knowledge, unless he was a butcher, which, by the way, is not
impossible. He has used his knife uncommonly skilfully, and you notice
that each arm was taken off with the scapula attached, just as a butcher
takes off a shoulder of mutton. Are there any more bones in that bag?'

'No, sir,' replied the labourer, wiping his hands with an air of
finality on the posterior aspect of his trousers; 'that's the lot.'

The surgeon looked thoughtfully at the bones as he gave a final touch to
their arrangement, and remarked:

'The inspector is right. All the bones of the neck are there. Very odd.
Don't you think so?'

'You mean--'

'I mean that this very eccentric murderer seems to have given himself
such an extraordinary amount of trouble for no reason that one can see.
There are these neck vertebrae, for instance. He must have carefully
separated the skull from the atlas instead of just cutting through the
neck. Then there is the way he divided the trunk; the twelfth ribs have
just come in with this lot, but the twelfth dorsal vertebra to which
they belong was attached to the lower half. Imagine the trouble he must
have taken to do that, and without cutting or hacking the bones about,
either. It is extraordinary. This is rather interesting, by the way.
Handle it carefully.'

He picked up the breast-bone daintily--for it was covered with wet
mud--and handed it to me with the remark:

'That is the most definite piece of evidence we have.'

'You mean,' I said, 'that the union of the two parts into a single mass
fixes this as the skeleton of an elderly man?'

'Yes, that is the obvious suggestion, which is confirmed by the deposit
of bone in the rib-cartilages. You can tell the inspector, Davis, that I
have checked this lot of bones and that they are all here.'

'Would you mind writing it down, sir?' said the constable. 'Inspector
Badger said I was to have everything in writing.'

The surgeon took out his pocket-book, and, while he was selecting a
suitable piece of paper, he asked: 'Did you form any opinion as to the
height of the deceased?'

'Yes, I thought he would be about five feet eight' (here I caught the
sergeant's eyes, fixed on me with a knowing leer).

'I made it five eight and a half,' said the police surgeon; 'but we
shall know better when we have seen the lower leg-bones. Where was this
lot found, Davis?'

'In the pond just off the road in Lord's Bushes, sir, and the inspector
has gone off now to--'

'Never mind where he's gone,' interrupted the sergeant. 'You just answer
questions and attend to your business.'

The sergeant's reproof conveyed a hint to me on which I was not slow
to act. Friendly as my professional colleague was, it was clear that
the police were disposed to treat me as an interloper who was to be
kept out of the 'know' as far as possible. Accordingly I thanked my
colleague and the sergeant for their courtesy, and bidding them adieu
until we should meet at the inquest, took my departure and walked away
quickly until I found an inconspicuous position from which I could
keep the door of the mortuary in view. A few moments later I saw
Constable Davis emerge and stride away up the road.

I watched his rapidly diminishing figure until he had gone as far as I
considered desirable, and then I set forth in his wake. The road led
straight away from the village, and in less than half a mile entered
the outskirts of the forest. Here I quickened my pace to close up
somewhat, and it was well that I did so, for suddenly he diverged from
the road into a green lane, where for a while I lost sight of him.
Still hurrying forward, I again caught sight of him just as he turned
off into a narrow path that entered a beech wood with a thickish
undergrowth of holly, along which I followed him for several minutes,
gradually decreasing the distance between us, until suddenly there
fell on my ear a rhythmical sound like the clank of a pump. Soon after
I caught the sound of men's voices, and then the constable struck off
the path into the wood.

I now advanced more cautiously, endeavouring to locate the search
party by the sound of the pump, and when I had done this I made a
little detour so that I might approach from the opposite direction to
that from which the constable had appeared.

Still guided by the noise of the pump, I at length came out into a
small opening among the trees and halted to survey the scene. The
centre of the opening was occupied by a small pond, not more than a
dozen yards across, by the side of which stood a builder's handcart.
The little two-wheeled vehicle had evidently been used to convey the
appliances which were deposited on the ground near it, and which
consisted of a large tub--now filled with water--a shovel, a rake, a
sieve, and a portable pump, the latter being fitted with a long
delivery hose. There were three men besides the constable, one of whom
was working the handle of the pump, while another was glancing at a
paper that the constable had just delivered to him. He looked up
sharply as I appeared, and viewed me with unconcealed disfavour.

'Hallo, sir!' said he. 'You can't come here.'

Now, seeing that I was actually here, this was clearly a mistake, and
I ventured to point out the fallacy.

'Well, I can't allow you to stay here. Our business is of a private
nature.'

'I know exactly what your business is, Inspector Badger.'

'Oh, do you?' said he, surveying me with a foxy smile. 'And I expect I
know what yours is, too. But we can't have any of you newspaper gentry
spying on us just at present, so you just be off.'

I thought it best to undeceive him at once, and accordingly, having
explained who I was, I showed him the coroner's permit, which he read
with manifest annoyance.

'This is all very well, sir,' said he as he handed me back the paper,
'but it doesn't authorise you to come spying on the proceedings of the
police. Any remains that we discover will be deposited in the
mortuary, where you can inspect them to your heart's content; but you
can't stay here and watch us.'

I had no defined object in keeping a watch on the inspector's
proceedings; but the sergeant's indiscreet hint had aroused my
curiosity, which was further excited by Mr. Badger's evident desire to
get rid of me. Moreover, while we had been talking, the pump had
stopped (the muddy floor of the pond being now pretty fully exposed),
and the inspector's assistant was handling the shovel impatiently.

'Now I put it to you, Inspector,' said I, persuasively, 'is it politic
of you to allow it to be said that you refused an authorised
representative of the family facilities for verifying any statements
that you may make hereafter?'

'What do you mean?' he asked.

'I mean that if you should happen to find some bone which could be
identified as part of the body of Mr. Bellingham, that fact would be
of more importance to his family than to anyone else. You know that
there is a very valuable estate and a rather difficult will.'

'I didn't know it, and I don't see the bearing of it now' (neither did
I for that matter); 'but if you make such a point of being present at
the search, I can't very well refuse. Only you mustn't get in our way,
that's all.'

On hearing this conclusion, his assistant, who looked like a
plain-clothes officer, took up his shovel and stepped into the mud that
formed the bottom of the pond, stooping as he went and peering among the
masses of weed that had been left stranded by the withdrawal of the
water. The inspector watched him anxiously, cautioning him from time to
time to 'look out where he was treading'; the labourer left the pump and
craned forward from the margin of the mud, and the constable and I
looked on from our respective points of vantage. For some time the
search was fruitless. Once the searcher stooped and picked up what
turned out to be a fragment of decayed wood; then the remains of a
long-deceased jay were discovered, examined, and rejected. Suddenly the
man bent down by the side of a small pool that had been left in one of
the deeper hollows, stared intently into the mud, and stood up.

'There's something here that looks like a bone, sir,' he sang out.

'Don't grub about then,' said the inspector. 'Drive your shovel right
into the mud where you saw it and bring it to the sieve.'

The man followed out these instructions, and as he came shore-wards with
a great pile of the slimy mud on his shovel we all converged on the
sieve, which the inspector took up and held over the tub, directing the
constable and labourer to 'lend a hand,' meaning thereby that they were
to crowd round the tub and exclude me as completely as possible. This,
in fact, they did very effectively with his assistance, for, when the
shovelful of mud had been deposited on the sieve, the four men leaned
over it and so nearly hid it from view that it was only by craning over,
first on one side and then on the other, that I was able to catch an
occasional glimpse of it and to observe it gradually melting away as the
sieve, immersed in the water, was shaken to and fro.

Presently the inspector raised the sieve from the water and stooped over
it more closely to examine its contents. Apparently the examination
yielded no very conclusive results, for it was accompanied by a series
of rather dubious grunts.

At length the officer stood up, and turning to me with a genial but foxy
smile, held out the sieve for my inspection.

'Like to see what we have found, Doctor?' said he.

I thanked him and stood over the sieve. It contained the sort of litter
of twigs, skeleton leaves, weed, pond-snails, dead shells, and
fresh-water mussels that one would expect to strain out from the mud of
an ancient pond; but in addition to these there were three small bones
which at first glance gave me quite a start until I saw what they were.

The inspector looked at me inquiringly. 'H'm?' said he.

'Yes,' I replied. 'Very interesting.'

'Those will be human bones, I fancy; h'm?'

'I should say so, undoubtedly,' I answered.

'Now,' said the inspector, 'could you say, off-hand, which finger those
bones belong to?'

I smothered a grin (for I had been expecting this question), and
answered:

'I can say off-hand that they don't belong to any finger. They are the
bones of the left great toe.'

The inspector's jaw dropped.

'The deuce they are!' he muttered. 'H'm. I thought they looked a bit
stout.'

'I expect,' said I, 'that if you go through the mud close to where this
came from you'll find the rest of the foot.'

The plain-clothes man proceeded at once to act on my suggestion, taking
the sieve with him to save time. And sure enough, after filling it twice
with the mud from the bottom of the pool, the entire skeleton of the
foot was brought to light.

'Now you're happy, I suppose,' said the inspector when I had checked the
bones and found them all present.

'I should be more happy,' I replied, 'if I knew what you were searching
for in this pond. You weren't looking for the foot, were you?'

'I was looking for anything that I might find,' he answered. 'I shall go
on searching until we have the whole body. I shall go through all the
streams and ponds around here, excepting Con-naught Water. That I shall
leave to the last, as it will be a case of dredging from a boat and
isn't so likely as the smaller ponds. Perhaps the head will be there;
it's deeper than any of the others.'

It now occurred to me that as I had learned all that I was likely to
learn, which was little enough, I might as well leave the inspector to
pursue his searches unembarrassed by my presence. Accordingly I thanked
him for his assistance and departed by the way I had come.

But as I retraced my steps along the shady path I speculated profoundly
on the officer's proceedings. My examinations of the mutilated hand had
yielded the conclusion that the finger had been removed after death or
shortly before, but more probably after. Some one else had evidently
arrived at the same conclusion, and had communicated his opinion to
Inspector Badger; for it was clear that that gentleman was in full cry
after the missing finger. But why was he searching for it here when the
hand had been found at Sidcup? And what did he expect to learn from it
when he found it? There is nothing particularly characteristic about a
finger, or, at least, the bones of one; and the object of the present
researches was to determine the identity of the person of whom these
bones were the remains. There was something mysterious about the affair,
something suggesting that Inspector Badger was in possession of private
information of some kind. But what information could he have? And whence
could he have obtained it? These were questions to which I could find no
answer, and I was still fruitlessly revolving them when I arrived at the
modest inn where the inquest was to be held, and I proposed to fortify
myself with a correspondingly modest lunch as a preparation for my
attendance at the inquiry.



CHAPTER XIII. THE CORONER'S QUEST



THE proceedings of that fine old institution, the coroner's court, are
apt to have their dignity impaired by the somewhat unjudicial
surroundings amidst which they are conducted. The present inquiry was to
be held in a long room attached to the inn, ordinarily devoted, as its
various appurtenances testified, to gatherings of a more convivial
character.

Hither I betook myself after a protracted lunch and a meditative pipe,
and being the first to arrive--the jury having already been sworn and
conducted to the mortuary to view the remains--whiled away the time by
considering the habits of the customary occupants of the room by the
light of the objects contained in it. A wooden target with one or two
darts sticking in it hung on the end wall and invited the Robin Hoods of
the village to try their skill; a system of incised marks on the oaken
table made sinister suggestions of shove-halfpenny; and a large open box
filled with white wigs, gaudily coloured robes and wooden spears, swords
and regalia, crudely coated with gilded paper, obviously appertained to
the puerile ceremonials of the Order of Druids.

I had exhausted the interest of these relics and had transferred my
attentions to the picture gallery when the other spectators and the
witnesses began to arrive. Hastily I seated myself in the only
comfortable chair besides the one placed at the head of the table,
presumably for the coroner; and I had hardly done so when the latter
entered accompanied by the jury. Immediately after them came the
sergeant, Inspector Badger, one or two plain-clothes men, and finally
the divisional surgeon.

The coroner took his seat at the head of the table and opened his book,
and the jury seated themselves on a couple of benches on one side of the
long table.

I looked with some interest at the twelve 'good men and true.' They were
a representative group of British tradesmen, quiet, attentive, and
rather solemn; but my attention was particularly attracted by a small
man with a very large head and a shock of upstanding hair whom I had
diagnosed, after a glance at his intelligent but truculent countenance
and the shiny knees of his trousers, as the village cobbler. He sat
between the broad-shouldered foreman, who looked like a blacksmith, and
a dogged, red-faced man whose general aspect of prosperous greasiness
suggested the calling of a butcher.

'The inquiry, gentlemen,' the coroner commenced, 'upon which we are now
entering concerns itself with two questions. The first is that of
identity: who was this person whose body we have just viewed? The second
is: How, when, and by what means did he come by his death? We will take
the identity first and begin with the circumstances under which the body
was discovered.'

Here the cobbler stood up and raised an excessively dirty hand.

'I rise, Mr. Chairman,' said he, 'to a point of order.' The other
jurymen looked at him curiously and some of them, I regret to say,
grinned. 'You have referred, sir,' he continued, 'to the body which we
have just viewed. I wish to point out that we have not viewed a body; we
have viewed a collection of bones.'

'We will refer to them as the remains, if you prefer it,' said the
coroner.

'I do prefer it,' was the reply, and the objector sat down.

'Very well,' rejoined the coroner, and he proceeded to call the
witnesses, of whom the first was a labourer who had discovered the bones
in the watercress-bed.

'Do you happen to know how long it was since the watercress-beds had
been cleaned out previously?' the coroner asked, when the witness had
told the story of the discovery.

'They was cleaned out by Mr. Tapper's orders just before he gave them
up. That will be a little better than two years ago. In May it were. I
helped to clean 'em. I worked on this very same place and there wasn't
no bones there then.'

The coroner glanced at the jury. 'Any questions, gentlemen,' he asked.

The cobbler directed an intimidating scowl at the witness and demanded:

'Were you searching for bones when you came on these remains?'

'Me!' exclaimed the witness. 'What should I be searching for bones for?'

'Don't prevaricate,' said the cobbler sternly; 'answer the question: Yes
or no.'

'No, of course I wasn't.'

The juryman shook his enormous head dubiously as though implying that he
would let it pass this time but it mustn't happen again; and the
examination of the witnesses continued, without eliciting anything that
was new to me or giving rise to any incident, until the sergeant had
described the finding of the right arm in the Cuckoo Pits.

'Was this an accidental discovery?' the coroner asked.

'No. We had instructions from Scotland Yard to search any likely ponds
in this neighbourhood.'

The coroner discreetly forbore to press this matter any further, but my
friend the cobbler was evidently on the qui-vive, and I anticipated a
brisk cross-examination for Mr. Badger when his turn came. The inspector
was apparently of the same opinion, for I saw him cast a glance of the
deepest malevolence at the too inquiring disciple of St Crispin. In
fact, his turn came next, and the cobbler's hair stood up with unholy
joy.

The finding of the lower half of the trunk in Staple's Pond at Loughton
was the inspector's own achievement, but he was not boastful about it.
The discovery, he remarked, followed naturally on the previous one in
the Cuckoo Pits.

'Had you any private information that led you to search this particular
neighbourhood?' the cobbler asked.

'We had no private information whatever,' replied Badger.

'Now I put it to you,' pursued the juryman, shaking a forensic, and very
dirty, forefinger at the inspector; 'here are certain remains found at
Sidcup; here are certain other remains found at St Mary Cray, and
certain others at Lee. All those places are in Kent. Now isn't it very
remarkable that you should come straight down to Epping Forest, which is
in Essex, and search for those bones and find 'em?'

'We were making a systematic search of all likely places,' replied
Badger.

'Exactly,' said the cobbler, with a ferocious grin, 'that's just my
point. I say, isn't it very funny that, after finding the remains in
Kent some twenty miles from here, with the River Thames between, you
should come here to look for the bones and go straight to Staple's Pond,
where they happen to be--and find 'em?'

'It would have been more funny,' Badger replied sourly, 'if we'd gone
straight to a place where they happened not to be--and found them.'

A gratified snigger arose from the other eleven good men and true, and
the cobbler grinned savagely; but before he could think of a suitable
rejoinder the coroner interposed.

'The question is not very material,' he said, 'and we mustn't embarrass
the police by unnecessary inquiries.'

'It's my belief,' said the cobbler, 'that he knew they were there all
the time.'

'The witness has stated that he had no private information,' said the
coroner; and he proceeded to take the rest of the inspector's evidence,
watched closely by the critical juror.

The account of the finding of the remains having been given in full, the
police surgeon was called and sworn; the jurymen straightened their
backs with an air of expectancy, and I turned over a page of my
notebook.

'You have examined the bones at present lying in the mortuary and
forming the subject of this inquiry?' the coroner asked.

'I have.'

'Will you kindly tell us what you have observed?'

'I find that the bones are human bones, and are, in my opinion, all
parts of the same person. They form a skeleton which is complete with
the exception of the skull, the third finger of the left hand, the
knee-caps, and the leg-bones--I mean the bones between the knees and the
ankles.'

'Is there anything to account for the absence of the missing finger?'

'No. There is no deformity and no sign of its having been amputated
during life. In my opinion it was removed after death.'

'Can you give us any description of the deceased?'

'I should say that these are the bones of an elderly man, probably over
sixty years of age, about five feet eight and a half inches in height,
of rather stout build, fairly muscular, and well preserved. There are no
signs of disease excepting some old-standing rheumatic gout of the right
hip-joint.'

'Can you form any opinion as to the cause of death?'

'No. There are no marks of violence or signs of injury. But it will be
impossible to form any opinion as to the cause of death until we have
seen the skull.'

'Did you note anything else of importance?'

'Yes. I was struck by the appearance of anatomical knowledge and skill
on the part of the person who dismembered the body. The knowledge of
anatomy is proved by the fact that the corpse has been divided into
definite anatomical regions. For instance, the bones of the neck are
complete and include the top joint of the backbone known as the atlas;
whereas a person without anatomical knowledge would probably take off
the head by cutting through the neck. Then the arms have been separated
with the scapula (or shoulder-blade) and clavicle (or collar-bone)
attached, just as an arm would be removed for dissection.

'The skill is shown by the neat way in which the dismemberment has been
carried out. The parts have not been rudely hacked asunder, but have
been separated at the joints so skilfully that I have not discovered a
single scratch or mark of the knife on any of the bones.'

'Can you suggest any class of person who would be likely to possess the
knowledge and skill to which you refer?'

'It would, of course, be possessed by a surgeon or medical student, and
possibly by a butcher.'

'You think that the person who dismembered this body may have been a
surgeon or a medical student?'

'Yes; or a butcher. Some one accustomed to the dismemberment of bodies
and skilful with the knife.'

Here the cobbler suddenly rose to his feet.

'I rise, Mr. Chairman,' said he, 'to protest against the statement that
has just been made.'

'What statement?' demanded the coroner.

'Against the aspersion,' continued the cobbler, with an oratorical
flourish, 'that has been cast upon a honourable calling.'

'I don't understand you,' said the coroner.

'Doctor Summers has insinuated that this murder was committed by a
butcher. Now a member of that honourable calling is sitting on this
jury--'

'You let me alone,' growled the butcher.

'I will not let you alone,' persisted the cobbler. 'I desire--'

'Oh, shut up, Pope!' This was from the foreman, who, at the same moment,
reached out an enormous hairy hand with which he grabbed the cobbler's
coat-tails and brought him into a sitting posture with a thump that
shook the room.

But Mr. Pope, though seated, was not silenced. 'I desire,' he said, 'to
have my protest put on record.'

'I can't do that,' said the coroner, 'and I can't allow you to interrupt
the witnesses.'

'I am acting,' said Mr. Pope, 'in the interests of my friend here and
the members of a honourable--'

But here the butcher turned on him savagely, and, in a hoarse
stage-whisper, exclaimed:

'Look here, Pope; you've got too much of what the cat licks--'

'Gentlemen! gentlemen!' the coroner protested sternly; 'I cannot
permit this unseemly conduct. You are forgetting the solemnity of the
occasion and your own responsible positions. I must insist on more
decent and decorous behaviour.'

There was profound silence, in the midst of which the butcher
concluded in the same hoarse whisper:

'--licks 'er paws with.'

The coroner cast a withering glance at him, and, turning to the
witness, resumed the examination.

'Can you tell us, Doctor, how long a time has elapsed since the death
of the deceased?'

'I should say not less than eighteen months, but probably more. How
much more it is impossible from inspection alone to say. The bones are
perfectly clean--that is, clean of all soft structures--and will
remain substantially in their present condition for many years.'

'The evidence of the man who found the remains in the watercress-bed
suggests that they could not have been there for more than two years.
Do the appearances in your opinion agree with that view?'

'Yes; perfectly.'

'There is one more point, Doctor; a very important one. Do you find
anything in any of the bones, or all of them together, which would
enable you to identify them as the bones of any particular
individual?'

'No,' replied Dr. Summers; 'I found no peculiarity that could furnish
the means of personal identification.'

'The description of a missing individual has been given to us,' said
the coroner; 'a man, fifty-nine years of age, five feet eight inches
in height, healthy, well preserved, rather broad in build, and having
an old Pott's fracture of the left ankle. Do the remains that you have
examined agree with that description?'

'Yes, so far as agreement is possible. There is no disagreement.'

'The remains might be those of that individual?'

'They might; but there is no positive evidence that they are. The
description would apply to a large proportion of elderly men, except
as to the fracture.'

'You found no signs of such a fracture?'

'No. Pott's fracture affects the bone called the fibula. That is one
of the bones that has not yet been found, so there is no evidence on
that point. The left foot was quite normal, but then it would be in
any case, unless the fracture had resulted in great deformity.'

'You estimated the height of the deceased as half an inch greater than
that of the missing person. Does that constitute a disagreement?'

'No; my estimate is only approximate. As the arms are complete and the
legs are not, I have based my calculations on the width across the two
arms. But measurement of the thigh-bones gives the same result. The
length of the thigh-bones is one foot seven inches and five-eighths.'

'So the deceased might not have been taller than five feet eight?'

'That is so; from five feet eight to five feet nine.'

'Thank you. I think that is all we want to ask you, Doctor; unless the
jury wish to put any questions.'

He glanced uneasily at that august body, and instantly the
irrepressible Pope rose to the occasion.

'About that finger that is missing,' said the cobbler. 'You say that
it was cut off after death?'

'That is my opinion.'

'Now can you tell us why it was cut off?'

'No, I cannot.'

'Oh, come now, Doctor Summers, you must have formed some opinion on
the subject.'

Here the coroner interposed. 'The Doctor is only concerned with the
evidence arising out of the actual examination of the remains. Any
personal opinions or conjectures that he may have formed are not
evidence, and he must not be asked about them.'

'But, sir,' objected Pope, 'we want to know why that finger was cut
off. It couldn't have been took off for no reason. May I ask, sir, if
the person who is missing had anything peculiar about that finger?'

'Nothing is stated to that effect in the written description,' replied
the coroner.

'Perhaps,' suggested Pope, 'Inspector Badger can tell us.'

'I think,' said the coroner, 'we had better not ask the police too
many questions. They will tell us anything that they wish to be made
public.'

'Oh, very well,' snapped the cobbler. 'If it's a matter of hushing it
up I've got no more to say; only I don't see how we are to arrive at a
verdict if we don't have the facts put before us.'

All the witnesses having now been examined, the coroner proceeded to
sum up and address the jury.

'You have heard the evidence, gentlemen, of the various witnesses, and
you will have perceived that it does not enable us to answer either of
the questions that form the subject of this inquiry. We now know that
the deceased was an elderly man, about sixty years of age, and about
five feet eight to nine in height; and that his death took place from
eighteen months to two years ago. That is all we know. From the
treatment to which the body has been subjected we may form conjectures
as to the circumstances of his death. But we have no actual knowledge.
We do not know who the deceased was or how he came by his death.
Consequently, it will be necessary to adjourn this inquiry until fresh
facts are available, and as soon as that is the case, you will receive
due notice that your attendance is required.'

The silence of the Court gave place to the confused noise of moving
chairs and a general outbreak of eager talk, amidst which I rose and
made my way out into the street. At the door I encountered Dr.
Summers, whose dog-cart was waiting close by.

'Are you going back to town now?' he asked.

'Yes,' I answered; 'as soon as I can catch a train.'

'If you jump into my cart I'll run you down in time for the five-one.
You'll miss it if you walk.'

I accepted his offer thankfully, and a minute later was spinning
briskly down the road to the station.

'Queer little devil, that man Pope,' Dr. Summers remarked. 'Quite a
character; a socialist, labourite, agitator, general crank; anything
for a row.'

'Yes,' I answered; 'that was what his appearance suggested. It must be
trying for the coroner to get a truculent rascal like that on a jury.'

Summers laughed. 'I don't know. He supplies the comic relief. And
then, you know, those fellows have their uses. Some of his questions
were pretty pertinent.'

'So Badger seemed to think.'

'Yes, by Jove,' chuckled Summers. 'Badger didn't like him a bit; and I
suspect the worthy inspector was sailing pretty close to the wind in
his answers.'

'You think he really has some private information?'

'Depends upon what you mean by "information." The police are not a
speculative body. They wouldn't be taking all this trouble unless they
had a pretty straight tip from somebody. How are Mr. and Miss
Bellingham? I used to know them when they lived here.'

I was considering a discreet answer to this question when we swept
into the station yard. At the same moment the train drew up at the
platform, and, with a hurried hand-shake and hastily spoken thanks, I
sprang from the dog-cart and darted into the station.

During the rather slow journey homewards I read over my notes and
endeavoured to extract from the facts they set forth some significance
other than that which lay on the surface, but without much success.
Then I fell to speculating on what Thorndyke would think of the
evidence at the inquest and whether he would be satisfied with the
information that I had collected. These speculations lasted me, with
occasional digressions, until I arrived at the Temple and ran up the
stairs rather eagerly to my friends' chambers.

But here a disappointment awaited me. The nest was empty with the
exception of Polton, who appeared at the laboratory door in his white
apron, with a pair of flat-nosed pliers in his hand.

'The Doctor had to go down to Bristol to consult over an urgent case,'
he explained, 'and Doctor Jervis has gone with him. They'll be away a
day or two, I expect, but the Doctor left this note for you.'

He took a letter from the shelf, where it had been stood conspicuously
on edge, and handed it to me. It was a short note from Thorndyke
apologising for his sudden departure and asking me to give Polton my
notes with any comments that I had to make.

'You will be interested to learn,' he added, 'that the application
will be heard in the Probate Court the day after to-morrow. I shall
not be present, of course, nor will Jervis, so I should like you to
attend and keep your eyes open for anything that may happen during the
hearing and that may not appear in the notes that Marchmont's clerk
will be instructed to take. I have retained Dr. Payne to stand by and
help you with the practice, so that you can attend the Court with a
clear conscience.'

This was highly flattering and quite atoned for the small
disappointment; with deep gratification at the trust that Thorndyke
had reposed in me, I pocketed the letter, handed my notes to Polton,
wished him 'Good-evening,' and betook myself to Fetter Lane.



CHAPTER XIV. WHICH CARRIES THE READER INTO THE PROBATE COURT



THE Probate Court wore an air of studious repose when I entered with
Miss Bellingham and her father. Apparently the great and inquisitive
public had not become aware of the proceedings that were about to take
place, or had not realised their connection with the sensational
'Mutilation Case'; but barristers and Pressmen, better informed, had
gathered in some strength, and the hum of their conversation filled
the air like the droning of the voluntary that ushers in a cathedral
service.

As we entered, a pleasant-faced, elderly gentleman rose and came
forward to meet us, shaking Mr. Bellingham's hand cordially and
saluting Miss Bellingham with a courtly bow.

'This is Mr. Marchmont, Doctor,' said the former, introducing me; and
the solicitor, having thanked me for the trouble I had taken in
attending at the inquest, led us to a bench, at the farther end of
which was seated a gentleman whom I recognised as Mr. Hurst.

Mr. Bellingham recognised him at the same moment and glared at him
wrathfully.

'I see that scoundrel is here!' he exclaimed in a distinctly audible
voice, 'pretending that he doesn't see me, because he is ashamed to
look me in the face, but--'

'Hush! hush! my dear sir,' exclaimed the horrified solicitor; 'we
mustn't talk like that, especially in this place. Let me beg you--let
me entreat you to control your feelings, to make no indiscreet
remarks; in fact, to make no remarks at all,' he added, with the
evident conviction that any remarks that Mr. Bellingham might make
would be certain to be indiscreet.

'Forgive me, Marchmont,' Mr. Bellingham replied contritely. 'I will
control myself: I will really be quite discreet. I won't even look at
him again--because, if I do, I shall probably go over and pull his
nose.'

This form of discretion did not appear to be quite to Mr. Marchmont's
liking, for he took the precaution of insisting that Miss Bellingham
and I should sit on the farther side of his client, and thus
effectually separate him from his enemy.

'Who's the long-nosed fellow talking to Jellicoe?' Mr. Bellingham
asked.

'That is Mr. Loram, KG, Mr. Hurst's counsel; and the convivial-looking
gentleman next to him is our counsel, Mr. Heath, a most able man
and'--here Mr. Marchmont whispered behind his hand--'fully instructed
by Doctor Thorndyke.'

At this juncture the judge entered and took his seat; the usher
proceeded with great rapidity to swear in the jury, and the Court
gradually settled down into that state of academic quiet which it
maintained throughout the proceedings, excepting when the noisy
swing-doors were set oscillating by some bustling clerk or reporter.

The judge was a somewhat singular-looking old gentleman, very short as
to his face and very long as to his mouth; which peculiarities, together
with a pair of large and bulging eyes (which he usually kept closed),
suggested a certain resemblance to a frog. And he had a curious
frog-like trick of flattening his eyelids--as if in the act of
swallowing a large beetle--which was the only outward and visible sign
of emotion that he ever displayed.

As soon as the swearing in of the jury was completed Mr. Loram rose to
introduce the case; whereupon his lordship leaned back in his chair and
closed his eyes, as if bracing himself for a painful operation.

'The present proceedings,' Mr. Loram explained, 'are occasioned by the
unaccountable disappearance of Mr. John Bellingham, of 141, Queen
Square, Bloomsbury, which occurred about two years ago, or, to be more
precise, on the twenty-third of November, nineteen hundred and two.
Since that date nothing has been heard of Mr. Bellingham, and, as there
are certain substantial reasons for believing him to be dead, the
principal beneficiary under his will, Mr. George Hurst, is now applying
to the Court for permission to presume the death of the testator and
prove the will. As the time which has elapsed since the testator was
last seen alive is only two years, the application is based upon the
circumstances of the disappearance, which were, in many respects, very
singular, the most remarkable feature of that disappearance being,
perhaps, its suddenness and completeness.'

Here the judge remarked in a still, small voice that 'It would, perhaps,
have been even more remarkable if the testator had disappeared gradually
and incompletely.'

'No doubt, my lord,' agreed Mr. Loram; 'but the point is that the
testator, whose habits had always been regular and orderly, disappeared
on the date mentioned without having made any of the usual provisions
for the conduct of his affairs, and has not since then been seen or
heard of.'

With this preamble Mr. Loram proceeded to give a narrative of the events
connected with the disappearance of John Bellingham, which was
substantially identical with that which I had read in the newspapers;
and having laid the actual facts before the jury, he went on to discuss
their probable import.

'Now, what conclusion,' he asked, 'will this strange, this most
mysterious train of events suggest to an intelligent person who shall
consider it impartially? Here is a man who steps forth from the house
of his cousin or his brother, as the case may be, and forthwith, in
the twinkling of an eye, vanishes from human ken. What is the
explanation? Did he steal forth and, without notice or hint of his
intention, take train to some seaport, thence to embark for some
distant land, leaving his affairs to take care of themselves and his
friends to speculate vainly as to his whereabouts? Is he now hiding
abroad, or even at home, indifferent alike to the safety of his own
considerable property and the peace of mind of his friends? Or is it
that death has come upon him unawares by sickness, by accident, or,
more probably, by the hand of some unknown criminal? Let us consider
the probabilities.

'Can he have disappeared by his own deliberate act? Why not? it may be
asked. Men undoubtedly do disappear from time to time, to be
discovered by chance or to reappear voluntarily after intervals of
years and find their names almost forgotten and their places filled by
new-comers. Yes; but there is always some reason for a disappearance
of this kind, even though it be a bad one. Family discords that make
life a weariness; pecuniary difficulties that make life a succession
of anxieties; distaste for particular circumstances and surroundings
from which there seems no escape; inherent restlessness and vagabond
tendencies, and so on.

'Do any of these explanations apply to the present case? No, they do
not. Family discords--at least those capable of producing chronic
misery--appertain exclusively to a married state. But the testator was
a bachelor with no encumbrances whatever. Pecuniary anxieties can be
equally excluded. The testator was in easy, in fact, in affluent
circumstances. His mode of life was apparently agreeable and full of
interest and activity, and he had full liberty of change if he wished.
He had been accustomed to travel, and could do so again without
absconding. He had reached an age when radical changes do not seem
desirable. He was a man of fixed and regular habits, and his
regularity was of his own choice and not due to compulsion or
necessity. When last seen by his friends, as I shall prove, he was
proceeding to a definite destination with the expressed intention of
returning for purposes of his own appointing. He did return and then
vanished, leaving those purposes unachieved.

'If we conclude that he has voluntarily disappeared and is at present
in hiding, we adopt an opinion that is entirely at variance with all
these weighty facts. If, on the other hand, we conclude that he has
died suddenly, or has been killed by an accident or otherwise, we are
adopting a view that involves no inherent improbabilities and that is
entirely congruous with the known facts; facts that will be proved by
the testimony of the witnesses whom I shall call. The supposition that
the testator is dead is not only more probable than that he is alive;
I submit it is the only reasonable explanation of the circumstances of
his disappearance.

'But this is not all. The presumption of death which arises so
inevitably out of the mysterious and abrupt manner in which the
testator disappeared has recently received most conclusive and
dreadful confirmation. On the fifteenth of July last there were
discovered at Sidcup the remains of a human arm--a left arm,
gentlemen, from the hand of which the third, or ring, finger was
missing. The doctor who has examined that arm will tell you that the
finger was cut off either after death or immediately before; and his
evidence will prove conclusively that that arm must have been
deposited in the place where it was found just about the time when the
testator disappeared. Since that first discovery, other portions of
the same mutilated body have come to light; and it is a strange and
significant fact that they have all been found in the immediate
neighbourhood of Eltham or Woodford. You will remember, gentlemen,
that it was either at Eltham or Woodford that the testator was last
seen alive.

'And now observe the completeness of the coincidence. These human
remains, as you will be told presently by the experienced and learned
medical gentleman who has examined them most exhaustively, are those
of a man of about sixty years of age, about five feet eight inches in
height, fairly muscular and well preserved, apparently healthy, and
rather stoutly built. Another witness will tell you that the missing
man was about sixty years of age, about five feet eight inches in
height, fairly muscular and well preserved, apparently healthy, and
rather stoutly built. And--another most significant and striking
fact--the testator was accustomed to wear upon the third finger of his
left hand--the very finger that is missing from the remains that were
found--a most peculiar ring, which fitted so tightly that he was
unable to get it off after once putting it on; a ring, gentlemen, of
so peculiar a pattern that had it been found on the body must have
instantly established the identity of the remains. In a word,
gentlemen, the remains which have been found are those of a man
exactly like the testator; they differ from him in no respect
whatever; they display a mutilation which suggests an attempt to
conceal an identifying peculiarity which he undoubtedly presented; and
they were deposited in their various hiding-places about the time of
the testator's disappearance. Accordingly, when you have heard these
facts proved by the sworn testimony of competent witnesses, together
with the facts relating to the disappearance, I shall ask you for a
verdict in accordance with that evidence.'

Mr. Loram sat down, and adjusting a pair of pince-nez, rapidly glanced
over his brief while the usher was administering the oath to the first
witness.

This was Mr. Jellicoe, who stepped into the box and directed a stony
gaze at the (apparently) unconscious judge. The usual preliminaries
having been gone through, Mr. Loram proceeded to examine him.

'You were the testator's solicitor and confidential agent, I believe?'

'I was--and am.'

'How long have you known him?'

'Twenty-seven years.'

'Judging from your experience of him, should you say that he was a
person likely to disappear voluntarily and suddenly to cease to
communicate with his friends?

'No.'

'Kindly give your reasons for that opinion.'

'Such conduct on the part of the testator would be entirely opposed to
his habits and character as they are known to me. He was exceedingly
regular and businesslike in his dealings with me.

When travelling abroad he always kept me informed as to his
whereabouts, or, if he was likely to be beyond reach of
communications, he always advised me beforehand. One of my duties was
to collect a pension which he drew from the Foreign Office, and on no
occasion, previous to his disappearance, has he ever failed to furnish
me punctually with the necessary documents.'

'Had he, so far as you know, any reasons for wishing to disappear?'

'No.'

'When and where did you last see him alive?'

'At six o'clock in the evening, on the fourteenth of October, nineteen
hundred and two, at 141, Queen Square, Bloomsbury.'

'Kindly tell us what happened on that occasion.'

'The testator had called for me at my office at a quarter past three,
and asked me to come with him to his house to meet Doctor Norbury. I
accompanied him to 141, Queen Square, and shortly after we arrived
Doctor Norbury came to look at some antiquities that the testator
proposed to give to the British Museum. The gift consisted of a mummy
with four Canopic jars and other tomb-furniture which the testator
stipulated should be exhibited together in a single case and in the
state in which they were then presented. Of these objects, the mummy
only was ready for inspection. The tomb-furniture had not yet arrived
in England, but was expected within a week. Doctor Norbury accepted
the gift on behalf of the Museum, but could not take possession of the
objects until he had communicated with the Director and obtained his
formal authority. The testator accordingly gave me certain
instructions concerning the delivery of the gift, as he was leaving
England that evening.'

'Are those instructions relevant to the subject of this inquiry?'

'I think they are. The testator was going to Paris, and perhaps thence
to Vienna. He instructed me to receive and unpack the tomb-furniture
on its arrival, and to store it, with the mummy, in a particular room,
where it was to remain for three weeks. If he returned within that
time he was to hand it over in person to the Museum authorities; if he
had not returned within that time, he desired me to notify the Museum
authorities that they were at liberty to take possession of and remove
the collection at their convenience. From these instructions I
gathered that the testator was uncertain as to the length of his
absence from England and the extent of his journey.'

'Did he state precisely where he was going?'

'No. He said he was going to Paris and perhaps to Vienna, but he gave
no particulars and I asked for none.' 'Do you, in fact, know where he
went?'

'No. He left the house at six o'clock wearing a long, heavy overcoat
and carrying a suit-case and an umbrella. I wished him "Good-bye" at
the door and watched him walk away as if going towards Southampton
Row. I have no idea where he went, and I never saw him again.'

'Had he no other luggage than the suit-case?' 'I do not know, but I
believe not. He was accustomed to travel with the bare necessaries,
and to buy anything further he wanted en route.'

'Did he say nothing to the servants as to the probable date of his
return?'

'There were no servants excepting the caretaker. The house was not
used for residential purposes. The testator slept and took his meals
at his club, though he kept his clothes at the house.' 'Did you
receive any communication from him after he left?' 'No. I never heard
from him again in any way. I waited for three weeks as he had
instructed me, and then notified the Museum authorities that the
collection was ready for removal. Five days later Doctor Norbury came
and took formal possession of it, and it was transferred to the Museum
forthwith.' 'When did you next hear of the testator?'

'On the twenty-third of November following at a quarter-past seven in
the evening. Mr. George Hurst came to my rooms, which are over my
office, and informed me that the testator had called at his house
during his absence and had been shown into the study to wait for him.
That on his--Mr. Hurst's--arrival it was found that the testator had
disappeared without acquainting the servants of his intended
departure, and without being seen by anyone to leave the house. Mr.
Hurst thought this so remarkable that he had hastened up to town to
inform me. I also thought it a remarkable circumstance, especially as
I had received no communication from the testator, and we both decided
that it was advisable to inform the testator's brother, Godfrey, of
what had happened.

'Accordingly-Mr. Hurst and I proceeded as quickly as possible to
Liverpool Street and took the first train available to Woodford, where
Mr. Godfrey Bellingham then resided. We arrived at his house at five
minutes to nine, and were informed by the servant that he was not at
home, but that his daughter was in the library, which was a detached
building situated in the grounds. The servant lighted a lantern and
conducted us through the grounds to the library, where we found Mr.
Godfrey Bellingham and Miss Bellingham. Mr. Godfrey had only just come
in and had entered by the back gate, which had a bell that rang in the
library. Mr. Hurst informed Mr. Godfrey of what had occurred, and then
we left the library to walk up to the house. A few paces from the
library I noticed by the light of the lantern, which Mr. Godfrey was
carrying, a small object lying on the lawn. I pointed it to him and he
picked it up, and then we all recognised it as a scarab that the
testator was accustomed to wear on his watch-chain. It was fitted with
a gold wire passed through the suspension hole and a gold ring. Both
the wire and the ring were in position, but the ring was broken. We
went to the house and questioned the servants as to visitors; but none
of them had seen the testator, and they all agreed that no visitor
whatsoever had come to the house during the afternoon or evening. Mr.
Godfrey and Miss Bellingham both declared that they had neither seen
nor heard anything of the testator, and were both unaware that he had
returned to England. As the circumstances were somewhat disquieting, I
communicated, on the following morning, with the police and requested
them to make inquiries; which they did, with the result that a suit-case
bearing the initials "J. B.", was found to be lying unclaimed in the
cloak-room at Charing Cross Station. I was able to identify the
suit-case as that which I had seen the testator carry away from Queen
Square. I was also able to identify some of the contents. I interviewed
the cloak-room attendant, who informed me that the suit-case had been
deposited on the twenty-third about 4.15 p.m. He had no recollection of
the person who deposited it. It remained unclaimed in the possession of
the railway company for three months, and was then surrendered to me.'

'Were there any marks or labels on it showing the route by which it had
travelled?'

'There were no labels on it and no marks other than the initials "J.B."

'Do you happen to know the testator's age?'

'Yes. He was fifty-nine on the eleventh of October, nineteen hundred and
two.'

'Can you tell us what his height was?'

'Yes. He was exactly five feet eight inches.'

'What sort of health had he?'

'So far as I know his health was good. I am not aware that he suffered
from any disease. I am only judging by his appearance, which was that of
a healthy man.'

'Should you describe him as well preserved or otherwise?'

'I should describe him as a well preserved man for his age.'

'How should you describe his figure?'

'I should describe him as rather broad and stout in build, and fairly
muscular, though not exceptionally so.'

Mr. Loram made a rapid note of these answers and then said:

'You have told us, Mr. Jellicoe, that you have known the testator
intimately for twenty-seven years. Now, did you ever notice whether he
was accustomed to wear any rings upon his fingers?'

'He wore upon the third finger of his left hand a copy of an antique
ring which bore the device of the Eye of Osiris. That was the only ring
he ever wore as far as I know.'

'Did he wear it constantly?'

'Yes, necessarily; because it was too small for him, and having once
squeezed it on he was never able to get it off again.'

This was the sum of Mr. Jellicoe's evidence, and at its conclusion the
witness glanced inquiringly at Mr. Bellingham's counsel. But Mr. Heath
remained seated, attentively considering the notes that he had just
made, and finding that there was to be no cross-examination, Mr.
Jellicoe stepped down from the box. I leaned back on my bench, and,
turning my head, observed Miss Bellingham deep in thought.

'What do you think of it?' I asked.

'It seems very complete and conclusive,' she replied. And then, with a
sigh, she murmured: 'Poor old Uncle John! How horrid it sounds to talk
of him in this cold-blooded, business-like way, as "the testator," as if
he were nothing but a sort of algebraical sign.'

'There isn't much room for sentiment, I suppose, in the proceedings of
the Probate Court,' I replied. To which she assented, and then asked:
'Who is this lady?'

'This lady' was a fashionably dressed young woman who had just bounced
into the witness-box and was now being sworn. The preliminaries being
finished, she answered Miss Bellingham's question and Mr. Loram's by
stating that her name was Augustina Gwendoline Dobbs, and that she was
housemaid to Mr. George Hurst, of' The Poplars,' Eltham.

'Mr. Hurst lives alone, I believe?' said Mr. Loram.

'I don't know what you mean by that,' Miss Dobbs began; but the
barrister explained.

'I mean that I believe he is unmarried?'

'Well, and what about it?' the witness demanded tartly.

'I am asking you a question.'

'I know that,' said the witness viciously; 'and I say that you've no
business to make any such insinuations to a respectable young lady when
there's a cook-housekeeper and a kitchenmaid living in the house, and
him old enough to be my father--'

Here his lordship flattened his eyelids with startling effect, and Mr.
Loram interrupted: 'I make no insinuations. I merely ask, Is your
employer, Mr. Hurst, an unmarried man, or is he not?'

'I never asked him,' said the witness sulkily.

'Please answer my question--yes or no.'

'How can I answer your question? He may be married or he may not. How do
I know? I'm no private detective.'

Mr. Loram directed a stupefied gaze at the witness, and in the ensuing
silence a plaintive voice came from the bench:

'Is that point material?'

'Certainly, my lord,' replied Mr. Loram.

'Then, as I see that you are calling Mr. Hurst, perhaps you had better
put the question to him. He will probably know.'

Mr. Loram bowed, and as the judge subsided into his normal state of coma
he turned to the triumphant witness.

'Do you remember anything remarkable occurring on the twenty-third of
November the year before last?'

'Yes. Mr. John Bellingham called at our house.'

'How did you know he was Mr. John Bellingham?'

'I didn't; but he said he was, and I supposed he knew.'

'At what time did he arrive?'

'At twenty minutes past five in the evening.'

'What happened then?'

'I told him that Mr. Hurst had not come home yet, and he said he would
wait for him in the study and write some letters; so I showed him into
the study and shut the door.'

'What happened next?'

'Nothing. Then Mr. Hurst came home at his usual time--a quarter to
six--and let himself in with his key. He went straight into the study
where I supposed Mr. Bellingham still was, so I took no notice, but laid
the table for two. At six o'clock Mr. Hurst came into the
dining-room--he has tea in the City and dines at six--and when he saw
the table laid for two he asked the reason. I said I thought Mr.
Bellingham was staying to dinner.

'"Mr. Bellingham!" says he. "I didn't know he was here. Why didn't you
tell me?" he says. "I thought he was with you, sir," I said. "I showed
him into the study," I said. "Well, he wasn't there when I came in," he
said, "and he isn't there now," he said. "Perhaps he has gone to wait in
the drawing-room," he said. So we went and looked in the drawing-room,
but he wasn't there. Then Mr. Hurst said he thought Mr. Bellingham must
have got tired of waiting and gone away; but I told him I was quite sure
he hadn't, because I had been watching all the time. Then he asked me if
Mr. Bellingham was alone or whether his daughter was with him, and I
said that it wasn't that Mr. Bellingham at all, but Mr. John Bellingham,
and then he was more surprised than ever. I said we had better search
the house to make sure whether he was there or not, and Mr. Hurst said
he would come with me; so we all went over the house and looked in all
the rooms, but there was not a sign of Mr. Bellingham in any of them.
Then Mr. Hurst got very nervous and upset, and when he had just snatched
a little dinner he ran off to catch the six thirty-one train up to
town.'

'You say that Mr. Bellingham could not have left the house because you
were watching all the time. Where were you while you were watching?'

'I was in the kitchen. I could see the front gate from the kitchen
window.'

'You say that you laid the table for two. Where did you lay it?'

'In the dining-room, of course.'

'Could you see the front gate from the dining-room?'

'No, but I could see the study door. The study is opposite the
dining-room.'

'Do you have to come upstairs to get from the kitchen to the
dining-room?'

'Yes, of course you do!'

'Then, might not Mr. Bellingham have left the house while you were
coming up the stairs?'

'No, he couldn't have done.'

'Why not?'

'Because it would have been impossible.'

'But why would it have been impossible?'

'Because he couldn't have done it.'

'I suggest that Mr. Bellingham left the house quietly while you were on
the stairs?'

'No, he didn't.'

'How do you know he did not?'

'I am quite sure he didn't.'

'But how can you be certain?'

'Because I should have seen him if he had.'

'But I mean when you were on the stairs.'

'He was in the study when I was on the stairs.'

'How do you know he was in the study?'

'Because I showed him in there and he hadn't come out.'

Mr. Loram paused and took a deep breath, and his lordship flattened his
eyelids.

'Is there a gate to the premises?' the barrister resumed wearily.

'Yes. It opens into a narrow lane at the side of the house.'

'And there is a French window in the study, is there not?'

'Yes It opens on to the small grass plot opposite the side gate.'

'Were the window and the gate locked or would it have been possible for
Mr. Bellingham to let himself out into the lane?'

'The window and the gate both have catches on the inside. He could have
got out that way, but, of course, he didn't.'

'Why not?'

'Well, no gentleman would go creeping out the back way like a thief.'

'Did you look to see if the French window was shut and fastened after
you missed Mr. Bellingham?'

'I looked at it when we shut the house up for the night. It was then
shut and fastened on the inside.'

'And the side gate?'

'That gate was shut and latched. You have to slam the gate to make the
latch fasten, so no one could have gone out of the gate without being
heard.'

Here the examination-in-chief ended, and Mr. Loram sat down with an
audible sigh of relief. Miss Dobbs was about to step down from the
witness-box when Mr. Heath rose to cross-examine.

'Did you see Mr. Bellingham in a good light?' he asked.

'Pretty good. It was dark outside, but the hall-lamp was alight.'

'Kindly look at this'--here a small object was passed across to the
witness. 'It is a trinket that Mr. Bellingham is stated to have carried
suspended from his watch-guard. Can you remember if he was wearing it in
that manner when he came to the house?'

'No, he was not.'

'You are sure of that.'

'Quite sure.'

'Thank you. And now I want to ask you about the search that you have
mentioned. You say that you went all over the house. Did you go into the
study?'

'No--at least, not until Mr. Hurst had gone to London.'

'When you did go in, was the window fastened?'

'Yes.'

'Could it have been fastened from the outside?'

'No; there is no handle outside.'

'What furniture is there in the study?'

'There is a writing-table, a revolving-chair, two easy chairs, two large
book-cases, and a wardrobe that Mr. Hurst keeps his overcoats and hats
in.'

'Does the wardrobe lock?'

'Yes.'

'Was it locked when you went in?'

'I'm sure I don't know. I don't go about trying the cupboards and
drawers.'

'What furniture is there in the drawing-room?'

'A cabinet, six or seven chairs, a Chesterfield sofa, a piano, a
silver-table, and one or two occasional tables.'

'Is the piano a grand or upright?'

'It is an upright grand.'

'In what position is it placed?'

'It stands across a corner near the window.'

'Is there sufficient room behind it for a man to conceal himself?'

Miss Dobbs was amused and did not dissemble. 'Oh, yes,' she sniggered,
'there's plenty of room for a man to hide behind it.'

'When you searched the drawing-room, did you look behind the piano?'

'No, I didn't,' Miss Dobbs replied scornfully.

'Did you look under the sofa?'

'Certainly not!'

'What did you do then?'

'We opened the door and looked into the room. We were not looking for a
cat or a monkey; we were looking for a middle-aged gentleman.'

'And am I to take it that your search over the rest of the house was
conducted in a similar manner?'

'Certainly. We looked into the rooms, but we did not search under the
beds or in the cupboards.'

'Are all the rooms in the house in use as living or sleeping rooms?'

'No; there is one room on the second floor that is used as a store and
lumber-room, and one on the first floor that Mr. Hurst uses to store
trunks and things that he is not using.'

'Did you look in those rooms when you searched the house?'

'No.'

'Have you looked in them since?'

'I have been in the lumber-room since, but not in the other. It is
always kept locked.'

At this point an ominous flattening became apparent in his lordship's
eyelids, but these symptoms passed when Mr. Heath sat down and indicated
that he had no further questions to ask.

Miss Dobbs once more prepared to step down from the witness-box when Mr.
Loram shot up like a jack-in-the-box.

'You have made certain statements,' said he, 'concerning the scarab
which Mr. Bellingham was accustomed to wear suspended from his
watch-guard. You say that he was not wearing it when he came to Mr.
Hurst's house on the twenty-third of November, nineteen hundred and two.
Are you quite sure of that?'

'Quite sure.'

'I must ask you to be very careful in your statement on this point. The
question is a highly important one. Do you swear that the scarab was not
hanging from his watch-guard?'

'Yes, I do.'

'Did you notice the watch-guard particularly?'

'No; not particularly.'

'Then what makes you sure that the scarab was not attached to it?'

'It couldn't have been.'

'Why could it not?'

'Because if it had been there I should have seen it.'

'What kind of watch-guard was Mr. Bellingham wearing?'

'Oh, an ordinary sort of watch-guard.'

'I mean was it a chain or a ribbon or a strap?'

'A chain, I think--or perhaps a ribbon--or it might have been a
strap.'

His lordship flattened his eyelids, but made no further sign and Mr.
Loram continued:

'Did you or did you not notice what kind of watch-guard Mr. Bellingham
was wearing?'

'I did not. Why should I? It was no business of mine.'

'But yet you are quite sure about the scarab?'

'Yes, quite sure.'

'You noticed that then?'

Mr. Loram paused and looked helplessly at the witness; a suppressed
titter arose from the body of the Court, and a faint voice from the
bench inquired:

'Are you quite incapable of giving a straightforward answer?'

Miss Dobbs's only reply was to burst into tears; whereupon Mr. Loram
abruptly sat down and abandoned his re-examination.

The witness-box vacated by Miss Dobbs was occupied successively by Dr.
Norbury, Mr. Hurst and the cloakroom attendant, none of whom
contributed any new facts, but merely corroborated the statements made
by Mr. Jellicoe and the housemaid. Then came the labourer who
discovered the bones at Sidcup, and who repeated the evidence that he
had given at the inquest, showing that the remains could not have been
lying in the watercress-bed more than two years. Finally Dr. Summers
was called, and, after he had given a brief description of the bones
that he had examined, was asked by Mr. Loram:

'You have heard the description that Mr. Jellicoe has given of the
testator?'

'I have.'

'Does that description apply to the person whose remains you
examined?'

'In a general way it does.'

'I must ask you for a direct answer--yes or no. Does it apply?'

'Yes. But I ought to say that my estimate of the height of the
deceased is only approximate.'

'Quite so. Judging from your examination of those remains and from Mr.
Jellicoe's description, might those remains be the remains of the
testator, John Bellingham?'

'Yes, they might.'

On receiving this admission Mr. Loram sat down, and Mr. Heath
immediately rose to cross-examine.

'When you examined these remains, Doctor Summers, did you discover any
personal peculiarities which would enable you to identify them as the
remains of any one individual rather than any other individual of
similar size, age, and proportions?'

'No. I found nothing that would identify the remains as those of any
particular individual.'

As Mr. Heath asked no further questions, the witness received his
dismissal, and Mr. Loram informed the Court that that was his case.
The judge bowed somnolently, and then Mr. Heath rose to address the
Court on behalf of the respondent. It was not a long speech, nor was
it enriched by any displays of florid rhetoric; it concerned itself
exclusively with a rebutment of the arguments of the counsel for the
petitioner.

Having briefly pointed out that the period of absence was too short to
give rise of itself to the presumption of death, Mr. Heath continued:

'The claim therefore rests upon evidence of a positive character. My
learned friend asserts that the testator is presumably dead, and it is
for him to prove what he has affirmed. Now, has he done this? I submit
that he has not. He has argued with great force and ingenuity that the
testator, being a bachelor, a solitary man without wife or child,
dependant or master, public or private office of duty, or any bond,
responsibility, or any other condition limiting his freedom of action,
had no reason or inducement for absconding. This is my learned
friend's argument, and he has conducted it with so much skill and
ingenuity that he has not only succeeded in proving his case; he has
proved a great deal too much. For if it is true, as my learned friend
so justly argues, that a man thus unfettered by obligations of any
kind has no reason for disappearing, is it not even more true that he
has no reason for not disappearing? My friend has urged that the
testator was at liberty to go where he pleased, when he pleased, and
how he pleased; and that therefore there was no need for him to
abscond. I reply, if he was at liberty to go away, whither, when, and
how he pleased, why do we express surprise that he has made use of his
liberty? My learned friend points out that the testator notified to
nobody his intention of going away and has acquainted no one with his
whereabouts; but, I ask, whom should he have notified? He was
responsible to nobody; there was no one dependent upon him; his
presence or absence was the concern of nobody but himself. If
circumstances suddenly arising made it desirable that he should go
abroad, why should he not go? I say there was no reason whatever.

'My learned friend has said that the testator went away leaving his
affairs to take care of themselves. Now, gentlemen, I ask you if this
can fairly be said of a man whose affairs are, as they have been for
many years, in the hands of a highly capable, completely trustworthy
agent who is better acquainted with them than the testator himself?
Clearly it cannot.

'To conclude this part of the argument: I submit that the
circumstances of the so-called disappearance of the testator present
nothing out of the ordinary. The testator is a man of ample means,
without any responsibilities to fetter his movements, and has been in
the constant habit of travelling, often into remote and distant
regions. The mere fact that he has been absent somewhat longer; than
usual affords no ground whatever for the drastic proceeding of
presumption of death and taking possession of his property.

'With reference to the human remains which have been mentioned in
connection with the case I need say but little. The attempt; to
connect them with the testator has failed completely. You, yourselves
have heard Doctor Summers state on oath that they cannot be identified
as the remains of any particular person. That would seem to dispose of
them effectually. I must remark upon a very singular point that has
been raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner, which is this:

'My learned friend points out that these remains were discovered near
Eltham and near Woodford and that the testator was last seen alive at
one of these two places. This he considers for some reason to be a
highly significant fact. But I cannot agree with him. If the testator
had been last seen alive at Woodford and the remains had been found at
Woodford, or if he had disappeared from Eltham, and the remains had
been found at Eltham, that would have had some significance. But he
can only have been last seen at one of the places, whereas the remains
have been found at both places. Here again my learned friend seems to
have proved too much.

'But I need not occupy your time further. I repeat that, in order to
justify us in presuming the death of the testator, clear and positive
evidence would be necessary. That no such evidence has been brought
forward. Accordingly, seeing that the testator may return at any time
and is entitled to find his property intact, I shall ask you for a
verdict that will secure to him this measure of ordinary justice.'

At the conclusion of Mr. Heath's speech the judge, as if awakening
from a refreshing nap, opened his eyes; and uncommonly shrewd,
intelligent eyes they were when the expressive eyelids were duly
tucked up out of the way. He commenced by reading over a part of the
will and certain notes--which he appeared to have made in some
miraculous fashion with his eyes shut--and then proceeded to review
the evidence and the counsels' arguments for the instruction of the
jury.

'Before considering the evidence which you have heard, gentlemen' he
said, 'it will be well for me to say a few words to you on the general
aspects of the case which is occupying our attention.'

'If a person goes abroad or disappears from his home and his ordinary
places of resort and is absent for a long period of time, the
presumption of death arises at the expiration of seven years from the
date on which he was last heard of. That is to say, that the total
disappearance of an individual for seven years constitutes presumptive
evidence that the said individual is dead; and the presumption can be
set aside only by the production of evidence that he was alive at some
time within that period of seven years. But if, on the other hand, it
is sought to presume the death of a person who has been absent for a
shorter period than seven years, it is necessary to produce such
evidence as shall make it highly probable that the said person is
dead. Of course, presumption implies supposition as opposed to actual
demonstration; but, nevertheless, the evidence in such a case must be
of a kind that tends to create a very strong belief that death has
occurred; and I need hardly say that the shorter the period of
absence, the more convincing must be the evidence.

'In the present case, the testator, John Bellingham, has been absent
somewhat under two years. This is a relatively short period, and in
itself gives rise to no presumption of death. Nevertheless, death has
been presumed in a case where the period of absence was even shorter
and the insurance recovered; but here the evidence supporting the
belief in the occurrence of death was exceedingly weighty.

'The testator in this case was a shipmaster, and his disappearance was
accompanied by the disappearance of the ship and the entire ship's
company in the course of a voyage from London to Marseilles. The loss
of the ship and her crew was the only reasonable explanation of the
disappearance, and, short of actual demonstration, the facts offered
convincing evidence of the death of all persons on board. I mention
this case as an illustration. You are not dealing with speculative
probabilities. You are contemplating a very momentous proceeding, and
you must be very sure of your ground. Consider what it is that you are
asked to do.

'The petitioner asks permission to presume the death of the testator
in order that the testator's property may be distributed among the
beneficiaries under the will. The granting of such permission involves
us in the gravest responsibility. An ill-considered decision might be
productive of a serious injustice to the testator, an injustice that
could never be remedied. Hence it is incumbent upon you to weigh the
evidence with the greatest care, to come to no decision without the
profoundest consideration of all the facts.

'The evidence that you have heard divides itself into two parts--that
relating to the circumstances of the testator's disappearance, and
that relating to certain human remains. In connection with the latter
I can only suggest my surprise and regret that the application was not
postponed until the completion of the coroner's inquest, and leave you
to consider the evidence. You will bear in mind that Doctor Summers
has stated explicitly that the remains cannot be identified as those
of any particular individual, but that the testator and the unknown
deceased had so many points of resemblance that they might possibly be
one and the same person.

'With reference to the circumstances of the disappearance, you have
heard the evidence of Mr. Jellicoe to the effect that the testator has
on no previous occasion gone abroad without informing him as to his
proposed destination. But in considering what weight you are to give
to this statement you will bear in mind that when the testator set out
for Paris after his interview with Doctor Norbury he left Mr. Jellicoe
without any information as to his specific destination, his address in
Paris, or the precise date when he should return, and that Mr.
Jellicoe was unable to tell us where the testator went or what was his
business. Mr. Jellicoe was, in fact, for a time without any means of
tracing the testator or ascertaining his whereabouts.

'The evidence of the housemaid, Dobbs, and of Mr. Hurst is rather
confusing. It appears that the testator came to the house, and when
looked for later was not to be found. A search of the premises showed
that he was not in the house, whence it seems to follow that he must
have left it; but since no one was informed of his intention to leave,
and he had expressed the intention of staying to see Mr. Hurst, his
conduct in thus going away surreptitiously must appear somewhat
eccentric. The point that you have to consider, therefore, is whether
a person who is capable of thus departing in a surreptitious and
eccentric manner from a house, without giving notice to the servants,
is capable also of departing in a surreptitious and eccentric manner
from his usual places of resort without giving notice to his friends
or thereafter informing them of his whereabouts.

'The questions, then, gentlemen, that you have to ask yourselves
before deciding on your verdict are two: first, Are the circumstances
of the testator's disappearance and his continued absence incongruous
with his habits and personal peculiarities as they are known to you?
and second, Are there any facts which indicate in a positive manner
that the testator is dead? Ask yourselves these questions, gentlemen,
and the answers to them, furnished by the evidence that you have
heard, will guide you to your decision.'

Having delivered himself of the above instructions, the judge applied
himself to the perusal of the will with professional gusto, in which
occupation he was presently disturbed by the announcement of the
foreman of the jury that a verdict had been agreed upon.

The judge sat up and glanced at the jury-box, and when the foreman
proceeded to state that 'We find no sufficient reason for presuming
the testator, John Bellingham, to be dead,' he nodded approvingly.
Evidently that was his opinion, too, as he was careful to explain when
he conveyed to Mr. Loram the refusal of the Court to grant the
permission applied for.

The decision was a great relief to me, and also, I think, to Miss
Bellingham; but most of all to her father, who, with instinctive good
manners, since he could not suppress a smile of triumph, rose and
hastily stumped out of the Court, so that the discomfited Hurst should
not see him. His daughter and I followed, and as we left the Court she
remarked, with a smile:

'So our pauperism is not, after all, made absolute. There is still a
chance for us in the Chapter of Accidents--and perhaps even for poor
old Uncle John.'



CHAPTER XV. CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE



THE morning after the hearing saw me setting forth on my round in more
than usually good spirits. The round itself was but a short one, for
my list contained only a couple of 'chronics,' and this, perhaps,
contributed to my cheerful outlook on life. But there were other
reasons. The decision of the Court had come as an unexpected reprieve
and the ruin of my friends' prospects was at least postponed. Then, I
had learned that Thorndyke was back from Bristol and wished me to look
in on him; and, finally, Miss Bellingham had agreed to spend this very
afternoon with me, browsing round the galleries at the British Museum.

I had disposed of my two patients by a quarter to eleven, and three
minutes later was striding down Mitre Court, all agog to hear what
Thorndyke had to say with reference to my notes on the inquest. The
'oak' was open when I arrived at his chambers, and a modest flourish
on the little brass knocker of the inner door was answered by my
quondam teacher himself.

'How good of you, Berkeley,' he said, shaking hands genially, 'to look
me up so early. I am alone, just looking through the report of the
evidence in yesterday's proceedings.'

He placed an easy chair for me, and, gathering up a bundle of
typewritten papers, laid them aside on the table.

'Were you surprised at the decision?' I asked.

'No,' he answered. 'Two years is a short period of absence; but still,
it might easily have gone the other way. I am greatly relieved. The
respite gives us time to carry out our investigations without undue
hurry.'

'Did you find my notes of any use?' I asked.

'Heath did. Polton handed them to him, and they were invaluable to him
for his cross-examination. I haven't seen them yet; in fact, I have
only just got them back from him. Let us go through them together
now.'

He opened a drawer and taking from it my notebook, seated himself, and
began to read through my notes with grave attention, while I stood and
looked shyly over his shoulder. On the page that contained my sketches
of the Sidcup arm, showing the distribution of the snails' eggs on the
bones, he lingered with a faint smile that made me turn hot and red.

'Those sketches look rather footy,' I said; 'but I had to put
something in my notebook.'

'You did not attach any importance, then, to the facts that they
illustrated?'

'No. The egg-patches were there, so I noted the fact. That's all.'

'I congratulate you, Berkeley. There is not one man in twenty who
would have had the sense to make a careful note of what he considers
an unimportant or irrelevant fact; and the investigator who notes only
those things that appear significant is perfectly useless. He gives
himself no material for reconsideration. But you don't mean that these
egg-patches and worm tubes appeared to you to have no significance at
all?'

'Oh, of course, they show the position in which the bones were lying.'

'Exactly. The arm was lying, fully extended, with the dorsal side
uppermost. But we also learn from these egg-patches that the hand had
been separated from the arm before it was thrown into the pond; and
there is something very remarkable in that.'

I leaned over his shoulder and gazed at my sketches, amazed at the
rapidity with which he had reconstructed the limb from my rough
drawings of the individual bones.

'I don't quite see how you arrived at it, though,' I said.

'Well, look at your drawings. The egg-patches are on the dorsal
surface of the scapula, the humerus, and the bones of the fore-arm.
But here you have shown six of the bones of the hand: two metacarpals,
the os magnum, and three phalanges; and they all have egg-patches on
the palmar surface. Therefore the hand was lying palm upwards.'

'But the hand may have been pronated.'

'If you mean pronated in relation to the arm, that is impossible, for
the position of the egg-patches shows clearly that the bones of the
arm were lying in the position of supination. Thus the dorsal surface
of the arm and the palmar surface of the hand respectively were
uppermost, which is an anatomical impossibility so long as the hand is
attached to the arm.'

'But might not the hand have become detached after lying in the pond
some time?'

'No. It could not have been detached until the ligaments had decayed,
and if it had been separated after the decay of the soft parts, the
bones would have been thrown into disorder. But the egg-patches are
all on the palmar surface, showing that the bones were still in their
normal relative positions. No, Berkeley, that hand was thrown into the
pond separately from the arm.'

'But why should it have been?' I asked.

'Ah, there is a very pretty little problem for you to consider. And,
meantime, let me tell you that your expedition has been a brilliant
success. You are an excellent observer. Your only fault is that when
you have noted certain facts you don't seem fully to appreciate their
significance--which is merely a matter of inexperience. As to the
facts that you have collected, several of them are of prime
importance.'

'I am glad you are satisfied,' said I, 'though I don't see that I have
discovered much excepting those snails' eggs; and they don't seem to
have advanced matters very much.'

'A definite fact, Berkeley, is a definite asset. Perhaps we may
presently find a little space in our Chinese puzzle which this fact of
the detached hand will just drop into. But, tell me, did you find
nothing unexpected or suggestive about those bones--as to their number
and condition, for instance?'

'Well, I thought it a little queer that the scapula and clavicle
should be there. I should have expected him to cut the arm off at the
shoulder-joint.'

'Yes,' said Thorndyke; 'so should I; and so it has been done in every
case of dismemberment that I am acquainted with. To an ordinary
person, the arm seems to join on to the trunk at the shoulder-joint,
and that is where he would naturally sever it. What explanation do you
suggest of this unusual mode of severing the arm?'

'Do you think the fellow could have been a butcher?' I asked,
remembering Dr. Summers' remark. 'This is the way a shoulder of mutton
is taken off.'

'No,' replied Thorndyke. 'A butcher includes the scapula in a shoulder
of mutton for a specific purpose, namely, to take off a given quantity
of meat. And also, as a sheep has no clavicle, it is the easiest way
to detach the limb. But I imagine a butcher would find himself in
difficulties if he attempted to take off a man's arm in that way. The
clavicle would be a new and perplexing feature. Then, too a butcher
does not deal very delicately with his subject; if he has to divide a
joint, he just cuts through it and does not trouble himself to avoid
marking the bones. But you note here that there is not a single
scratch or score on any one of the bones, not even where the finger
was removed. Now, if you have ever prepared bones for a museum, as I
have, you will remember the extreme care that is necessary in
disarticulating joints to avoid disfiguring the articular ends of the
bones with cuts and scratches.'

'Then you think that the person who dismembered this body must have
had some anatomical knowledge and skill?'

'That is what has been suggested. The suggestion is not mine.'

'Then I infer that you don't agree?'

Thorndyke smiled. 'I am sorry to be so cryptic, Berkeley, but you
understand that I can't make statements. Still, I am trying to lead
you to make certain inferences from the facts that are in your
possession.'

'If I make the right inference, will you tell me?' I asked.

'It won't be necessary,' he answered, with the same quiet smile. 'When
you have fitted the puzzle together you don't need to be told you have
done it.'

It was most infernally tantalising. I pondered on the problem with a
scowl of such intense cogitation that Thorndyke laughed outright.

'It seems to me,' I said, at length, 'that the identity of the remains
is the primary question and that it is a question of fact. It doesn't
seem any use to speculate about it.'

'Exactly. Either these bones are the remains of John Bellingham or
they are not. There will be no doubt on the subject when all the bones
are assembled--if ever they are. And the settlement of that question
will probably throw light on the further question: Who deposited them
in the places in which they were found? But to return to your
observations: did you gather nothing from the other bones? From the
complete state of the neck vertebrae, for instance?'

'Well, it did strike me as rather odd that the fellow should have gone
to the trouble of separating the atlas from the skull. He must have
been pretty handy with the scalpel to have done it as cleanly as he
seems to have done; but I don't see why he should have gone about the
business in the most inconvenient way.'

'You notice the uniformity of method. He has separated the head from the
spine, instead of cutting through the spine lower down, as most persons
would have done: he removed the arms with the entire shoulder-girdle,
instead of simply cutting them off at the shoulder-joints. Even in the
thighs the same peculiarity appears; for in neither case was the
knee-cap found with the thigh-bone, although it seems to have been
searched for. Now the obvious way to divide the leg is to cut through
the patellar ligament, leaving the knee-cap attached to the thigh. But
in this case, the knee-cap appears to have been left attached to the
shank. Can you explain why this person should have adopted this unusual
and rather inconvenient method? Can you suggest a motive for this
procedure, or can you think of any circumstances which might lead a
person to adopt this method by preference?'

'It seems as if he wished, for some reason, to divide the body into
definite anatomical regions.'

Thorndyke chuckled. 'You are not offering that suggestion as an
explanation, are you? Because it would require more explaining than the
original problem. And it is not even true. Anatomically speaking, the
knee-cap appertains to the thigh rather than to the shank. It is a
sesamoid bone belonging to the thigh muscles; yet in this case it has
been left attached, apparently, to the shank. No, Berkeley, that cat
won't jump. Our unknown operator was not preparing a skeleton as a
museum specimen; he was dividing a body up into convenient sized
portions for the purpose of conveying them to various ponds. Now what
circumstances might have led him to divide it in this peculiar manner?'

'I am afraid I have no suggestion to offer. Have you?'

Thorndyke suddenly lapsed into ambiguity. 'I think,' he said, 'it is
possible to conceive such circumstances, and so, probably, will you if
you think it over.'

'Did you gather anything of importance from the evidence at the
inquest?' I asked.

'It is difficult to say,' he replied. 'The whole of my conclusions in
this case are based on what is virtually circumstantial evidence. I have
not one single fact of which I can say that it admits only of a single
interpretation. Still, it must be remembered that even the most
inconclusive facts, if sufficiently multiplied, yield a highly
conclusive total. And my little pile of evidence is growing, particle by
particle; but we mustn't sit here gossiping at this hour of the day; I
have to consult with Marchmont and you say that you have an early
afternoon engagement. We can walk together as far as Fleet Street.'

A minute or two later we went our respective ways, Thorndyke towards
Lombard Street and I to Fetter Lane, not unmindful of those coming
events that were casting so agreeable a shadow before them.

There was only one message awaiting me, and when Adolphus had delivered
it (amidst mephitic fumes that rose from the basement, premonitory of
fried plaice), I pocketed my stethoscope and betook myself to Gunpowder
Alley, the aristocratic abode of my patient, joyfully threading the now
familiar passages of Gough Square and Wine Office Court, and meditating
pleasantly on the curious literary flavour that pervades these
little-known regions. For the shade of the author of 'Rasselas' still
seems to haunt the scenes of his Titanic labours and his ponderous but
homely and temperate rejoicings. Every court and alley whispers of books
and of the making of books: formes of type, trundled noisily on trolleys
by ink-smeared boys, salute the wayfarer at odd corners; piles of
strawboard, rolls or bales of paper, drums of printing-ink or roller
composition stand on the pavement outside dark entries; basement windows
give glimpses into Hadean caverns tenanted by legions of printer's
devils; and the very air is charged with the hum of press and with
odours of glue and paste and oil. The entire neighbourhood is given up
to the printer and binder; and even my patient turned out to be a
guillotine-knife grinder--a ferocious and revolutionary calling
strangely at variance with his harmless appearance and meek bearing.

I was in good time at my tryst, despite the hindrances of fried plaice
and invalid guillotinists; but, early as I was, Miss Bellingham was
already waiting in the garden--she had been filling a bowl with
flowers--ready to sally forth.

'It is quite like old times,' she said, as we turned into Fetter Lane,
'to be going to the Museum together. It brings back the Tell el Amarna
tablets and all your kindness and unselfish labour, suppose we shall
walk there to-day?'

'Certainly,' I replied; 'I am not going to share your society with the
common mortals who ride in omnibuses. That would be sheer, simple waste.
Besides, it is more companionable to walk.'

'Yes, it is; and the bustle of the streets makes one more appreciative
of the quiet of the Museum. What are we going to look at when we get
there?'

'You must decide that,' I replied. 'You know the collection much better
than I do.'

'Well, now,' she mused, 'I wonder what you would like to see; or, in
other words, what I should like you to see. The old English pottery is
rather fascinating, especially the Fulham ware. I rather think I shall
take you to see that.'

She reflected a while, and then, just as we reached the gate of Staple
Inn, she stopped and looked thoughtfully down the Gray's Inn Road.

'You have taken a great interest in our "case" as Doctor Thorndyke calls
it. Would you like to see the churchyard where Uncle John wished to be
buried? It is a little out of our way, but we are not in a hurry, are
we?'

I, certainly, was not. Any deviation that might prolong our walk was
welcome, and, as to the place--why, all places were alike to me if only
she were by my side. Besides, the churchyard was really of some
interest, since it was undoubtedly the 'exciting cause' of the obnoxious
paragraph two of the will. I accordingly expressed a desire to make its
acquaintance, and we crossed to the entrance to Gray's Inn Road.

'Do you ever try,' she asked, as we turned down the dingy thoroughfare,
'to picture familiar places as they looked a couple of hundred years
ago?'

'Yes,' I answered, 'and very difficult I find it. One has to manufacture
the materials for reconstruction, and then the present aspect of the
place will keep obtruding itself. But some places are easier to
reconstitute than others.'

'That is what I find,' said she. 'Now Holborn, for example, is quite
easy to reconstruct, though I daresay the imaginary form isn't a bit
like the original. But there are fragments left, like Staple Inn and the
front of Gray's Inn; and then one has seen prints of the old Middle Row
and some of the taverns, so that one has some material with which to
help out one's imagination. But this road we are walking in always
baffles me. It looks so old and yet is, for the most part, so new that I
find it impossible to make a satisfactory picture of its appearance,
say, when Sir Roger de Coverley might have strolled in Gray's Inn Walks,
or farther back, when Francis Bacon had chambers in the Inn.'

'I imagine,' said I, 'that part of the difficulty is in the mixed
character of the neighbourhood. Here, on the one side, is old Gray's
Inn, not much changed since Bacon's time--his chambers are still to be
seen, I think, over the gateway; and there, on the Clerkenwell side, is
a dense and rather squalid neighbourhood which has grown up over a
region partly rural and wholly fugitive in character. Places like
Bagnigge Wells and Hockley in the Hole would not have had many buildings
that were likely to survive; and in the absence of surviving specimens
the imagination hasn't much to work from.'

'I daresay you are right,' said she. 'Certainly, the purlieus of old
Clerkenwell present a very confused picture to me; whereas, in the case
of an old street like, say, Great Ormond Street, one has only to sweep
away the modern buildings and replace them with glorious old houses like
the few that remain, dig up the roadway and pavements and lay down
cobble-stones, plant a few wooden posts, hang up one or two oil-lamps,
and the transformation is complete. And a very delightful transformation
it is.'

'Very delightful; which, by the way, is a melancholy thought. For we
ought to be doing better work than our forefathers; whereas what we
actually do is to pull down the old buildings, clap the doorways,
porticoes, panelling, and mantels in our museums, and then run up
something inexpensive and useful and deadly uninteresting in their
place.'

My companion looked at me and laughed softly. 'For a naturally cheerful,
and even gay young man,' said she, 'you are most amazingly pessimistic.
The mantle of Jeremiah--if he ever wore one--seems to have fallen on
you, but without in the least impairing-your good spirits excepting in
regard to matters architectural.'

'I have much to be thankful for,' said I. 'Am I not taken to the Museum
by a fair lady? And does she not stay me with mummy cases and comfort me
with crockery?'

'Pottery,' she corrected; and then as we met a party of grave-looking
women emerging from a side-street, she said: 'I suppose these are lady
medical students.'

'Yes, on their way to the Royal Free Hospital. Note the gravity of their
demeanour and contrast it with the levity of the male student.'

'I was doing so,' she answered, 'and wondering why professional women
are usually so much more serious than men.'

'Perhaps,' I suggested, 'it is a matter of selection. A peculiar type of
woman is attracted to the professions, whereas every man has to earn his
living as a matter of course.'

'Yes, I daresay that is the explanation. This is our turning.'

We passed into Heathcote Street, at the end of which was an open gate
giving entrance to one of those disused and metamorphosed burial-grounds
that are to be met with in the older districts of London; in which the
dispossessed dead are jostled into corners to make room for the living.
Many of the headstones were still standing, and others, displaced to
make room for asphalted walks and seats, were ranged around by the walls
exhibiting inscriptions made meaningless by their removal. It was a
pleasant enough place on this summer afternoon, contrasted with the
dingy streets whence we had come, though its grass was faded and yellow
and the twitter of the birds in the trees mingled with the hideous
Board-school drawl of the children who played around the seats and the
few remaining tombs.

'So this is the last resting-place of the illustrious house of
Bellingham,' said I.

'Yes; and we are not the only distinguished people who repose in this
place. The daughter of no less a person than Richard Cromwell is buried
here; the tomb is still standing--but perhaps you have been here before,
and know it.'

'I don't think I have ever been here before; and yet there is something
about the place that seems familiar.' I looked around, cudgelling my
brains for the key to the dimly reminiscent sensations that the place
evoked; until, suddenly, I caught sight of a group of buildings away to
the west, enclosed within a wall heightened by a wooden trellis.

'Yes, of course!' I exclaimed. 'I remember the place now. I have never
been in this part before, but in that enclosure beyond, which opens at
the end of Henrietta Street, there used to be and may be still, for all
I know, a school of anatomy, at which I attended in my first year; in
fact, I did my first dissection there.'

'There was a certain gruesome appropriateness in the position of the
school,' remarked Miss Bellingham. 'It would have been really convenient
in the days of the resurrection men. Your material would have been
delivered at your very door. Was it a large school?'

'The attendance varied according to the time of the year. Sometimes I
worked there quite alone. I used to let myself in with a key and hoist
my subject out of a sort of sepulchral tank by means of a chain tackle.
It was a ghoulish business. You have no idea how awful the body used to
look to my unaccustomed eyes, as it rose slowly out of the tank. It was
like the resurrection scenes that you see on some old tombstones, where
the deceased is shown rising out of his coffin while the skeleton,
Death, falls vanquished with his dart shattered and his crown toppling
off.

'I remember, too, that the demonstrator used to wear a blue apron, which
created a sort of impression of a cannibal butcher's shop. But I am
afraid I am shocking you.'

'No you are not. Every profession has its unpresentable aspects, which
ought not to be seen by outsiders. Think of the sculptor's studio and of
the sculptor himself when he is modelling a large figure or group in the
clay. He might be a bricklayer or a road-sweeper if you judge by his
appearance. This is the tomb I was telling you about.'

We halted before the plain coffer of stone, weathered and wasted by age,
but yet kept in decent repair by some pious hands, and read the
inscription, setting forth with modest pride, that here reposed Anna,
sixth daughter of Richard Cromwell, 'The Protector.' It was a simple
monument and commonplace enough, with the crude severity of the ascetic
age to which it belonged. But still, it carried the mind back to those
stirring times when the leafy shades of Gray's Inn Lane must have
resounded with the clank of weapons and the tramp of armed men; when
this bald recreation-ground was a rustic churchyard, standing amidst
green fields and hedgerows, and countrymen leading their pack-horses
into London through the Lane would stop to look in over the wooden gate.

Miss Bellingham looked at me critically as I stood thus reflecting, and
presently remarked: 'I think you and I have a good many mental habits in
common.'

'I looked up inquiringly, and she continued: 'I notice that an old
tombstone seems to set you meditating. So it does me. When I look at an
ancient monument, and especially an old headstone, I find myself almost
unconsciously retracing the years to the date that is written on the
stone. Why do you think that is? Why should a monument be so stimulating
to the imagination? And why should a common headstone be more so than
any other?'

'I suppose it is,' I answered reflectively, 'that a churchyard monument
is a peculiarly personal thing and appertains in a peculiar way to a
particular time. And the circumstance that it has stood untouched by the
passing years while everything around has changed, helps the imagination
to span the interval. And the common headstone, the memorial of some
dead and gone farmer or labourer who lived and died in the village hard
by, is still more intimate and suggestive. The rustic, childish
sculpture of the village mason and the artless doggerel of the village
schoolmaster, bring back the time and place and the conditions of life
more vividly than the more scholarly inscriptions and the more artistic
enrichments of monuments of greater pretensions. But where are your own
family tombstones?'

'They are over in that farther corner. There is an intelligent, but
inopportune, person apparently copying the epitaphs. I wish he would go
away. I want to show them to you.'

I now noticed, for the first time, an individual engaged, notebook in
hand, in making a careful survey of a group of old headstones. Evidently
he was making a copy of the inscriptions, for not only was he poring
attentively over the writing on the face of the stone, but now and again
he helped out his vision by running his fingers over the worn lettering.

'That is my grandfather's tombstone that he is copying now,' said Miss
Bellingham; and even as she spoke, the man turned and directed a
searching glance at us with a pair of keen, spectacled eyes.

Simultaneously we uttered an exclamation of surprise; for the
investigator was Mr. Jellicoe.



CHAPTER XVI. O ARTEMIDORUS, FAREWELL!



WHETHER or not Mr. Jellicoe was surprised to see us, it is impossible to
say. His countenance (which served the ordinary purposes of a face,
inasmuch as it contained the principal organs of special sense, with
inlets to the alimentary and respiratory tracts) was, as an apparatus
for the expression of the emotions, a total failure. To a thought-reader
it would have been about as helpful as the face carved upon the handle
of an umbrella; a comparison suggested, perhaps, by a certain
resemblance to such an object. He advanced, holding open his notebook
and pencil, and having saluted us with a stiff bow and an old-fashioned
flourish of his hat, shook hands rheumatically and waited for us to
speak.

'This is an unexpected pleasure, Mr. Jellicoe,' said Miss Bellingham.

'It is very good of you to say so,' he replied.

'And quite a coincidence--that we should all happen to come here on the
same day.'

'A coincidence, certainly,' he admitted, 'and if we all happened not to
come--which must have occurred frequently--that also would have been a
coincidence.'

'I suppose it would,' said she, 'but I hope we are not interrupting
you.'

'Thank you, no. I had just finished when I had the pleasure of
perceiving you.'

You were making some notes in reference to the case, I imagine,' said I.
It was an impertinent question, put with malice aforethought for the
mere pleasure of hearing him evade it.

'The case?' he repeated. 'You are referring, perhaps, to Stevens versus
the Parish Council?'

'I think Doctor Berkeley was referring to the case of my uncle's will,'
Miss Bellingham said quite gravely, though with a suspicious dimpling
about the corners of her mouth.

'Indeed,' said Mr. Jellicoe. 'There is a case, is there; a suit?'

'I mean the proceedings instituted by Mr. Hurst.'

'Oh, but that was merely an application to the Court, and is, moreover,
finished and done with. At least, so I understand. I speak, of course,
subject to correction; I am not acting for Mr. Hurst, you will be
pleased to remember. As a matter of fact,' he continued, after a brief
pause, 'I was just refreshing my memory as to the wording of the
inscriptions on these stones, especially that of your grandfather,
Francis Bellingham. It has occurred to me that if it should appear by
the finding of the coroner's jury that your uncle is deceased, it would
be proper and decorous that some memorial should be placed here. But, as
the burial ground is closed, there might be some difficulty about
erecting a new monument, whereas there would probably be none in adding
an inscription to one already existing. Hence these investigations. For
if the inscriptions on your grandfather's stone had set forth that "here
rests the body of Francis Bellingham," it would have been manifestly
improper to add "also that of John Bellingham, son of the above".
Fortunately the inscription was more discreetly drafted, merely
recording the fact that this monument is "sacred to the memory of the
said Francis", and not committing itself as to the whereabouts of the
remains. But perhaps I am interrupting you.'

'No, not at all,' replied Miss Bellingham (which was grossly untrue; he
was interrupting me most intolerably); 'we were going to the British
Museum and just looked in here on our way.'

'Ha,' said Mr. Jellicoe, 'now, I happen to be going to the Museum too,
to see Doctor Norbury. I suppose that is another coincidence?'

'Certainly it is,' Miss Bellingham replied; and then she asked: 'Shall
we walk together?' and the old curmudgeon actually said 'yes'--confound
him!

We returned to the Gray's Inn Road, where, as there was now room for us
to walk abreast, I proceeded to indemnify myself for the lawyer's
unwelcome company by leading the conversation back to the subject of the
missing man.

'Was there anything, Mr. Jellicoe, in Mr. John Bellingham's state of
health that would make it probable that he might die suddenly?'

The lawyer looked at me suspiciously for a few moments and then
remarked:

'You seem to be greatly interested in John Bellingham and his affairs.'

'I am. My friends are deeply concerned in them, and the case itself is
of more than common interest from a professional point of view.'

'And what is the bearing of this particular question?'

'Surely it is obvious,' said I. 'If a missing man is known to have
suffered from some affection, such as heart disease, aneurism, or
arterial degeneration, likely to produce sudden death, that fact will
surely be highly material to the question as to whether he is probably
dead or alive.'

'No doubt you are right,' said Mr. Jellicoe. 'I have little knowledge of
medical affairs, but doubtless you are right. As to the question itself,
I am Mr. Bellingham's lawyer, not his doctor. His health is a matter
that lies outside my jurisdiction. But you heard my evidence in Court,
to the effect that the testator appeared, to my untutored observation,
to be a healthy man. I can say no more now.'

'If the question is of any importance,' said Miss Bellingham, 'I wonder
they did not call his doctor and settle it definitely. My own impression
is that he was--or is--rather a strong and sound man. He certainly
recovered very quickly and completely after his accident.'

'What accident was that?' I asked.

'Oh, hasn't my father told you? It occurred while he was staying with
us. He slipped from a kerb and broke one of the bones of the left
ankle--somebody's fracture--'

'Pott's?'

'Yes; that was the name--Pott's fracture; and he broke both his
knee-caps as well. Sir Morgan Bennet had to perform an operation, or he
would have been a cripple for life. As it was, he was about again in a
few weeks, apparently none the worse excepting for a slight weakness of
the left ankle.'

'Could he walk upstairs?' I asked.

'Oh, yes; and play golf and ride a bicycle.'

'You are sure he broke both knee-caps?'

'Quite sure. I remember that it was mentioned as an uncommon injury, and
that Sir Morgan seemed quite pleased with him for doing it.'

'That sounds rather libellous; but I expect he was pleased with the
result of the operation. He might well be.'

Here there was a brief lull in the conversation, and, even as I was
trying to think of a poser for Mr. Jellicoe, that gentleman took the
opportunity to change the subject.

'Are you going to the Egyptian rooms?' he asked.

'No,' replied Miss Bellingham; 'we are going to look at the pottery.'

'Ancient or modern?'

'That old Fulham ware is what chiefly interests us at present; that of
the seventeenth century. I don't know whether you call that ancient or
modern.'

'Neither do I,' said Mr. Jellicoe. 'Antiquity and modernity are terms
that have no fixed connotation. They are purely relative and their
application in a particular instance has to be determined by a sort of
sliding-scale. To a furniture collector, a Tudor chair or a Jacobean
chest is ancient; to an architect, their period is modern, whereas an
eleventh-century church is ancient; but to an Egyptologist, accustomed
to remains of a vast antiquity, both are products of modern periods
separated by an insignificant interval. And, I suppose,' he added
reflectively, 'that to a geologist, the traces of the very earliest dawn
of human history appertain only to the recent period. Conceptions of
time, like all other conceptions, are relative.'

'You would appear to be a disciple of Herbert Spencer,' I remarked.

'I am a disciple of Arthur Jellicoe, sir,' he retorted. And I believed
him.

By the time we had reached the Museum he had become almost genial; and,
if less amusing in this frame, he was so much more instructive and
entertaining that I refrained from baiting him, and permitted him to
discuss his favourite topic unhindered, especially since my companion
listened with lively interest. Nor, when we entered the great hall, did
he relinquish possession of us, and we followed submissively, as he led
the way past the winged bulls of Nineveh and the great seated statues,
until we found ourselves, almost without the exercise of our volition,
in the upper room amidst the glaring mummy cases that had witnessed the
birth of my friendship with Ruth Bellingham.

'Before I leave you,' said Mr. Jellicoe, 'I should like to show you that
mummy that we were discussing the other evening; the one, you remember,
that my friend, John Bellingham, presented to the Museum a little time
before his disappearance. The point that I mentioned is only a trivial
one, but it may become of interest hereafter if any plausible
explanation should be forthcoming.' He led us along the room until we
arrived at the case containing John Bellingham's gift, where he halted
and gazed in at the mummy with the affectionate reflectiveness of the
connoisseur.

'The bitumen coating was what we were discussing, Miss Bellingham,' said
he. 'You have seen it, of course.'

'Yes,' she answered. 'It is a dreadful disfigurement, isn't it?'

'Aesthetically it is to be deplored, but it adds a certain speculative
interest to the specimen. You notice that the black coating leaves the
principal decoration and the whole of the inscription untouched, which
is precisely the part that one would expect to find covered up; whereas
the feet and the back, which probably bore no writing, are quite thickly
crusted. If you stoop down, you can see that the bitumen was daubed
freely into the lacings of the back, where it served no purpose, so that
even the strings are embedded.' He stooped as he spoke, and peered up
inquisitively at the back of the mummy, where it was visible between the
supports.

'Has Doctor Norbury any explanation to offer?' asked Miss Bellingham.

'None whatever,' replied Mr. Jellicoe. 'He finds it as great a mystery
as I do. But he thinks that we may get some suggestion from the Director
when he comes back. He is a very great authority, as you know, and a
practical excavator of great experience too. I mustn't stay here talking
of these things, and keeping you from your pottery. Perhaps I have
stayed too long already. If I have I ask your pardon, and I will now
wish you a very good afternoon.' With a sudden return to his customary
wooden impassivity, he shook hands with us, bowed stiffly, and took
himself off towards the curator's office.

'What a strange man that is,' said Miss Bellingham, as Mr. Jellicoe
disappeared through the doorway at the end of the room, 'or perhaps I
should say, a strange being, for I can hardly think of him as a man. I
have never met any other human creature at all like him.'

'He is certainly a queer old fogey,' I agreed.

'Yes, but there is something more than that. He is so emotionless, so
remote and aloof from all mundane concerns. He moves among ordinary men
and women, but as a mere presence, an unmoved spectator of their
actions, quite dispassionate and impersonal.'

'Yes; he is astonishingly self-contained; in fact, he seems, as you say,
to go to and fro among men, enveloped in a sort of infernal atmosphere
of his own, like Marley's ghost. But he is lively and human enough as
soon as the subject of Egyptian antiquities is broached.'

'Lively, but not human. He is always, to me, quite unhuman. Even when he
is most interested, and even enthusiastic, he is a mere personification
of knowledge. Nature ought to have furnished him with an ibis' head like
Tahuti; then he would have looked his part.'

'He would have made a rare sensation in Lincoln's Inn if he had,' said
I; and we both laughed heartily at the imaginary picture of Tahuti
Jellicoe, slender-beaked and top-hatted, going about his business in
Lincoln's Inn and the Law Courts.

Insensibly, as we talked, we had drawn near to the mummy of Artemidorus,
and now my companion halted before the case with her thoughtful grey
eyes bent dreamily on the face that looked out at us. I watched her with
reverent admiration. How charming she looked as she stood with her
sweet, grave face turned so earnestly to the object of her mystical
affection! How dainty and full of womanly dignity and grace! And then,
suddenly it was borne in upon me that a great change had come over her
since the day of our first meeting. She had grown younger, more girlish,
and more gentle. At first she had seemed much older than I; a sad-faced
woman, weary, solemn, enigmatic, almost gloomy, with a bitter, ironic
humour and a bearing distant and cold. Now she was only maidenly and
sweet; tinged, it is true, with a certain seriousness, but frank and
gracious and wholly lovable.

Could the change be due to our friendship? As I asked myself the
question, my heart leaped with a new hope. I yearned to tell her all
that she was to me--all that I hoped we might be to one another in the
years to come.

At length I ventured to break in upon her reverie.

'What are you thinking about so earnestly, fair lady?'

She turned quickly with a bright smile and sparkling eyes that looked
frankly into mine. 'I was wondering,' said she, 'if he was jealous of my
new friend. But what a baby I am to talk such nonsense!'

She laughed softly and happily with just an adorable hint of shyness.

'Why should he be jealous?' I asked.

'Well, you see, before--we were friends, he had me all to himself. I
have never had a man friend before--except my father--and no really
intimate friend at all. And I was very lonely in those days, after our
troubles had befallen. I am naturally solitary, but still, I am only a
girl; I am not a philosopher. So when I felt very lonely, I used to come
here and look at Artemidorus and make believe that he knew all the
sadness of my life and sympathised with me. It was very silly, I know,
but yet, somehow it was a real comfort to me.'

'It was not silly of you at all. He must have been a good man, a gentle,
sweet-faced man who had won the love of those who knew him, as this
beautiful memorial tells; and it was wise and good of you to sweeten the
bitterness of your life with the fragrance of this human love that
blossoms in the dust after the lapse of centuries. No, you were not
silly, and Artemidorus is not jealous of your new friend.'

'Are you sure?' She still smiled as she asked the question, but was
soft--almost tender--and there was a note of whimsical anxiety in her
voice.

'Quite sure. I give you my confident assurance.' She laughed gaily.

'Then,' said she, 'I am satisfied, for I am sure you know. But here is a
mighty telepathist who can read the thoughts even of a mummy. A most
formidable companion. But tell me how you know.'

'I know because it is he who gave you to me to be my friend. Don't you
remember?'

'Yes, I remember,' she answered softly. 'It was when you were so
sympathetic with my foolish whim that I felt we were really friends.'

'And I, when you confided your pretty fancy to me, thanked you for the
gift of your friendship, and treasured it, and do still treasure it,
above everything on earth.'

She looked at me quickly with a sort of nervousness in her manner, and
cast down her eyes. Then, after a few moments' almost embarrassed
silence, as if to bring back our talk to a less emotional plane, she
said:

'Do you notice the curious way in which this memorial divides itself up
into two parts?'

'How do you mean?' I asked, a little disconcerted by the sudden descent.

'I mean that there is a part of it that is purely decorative and a part
that is expressive or emotional. You notice that the general design and
scheme of decoration, although really Greek in feeling, follows rigidly
the Egyptian conventions. But the portrait is entirely in the Greek
manner, and when they came to that pathetic farewell, it had to be
spoken in their own tongue, written in their own familiar characters.'

'Yes. I have noticed that and admired the taste with which they have
kept the inscription so inconspicuous as not to clash with the
decoration. An obtrusive inscription in Greek characters would have
spoiled the consistency of the whole scheme.'

'Yes, it would.' She assented absently as if she were thinking of
something else, and once more gazed thoughtfully at the mummy. I watched
her with deep content: noted the lovely contour of her cheek, the soft
masses of hair that strayed away so gracefully from her brow, and
thought her the most wonderful creature that had ever trod the earth.
Suddenly she looked at me reflectively.

'I wonder,' she said, 'what made me tell you about Artemidorus. It was a
rather silly, childish sort of make-believe, and I wouldn't have told
anyone else for the world; not even my father. How did I know that you
would sympathise and understand?'

She asked the question in all simplicity with her serious grey eyes
looking inquiringly into mine. And the answer came to me in a flash,
with the beating of my own heart.

'I will tell you how you know, Ruth,' I whispered passionately. 'It was
because I loved you more than anyone else in the world has ever loved
you, and you felt my love in your heart and called it sympathy.'

I stopped short, for she had blushed scarlet, and then turned deathly
pale. And now she looked at me wildly, almost with terror.

'Have I shocked you, Ruth dearest?' I exclaimed penitently, 'have I
spoken too soon? If I have, forgive me. But I had to tell you. I have
been eating my heart out for love of you for I don't know how long. I
think I have loved you from the first day we met. Perhaps I shouldn't
have spoken yet, but, Ruth dear, if you only knew what a sweet girl you
are, you wouldn't blame me.'

'I don't blame you,' she said, almost in a whisper; 'I blame myself. I
have been a bad friend to you, who have been so loyal and loving to me.
I ought not to have let this happen. For it can't be, Paul; I can't say
what you want me to say. We can never be anything more to one another
than friends.'

A cold hand seemed to grasp my heart--a horrible fear that I had lost
all that I cared for--all that made life desirable.

'Why can't we?' I asked. 'Do you mean that--that the gods have been
gracious to some other man?'

'No, no,' she answered hastily--almost indignantly, 'of course I don't
mean that.'

'Then it is only that you don't love me yet. Of course you don't. Why
should you? But you will, dear, some day. And I will wait patiently
until that day comes and not trouble you with entreaties. I will wait
for you as Jacob waited for Rachel; and as the long years seemed to him
but as a few days because of the love he bore her, so it shall be with
me, if only you will not send me away quite without hope.'

She was looking down, white-faced, with a hardening of the lips as if
she were in bodily pain. 'You don't understand,' she whispered. It can't
be--it can never be. There is something that makes it impossible, now
and always. I can't tell you more than that.'

But, Ruth dearest,' I pleaded despairingly, 'may it not become possible
some day? Can it not be made possible? I can wait, but I can't give you
up. Is there no chance whatever that this obstacle may be removed?'

'Very little, I fear. Hardly any. No, Paul; it is hopeless, and I
can't bear to talk about it. Let me go now. Let us say good-bye here
and see one another no more for a while. Perhaps we may be friends
again some day--when you have forgiven me.'

'Forgiven you, dearest!' I exclaimed. 'There is nothing to forgive.
And we are friends, Ruth. Whatever happens, you are the dearest friend
I have on earth, or can ever have.'

'Thank you, Paul,' she said faintly. 'You are very good to me. But let
me go, please. I must be alone.'

4 She held out a trembling hand, and, as I took it, I was shocked to
see how terribly agitated and ill she looked.

'May I not come with you, dear?' I pleaded.

'No, no!' she exclaimed breathlessly; 'I must go away by myself. I
want to be alone. Good-bye.'

'Before I let you go, Ruth--if you must go--I must have a most solemn
promise from you.'

Her sad grey eyes met mine and her lips quivered with an unspoken
question.

'You must promise me,' I went on, 'that if ever this barrier that
parts us should be removed, you will let me know instantly. Remember
that I love you always, and that I am waiting for you always on this
side of the grave.'

She caught her breath in a quick little sob, and pressed my hand.

'Yes,' she whispered: 'I promise. Good-bye.'

She pressed my hand again and was gone; and, as I gazed at the empty
doorway through which she had passed, I caught a glimpse of her
reflection in a glass on the landing, where she had paused for a
moment to wipe her eyes. I felt it, in a manner, indelicate to have
seen her, and turned away my head quickly; and yet I was conscious of
a certain selfish satisfaction in the sweet sympathy that her grief
bespoke.

But now that she was gone a horrible sense of desolation descended on
me. Only now, by the consciousness of irreparable loss, did I begin to
realise the meaning of this passion of love that had stolen unawares
into my life. How it had glorified the present and spread a glamour of
delight over the dimly considered future: how all pleasures and
desires, hopes and ambitions, had converged upon it as a focus; how it
had stood out as the one great reality behind which the other
circumstances of life were as a background, shimmering, half seen,
immaterial and unreal. And now it was gone--lost, as it seemed, beyond
hope; and that which was left to me was but the empty frame from which
the picture had vanished.

I have no idea how long I stood rooted to the spot where she had left
me, wrapped in a dull consciousness of pain, immersed in a half-numb
reverie. Recent events flitted, dream-like, through my mind; our happy
labours in the reading-room; our first visit to the Museum; and this
present day that had opened so brightly and with such joyous promise.
One by one these phantoms of a vanished happiness came and went.
Occasional visitors sauntered into the room--but the galleries were
mostly empty that day--gazed inquisitively at my motionless figure,
and went their way. And still the dull, intolerable ache in my breast
went on, the only vivid consciousness that was left to me.

Presently I raised my eyes and met those of the portrait. The sweet,
pensive face of the old Greek settler looked out at me wistfully as
though he would offer comfort; as though he would tell me that he,
too, had known sorrow when he lived his life in the sunny Fayyum. And
a subtle consolation, like the faint scent of old rose leaves, seemed
to exhale from that friendly face that had looked on the birth of my
happiness and had seen it wither and fade. I turned away, at last,
with a silent farewell; and when I looked back, he seemed to speed me
on my way with gentle valediction.



CHAPTER XVII. THE ACCUSING FINGER



OF my wanderings after I left the Museum on that black and dismal dies
irie, I have but a dim recollection. But I must have travelled a quite
considerable distance, since it wanted an hour or two to the time for
returning to the surgery, and I spent the interval walking swiftly
through streets and squares, unmindful of the happenings around,
intent only on my present misfortune, and driven by a natural impulse
to seek relief in bodily exertion. For mental distress sets up, as it
were, a sort of induced current of physical unrest; a beneficent
arrangement, by which a dangerous excess of emotional excitement may
be transformed into motor energy, and so safely got rid of. The motor
apparatus acts as a safety-valve to the psychical; and if the engine
races for a while, with the onset of a bodily fatigue the emotional
pressure-gauge returns to a normal reading.

And so it was with me. At first I was conscious of nothing but a sense
of utter bereavement, of the shipwreck of all my hopes. But, by degrees,
as I threaded my way among the moving crowds, I came to a better and
more worthy frame of mind. After all, I had lost nothing that I had ever
had. Ruth was still all that she had ever been to me--perhaps even more;
and if that had been a rich endowment yesterday, why not to-day also?
And how unfair it would be to her if I should mope and grieve over a
disappointment that was no fault of hers and for which there was no
remedy! Thus I reasoned with myself, and to such purpose that, by the
time I reached Fetter Lane, my dejection had come to quite manageable
proportions and I had formed the resolution to get back to the status
quo ante helium as soon as possible.

About eight o'clock, as I was sitting alone in the consulting-room,
gloomily persuading myself that I was now quite resigned to the
inevitable, Adolphus brought me a registered packet, at the handwriting
on which my heart gave such a bound that I had much ado to sign the
receipt. As soon as Adolphus had retired (with undissembled contempt of
the shaky signature) I tore open the packet, and as I drew out a letter
a tiny box dropped on the table.

The letter was all too short, and I devoured it over and over again with
the eagerness of a condemned man reading a reprieve:

'MY DEAR PAUL.

'Forgive me for leaving you so abruptly this afternoon, and leaving
you so unhappy, too. I am more sane and reasonable now, and so send
you greeting and beg you not to grieve for that which can never be. It
is quite impossible, dear friend, and I entreat you, as you care for
me, never speak of it again; never again to make me feel that I can
give you so little when you have given so much. And do not try to see
me for a little while. I shall miss your visits, and so will my
father, who is very fond of you; but it is better that we should not
meet, until we can take up our old relations--if that can ever be.

'I am sending you a little keepsake in case we should drift apart on
the eddies of life. It is the ring that I told you about--the one
that my uncle save me. Perhaps you may be able to wear it as you have
a small hand, but in any case keep it in remembrance of our
friendship. The device on it is the Eye of Osiris, a mystic symbol for
which I have a sentimentally superstitious affection, as also had my
poor uncle, who actually bore it tattooed in scarlet on his breast. It
signifies that the great judge of the dead looks down on men to see
that justice is done and that truth prevails. So I commend you to the
good Osiris; may his eye be upon you, ever watchful over your welfare
in the absence of

'Your affectionate friend.

'RUTH.'

It was a sweet letter, I thought, even if it carried little comfort;
quiet and reticent like its writer, but with an undertone of
affection. I laid it down at length, and, taking the ring from its
box, examined it fondly. Though but a copy, it had all the quaintness
and feeling of the antique original, and, above all, it was fragrant
with the spirit of the giver. Dainty and delicate, wrought of silver
and gold, with an inlay of copper, I would not have exchanged it for
the Koh-i-noor; and when I had slipped it on my finger its tiny eye of
blue enamel looked up at me so friendly and companionable that I felt
the glamour of the old-world superstition stealing over me too.

Not a single patient came in this evening, which was well for me (and
also for the patient), as I was able forthwith to write in reply a
long letter; but this I shall spare the long-suffering reader
excepting its concluding paragraph:

'And now, dearest, I have said my say; once for all I have said it, and
I will not open my mouth on the subject again (I am not actually opening
it now) "until the times do alter". And if the times do never alter--if
it shall come to pass, in due course, that we two shall sit side by
side, white-haired, and crinkly-nosed, and lean our poor old chins upon
our sticks and mumble and gibber amicably over the things that might
have been if the good Osiris had come up to the scratch--I will still be
content, because your friendship, Ruth, is better than another woman's
love. So you see, I have taken my gruel and come up to lime smiling--if
you will pardon the pugilistic metaphor--and I promise you loyally to do
your bidding and never again to distress you.'

'Your faithful and loving friend.

Paul.'

This letter I addressed and stamped, and then, with a wry grimace
which I palmed off on myself (but not on Adolphus) as a cheerful
smile, I went out and dropped it into the post-box; after which I
further deluded myself by murmuring Nunc dimittis and assuring myself
that the incident was now absolutely closed.

But despite this comfortable assurance I was, in the days that
followed, an exceedingly miserable young man. It is all very well to
write down troubles of this kind as trivial and sentimental. They are
nothing of the kind. When a man of essentially serious nature has
found the one woman of all the world who fulfils his highest ideals of
womanhood, who is, in fact, a woman in ten thousand, to whom he has
given all that he has to give of love and worship, the sudden wreck of
all his hopes is no small calamity. And so I found it. Resign myself
as I would to the bitter reality, the ghost of the might-have-been
haunted me night and day, so that I spent my leisure wandering
abstractedly about the streets, always trying to banish thought and
never for an instant succeeding. A great unrest was upon me; and when
I received a letter from Dick Barnard announcing his arrival at
Madeira, homeward bound, I breathed a sigh of relief. I had no plans
for the future, but I longed to be rid of thenow irksome, routine of
the practice--to be free to come and go when and how I pleased.

One evening, as I sat consuming with little appetite my solitary
supper, there fell on me a sudden sense of loneliness. The desire that
I had hitherto felt to be alone with my own miserable reflections gave
place to a yearning for human companionship. That, indeed, which I
craved for most was forbidden, and I must abide by my lady's wishes;
but there were my friends in the Temple. It was more than a week since
I had seen them; in fact, we had not met since the morning of that
unhappiest day of my life. They would be wondering what had become of
me. I rose from the table, and having filled my pouch from a tin of
tobacco, set forth for King's Bench Walk.

As I approached the entry of No. 5A in the gathering darkness I met
Thorndyke himself emerging encumbered with two deck-chairs, a
reading-lantern, and a book.

'Why, Berkeley!' he exclaimed, 'is it indeed thou? We have been
wondering what had become of you.'

'It is a long time since I looked you up,' I admitted.

He scrutinised me attentively by the light of the entry lamp, and then
remarked: 'Fetter Lane doesn't seem to be agreeing with you very well,
my son. You are looking quite thin and peaky.'

'Well, I've nearly done with it. Barnard will be back in about ten days.
His ship is putting in at Madeira to coal and take in some cargo, and
then he is coming home. Where are you going with those chairs?'

'I am going to sit down at the end of the Walk by the railings. It's
cooler there than indoors. If you will wait a moment I will go and fetch
another chair for Jervis, though he won't be back for a little while.'
He ran up the stairs, and presently returned with a third chair, and we
carried our impedimenta down to the quiet corner of the Walk.

'So your term of servitude is coming to an end,' said he, when we had
placed the chairs and hung the lantern on the railings. 'Any other
news?'

'No. Have you any?'

'I am afraid I have not. All my inquiries have yielded negative results.
There is, of course, a considerable body of evidence, and it all seems
to point one way. But I am unwilling to make a decisive move without
something more definite. I am really waiting for confirmation or
otherwise of my ideas on the subject; for some new item of evidence.'

'I didn't know there was any evidence.'

'Didn't you?' said Thorndyke. 'But you know as much as I know. You have
all the essential facts; but apparently you haven't collated them and
extracted their meaning. If you had, you would have found them curiously
significant.'

'I suppose I mustn't ask what their significance is?' No, I think not.
When I am conducting a case I mention my surmises to nobody--not even to
Jervis. Then I can say confidently that there has been no leakage. Don't
think I distrust you. Remember that my thoughts are my client's
property, and that the essence of strategy is to keep the enemy in the
dark.'

'Yes, I see that. Of course I ought not to have asked.'

'You ought not to need to ask,' Thorndyke replied, with a smile; 'you
should put the facts together and reason from them yourself.'

While we had been talking I had noticed Thorndyke glance at me
inquisitively from time to time. Now after an interval of silence, he
asked suddenly:

'Is anything amiss, Berkeley? Are you worrying about your friends'
affairs?'

'No, not particularly; though their prospects don't look very rosy.'
Perhaps they are not quite so bad as they look,' said he. 'But I am
afraid something is troubling you. All your gay spirits seem to have
evaporated.' He paused for a few moments, and then added: 'I don't want
to intrude on your private affairs, but if I can help you by advice or
otherwise, remember that we are old friends and that you are my academic
offspring.'

Instinctively, with a man's natural reticence, I began to mumble a
half-articulate disclaimer; and then I stopped. After all, why should I
not confide in him? He was a good man and a wise man, full of human
sympathy, as I knew, though so cryptic and secretive in his professional
capacity. And I wanted a friend badly just now.

'I'm afraid,' I began shyly, 'it is not a matter that admits of much
help, and it's hardly the sort of thing that I ought to worry you by
talking about--'

'If it is enough to make you unhappy, my dear fellow, it is enough to
merit serious consideration by your friend; so if you don't mind telling
me--'

'Of course I don't, sir!' I exclaimed.

'Then fire away; and don't call me "sir." We are brother practitioners
just now.'

Thus encouraged, I poured out the story of my little romance; bashfully
at first and with halting phrases, but later, with more freedom and
confidence. He listened with grave attention, and once or twice put a
question when my narrative became a little disconnected. When I had
finished he laid his hand softly on my arm.

'You have had rough luck, Berkeley. I don't wonder that you are
miserable. I am more sorry than I can tell you.'

'Thank you,' I said. 'It's exceedingly good of you to listen so
patiently, but it's a shame for me to pester you with my sentimental
troubles.'

'Now, Berkeley, you don't think that, and I hope you don't think that I
do. We should be bad biologists and worse physicians if we should
underestimate the importance of that which is nature's chiefest care.
The one salient biological truth is the paramount importance of sex; and
we are deaf and blind if we do not hear and see it in everything that
lives when we look abroad upon the world; when we listen to the spring
song of the birds, or when we consider the lilies of the field. And as
is man to the lower organisms, so is human love to their merely reflex
manifestations of sex. I will maintain, and you will agree with me, I
know, that the love of a serious and honourable man for a woman who is
worthy of him is the most momentous of all human affairs. It is the
foundation of social life, and its failure is a serious calamity, not
only to those whose lives may be thereby spoilt, but to society at
large.'

'It's a serious enough matter for the parties concerned,' I agreed; 'but
that is no reason why they should bore their friends.'

'But they don't. Friends should help one another and think it a
privilege.'

'Oh, I shouldn't mind coming to you for help, knowing you as I do. But
no one can help a poor devil in a case like this--and certainly not a
medical jurist.'

'Oh, come, Berkeley!' he protested, 'don't rate us too low. The humblest
of creatures has its uses--"even the little pismire," you know, as Isaak
Walton tells us. Why, I have got substantial help from a
stamp-collector. And then reflect upon the motor-scorcher and the
earth-worm and the blow-fly. All these lowly creatures play their parts
in the scheme of nature; and shall we cast out the medical jurist as
nothing worth?'

I laughed dejectedly at my teacher's genial irony.

What I meant,' said I, 'was that there is nothing to be done but
wait--perhaps for ever. I don't know why she isn't able to marry me, and
I mustn't ask her. She can't be married already.'

'Certainly not. She told you explicitly that there was no man in the
case.'

'Exactly. And I can think of no other valid reason, excepting that she
doesn't care enough for me. That would be a perfectly sound reason, but
then it would only be a temporary one, not the insuperable obstacle that
she assumes to exist, especially as we really got on excellently
together. I hope it isn't some confounded perverse feminine scruple. I
don't see how it could be; but women are most frightfully tortuous and
wrong-headed at times.'

'I don't see,' said Thorndyke, 'why we should cast about for perversely
abnormal motives when there is a perfectly reasonable explanation
staring us in the face.'

Us there?' I exclaimed. 'I see none.'

'You are, not unnaturally, overlooking some of the circumstances that
affect Miss Bellingham; but I don't suppose she has failed to grasp
their meaning. Do you realise what her position really is? I mean with
regard to her uncle's disappearance?'

'I don't think I quite understand you.'

'Well, there is no use in blinking the facts,' said Thorndyke. 'The
position is this: if John Bellingham ever went to his brother's house
at Woodford, it is nearly certain that he went there after his visit
to Hurst. Mind, I say "if he went"; I don't say that I believe he did.
But it is stated that he appears to have gone there; and if he did go,
he was never seen alive afterwards. Now, he did not go in at the front
door. No one saw him enter the house. But there was a back gate, which
John Bellingham knew, and which had a bell which rang in the library.
And you will remember that, when Hurst and Jellicoe called, Mr.
Bellingham had only just come in. Previous to that time Miss
Bellingham had been alone in the library; that is to say, she was
alone in the library at the very time when John Bellingham is said to
have made his visit. That is the position, Berkeley. Nothing pointed
has been said up to the present. But, sooner or later, if John
Bellingham is not found, dead or alive, the question will be opened.
Then it is certain that Hurst, in self-defence, will make the most of
any facts that may transfer suspicion from him to some one else. And
that some one else will be Miss Bellingham.'

I sat for some moments literally paralysed with horror. Then my dismay
gave place to indignation. 'But, damn it!' I exclaimed, starting up--'I
beg your pardon--but could anyone have the infernal audacity to
insinuate that that gentle, refined lady murdered her uncle?'

'That is what will be hinted, if not plainly asserted; and she knows it.
And that being so, is it difficult to understand why she should refuse
to allow you to be publicly associated with her? To run the risk of
dragging your honourable name into the sordid transactions of the
police-court or the Old Bailey? To invest it, perhaps, with a dreadful
notoriety?'

'Oh, don't! for God's sake! It is too horrible! Not that I would care
for myself. I would be proud to share her martyrdom of ignominy, if it
had to be; but it is the sacrilege, the blasphemy of even thinking of
her in such terms, that enrages me.'

'Yes,' said Thorndyke; 'I understand and sympathise with you. Indeed, I
share your righteous indignation at this dastardly affair. So you
mustn't think me brutal for putting the case so plainly.'

'I don't. You have only shown me the danger that I was fool enough not
to see. But you seem to imply that this hideous position has been
brought about deliberately.'

'Certainly I do! This is no chance affair. Either the appearances
indicate the real events--which I am sure they do not--or they have been
created of a set purpose to lead to false conclusions. But the
circumstances convince me that there has been a deliberate plot; and I
am waiting--in no spirit of Christian patience, I can tell you--to lay
my hand on the wretch who has done this.'

'What are you waiting for?' I asked.

'I am waiting for the inevitable,' he replied; 'for the false move that
the most artful criminal invariably makes. At present he is lying low;
but presently he will make a move, and then I shall have him.'

'But he may go on lying low. What will you do then?'

'Yes, that is the danger. We may have to deal with the perfect villain
who knows when to leave well alone. I have never met him, but he may
exist, nevertheless.'

'And then we should have to stand by and see our friends go under.'

'Perhaps,' said Thorndyke; and we both subsided into gloomy and silent
reflection.

The place was peaceful and quiet, as only a backwater of London can be.
Occasional hoots from far-away tugs and steamers told of the busy life
down below in the crowded Pool. A faint hum of traffic was borne in from
the streets outside the precincts, and the shrill voices of newspaper
boys came in unceasing chorus from the direction of Carmelite Street.
They were too far away to be physically disturbing, but the excited
yells, toned down as they were by distance, nevertheless stirred the
very marrow in my bones, so dreadfully suggestive were they of those
possibilities of the future at which Thorndyke had hinted. They seemed
like the sinister shadows oncoming misfortunes.

Perhaps they called up the same association of ideas in Thorndyke's
mind, for he remarked presently: 'The newsvendor is abroad to-night like
a bird of ill-omen. Something unusual has happened: some public or
private calamity, most likely, and these yelling ghouls are out to feast
on the remains. The newspaper men have a good deal in common with the
carrion-birds that hover over a battle-field.'

Again we subsided into silence and reflection. Then, after an interval,
I asked:

'Would it be possible for me to help in any way in this investigation of
yours?'

'That is exactly what I have been asking myself,' replied Thorndyke. 'It
would be right and proper that you should, and I think you might.'

'How?' I asked eagerly.

'I can't say off-hand; but Jervis will be going away for his holiday
almost at once--in fact, he will go off actual duty to-night. There is
very little doing; the long vacation is close upon us, and I can do
without him. But if you would care to come down here and take his place,
you would be very useful to me; and if there should be anything to be
done in the Bellinghams' case, I am sure you would make up in enthusiasm
for any deficiency in experience.'

'I couldn't really take Jervis's place,' said I, 'but if you would let
me help you in any way it would be a great kindness. I would rather
clean your boots than be out of it altogether.'

'Very well. Let us leave it that you come here as soon as Barnard has
done with you. You can have Jervis's room, which he doesn't often use
nowadays, and you will be more happy here than elsewhere, I know. I may
as well give you my latch-key now. I have a duplicate upstairs, and you
understand that my chambers are yours too from this moment.'

He handed me the latch-key and I thanked him warmly from my heart, for I
felt sure that the suggestion was made, not for any use that I should be
to him, but for my own peace of mind. I had hardly finished speaking
when a quick step on the paved walk caught my ear.

'Here is Jervis,' said Thorndyke. 'We will let him know that there is a
locum tenens ready to step into his shoes when he wants to be off.' He
flashed the lantern across the path, and a few moments later his junior
stepped up briskly with a bundle of newspapers tucked under his arm.

It struck me that Jervis looked at me a little queerly when he
recognised me in the dim light; also he was a trifle constrained in his
manner, as if my presence were an embarrassment. He listened to
Thorndyke's announcement of our newly made arrangement without much
enthusiasm and with none of his customary facetious comments. And again
I noticed a quick glance at me, half curious, half uneasy, and wholly
puzzling to me.

'That's all right,' he said when Thorndyke had explained the situation.
'I daresay you'll find Berkeley as useful as me, and, in any case, he'll
be better here than staying on with Barnard.' He spoke with unwonted
gravity, and there was in his tone a solicitude for me that attracted my
notice and that of Thorndyke as well, for the latter looked at him
curiously, though he made no comment. After a short silence, however, he
asked: 'And what news does my learned brother bring? There is a mighty
shouting among the outer barbarians and I see a bundle of newspapers
under my learned friend's arm. Has anything in particular happened?'

Jervis looked more uncomfortable than ever. 'Well--yes,' he replied
hesitatingly, 'something has happened--there! It's no use beating about
the bush; Berkeley may as well learn it from me as from those yelling
devils outside.' He took a couple of papers from his bundle and silently
handed one to me and the other to Thorndyke.

Jervis's ominous manner, naturally enough, alarmed me not a little. I
opened the paper with a nameless dread. But whatever my vague fears,
they fell far short of the occasion; and when I saw those yells from
without crystallised into scare head-lines and flaming capitals I turned
for a moment sick and dizzy with fear.

The paragraph was only a short one, and I read it through in less than a
minute.

'THE MISSING FINGER

DRAMATIC DISCOVERY AT WOODFORD'

'The mystery that has surrounded the remains of a mutilated human body,
portions of which have been found in various places in Kent and Essex,
has received a partial and very sinister solution. The police have, all
along, suspected that those remains were those of a Mr. John Bellingham
who disappeared under circumstances of some suspicion about two years
ago. There is now no doubt upon the subject, for the finger which was
missing from the hand that was found at Sidcup has been discovered at
the bottom of a disused well together with a ring, which has been
identified as one habitually worn by Mr. John Bellingham.

'The house in the garden of which the well is situated was the property
of the murdered man, and was occupied at the time of the disappearance
by his brother, Mr. Godfrey Bellingham. But the latter left it very soon
after, and it has been empty ever since. Just lately it has been put in
repair, and it was in this way that the well came to be emptied and
cleaned out. It seems that Detective-Inspector Badger, who was searching
the neighbourhood for further remains, heard of the emptying of the well
and went down in the bucket to examine the bottom, where he found the
three bones and the ring.

'Thus the identity of the body is established beyond all doubt, and the
question that remains is, Who killed John Bellingham? It may be
remembered that a trinket, apparently broken from his watch-chain, was
found in the grounds of this house on the day that he disappeared, and
that he was never again seen alive. What may be the import of these
facts time will show.'

That was all; but it was enough. I dropped the paper to the ground and
glanced round furtively at Jervis, who sat gazing gloomily at the toes
of his boots. It was horrible! It was incredible! The blow was so
crushing that it left my faculties numb, and for a while I seemed unable
even to think intelligibly.

I was aroused by Thorndyke's voice--calm, businesslike, composed:

'Time will show, indeed! But meanwhile we must go warily. And don't be
unduly alarmed, Berkeley. Go home, take a good dose of bromide with a
little stimulant, and turn in. I am afraid this has been rather a shock
to you.'

I rose from my chair like one in a dream and held out my hand to
Thorndyke; and even in the dim light and in my dazed condition I noticed
that his face bore a look that I had never seen before; the look of a
granite mask of Fate--grim, stern, inexorable.

My two friends walked with me as far as the gateway at the top of Inner
Temple Lane, and as we reached the entry a stranger, coming quickly up
the Lane, overtook and passed us. In the glare of the lamp outside the
porter's lodge he looked at us quickly over his shoulder, and though he
passed on without halt or greeting, I recognised him with a certain dull
surprise which I did not understand then and do not understand now. It
was Mr. Jellicoe.

I shook hands once more with my friends and strode out into Fleet
Street, but as soon as I was outside the gate I made direct for Nevill's
Court. What was in my mind I do not know; only that some instinct of
protection led me there, where my lady lay unconscious of the hideous
menace that hung over her. At the entrance to the Court a tall, powerful
man was lounging against the wall, and he seemed to look at me curiously
as I passed; but I hardly noticed him and strode forward into the narrow
passage. By the shabby gateway of the house I halted and looked up at
such of the windows as I could see over the wall. They were all dark.
All the inmates, then, were in bed. Vaguely comforted by this, I walked
on to the New Street end of the Court and looked out. Here, too, a
man--a tall, thick-set man--was loitering; and as he looked
inquisitively into my face I turned and re-entered the Court, slowly
retracing my steps. As I again reached the gate of the house I stopped
to look once more at the windows, and turning I found the man whom I had
last noticed close behind me. Then, in a flash of dreadful
comprehension, I understood. These two were plain-clothes policemen.

For a moment a blind fury possessed me. An insane impulse urged me to
give battle to this intruder; to avenge upon this person the insult of
his presence. Fortunately the impulse was but momentary, and I recovered
myself without making any demonstration. But the appearance of those two
policemen brought the peril into the immediate present, imparted to it a
horrible actuality. A chilly sweat of terror stood on my forehead, and
my ears were ringing when I walked with faltering steps out into Fetter
Lane.



CHAPTER XVIII. JOHN BELLINGHAM



THE next few days were a very nightmare of horror and gloom. Of course,
I repudiated my acceptance of the decree of banishment that Ruth had
passed upon me. I was her friend, at least, and in time of peril my
place was at her side. Tacitly--though thankfully enough, poor
girl!--she had recognised the fact and made me once more free of the
house.

For there was no disguising the situation. Newspaper boys yelled the
news up and down Fleet Street from morning to night; soul-shaking
posters grinned on gaping crowds; and the newspapers fairly wallowed in
the 'Shocking details.'

It is true that no direct accusations were made; but the original
reports of the disappearance were reprinted with such comments as made
me gnash my teeth with fury.

The wretchedness of those days will live in my memory until my dying
day. Never can I forget the dread that weighed me down, the horrible
suspense, the fear that clutched at my heart as I furtively scanned the
posters in the streets. Even the wretched detectives who prowled about
the entrances to Nevill's Court became grateful to my eyes, for,
embodying as they did the hideous menace that hung over my dear lady,
their presence at least told me that the blow had not yet fallen.
Indeed, we came, after a time, to exchange glances of mutual
recognition, and I thought that they seemed to be sorry for her and for
me, and had no great liking for their task. Of course, I spent most of
my leisure at the old house, though my heart ached more there than
elsewhere; and I tried, with but poor success, I fear to maintain a
cheerful, confident manner, cracking my little jokes as of old, and even
essaying to skirmish with Miss Oman. But this last experiment was a dead
failure; and when she had suddenly broken down in a stream of brilliant
repartee to weep hysterically on my breast, I abandoned the attempt and
did not repeat it.

A dreadful gloom had settled down upon the old house. Poor Miss Oman
crept silently but restlessly up and down the ancient stairs with dim
eyes and a tremulous chin, or moped in her room with a parliamentary
petition (demanding, if I remember rightly, the appointment of a
female judge to deal with divorce and matrimonial causes) which lay on
her table languidly awaiting signatures that never came. Mr.
Bellingham, whose mental condition at first alternated between furious
anger and absolute panic, was fast sinking into a state of nervous
prostration that I viewed with no little alarm. In fact, the only
really self-possessed person in the entire household was Ruth herself,
and even she could not conceal the ravages of sorrow and suspense and
overshadowing peril. Her manner was almost unchanged; or rather, I
should say, she had gone back to that which I had first known--quiet,
reserved, taciturn, with a certain bitter humour showing through her
unvarying amiability. When she and I were alone, indeed, her reserve
melted away and she was all sweetness and gentleness. But it wrung my
heart to look at her, to see how, day by day, she grew ever more thin
and haggard; to watch the growing pallor of her cheek; to look into
her solemn grey eyes, so sad and tragic and yet so brave and defiant
of fate.

It was a terrible time; and through it all the dreadful questions
haunted me continually: When will the blow fall? What is it that the
police are waiting for? And when they do strike, what will Thorndyke
have to say?

So things went on for four dreadful days. But on the fourth day, just
as the evening consultations were beginning and the surgery was filled
with waiting patients, Polton appeared with a note, which he insisted,
to the indignation of Adolphus, on delivering into my own hands. It
was from Thorndyke, and was to the following effect:

'I learn from Dr. Norbury that he has recently heard from Hen
Lederbogen, of Berlin--a learned authority on Oriental antiquities--who
makes some reference to an English Egyptologist whom he met in Vienna
about a year ago. He cannot recall the Englishman's name, but there are
certain expressions in the letter which make Dr. Norbury suspect that he
is referring to John Bellingham.'

'I want you to bring Mr. and Miss Bellingham to my chambers this evening
at 8.30, to meet Dr. Norbury and talk over his letter; and in view of
the importance of the matter, I look to you not to fail me.'

A wave of hope and relief swept over me. It was still possible that this
Gordian knot might be cut; that the deliverance might not come before it
was too late. I wrote a hasty note to Thorndyke and another to Ruth,
making the appointment; and having given them both to the trusty Polton,
returned somewhat feverishly to my professional duties. To my profound
relief, the influx of patients ceased, and the practice sank into its
accustomed torpor; whereby I was able without base and mendacious
subterfuge to escape in good time to my tryst.

It was near upon eight o'clock when I passed through the archway into
Nevill's Court. The warm afternoon light had died away, for the summer
was running out apace. The last red glow of the setting sun had faded
from the ancient roofs and chimney stacks, and down in the narrow court
the shades of evening had begun to gather in nooks and corners. I was
due at eight, and, as it still wanted some minutes to the hour, I
sauntered slowly down the Court, looking reflectively on the familiar
scene and the well-known friendly faces.

The day's work was drawing to a close. The little shops were putting up
their shutters; lights were beginning to twinkle in parlour windows; a
solemn hymn arose in the old Moravian chapel, and its echoes stole out
through the dark entry that opens into the court under the archway.

Here was Mr. Finneymore (a man of versatile gifts, with a leaning
towards paint and varnish) sitting, white-aproned and shirt-sleeved, on
a chair in his garden, smoking his pipe with a complacent eye on his
dahlias. There at an open window a young man, with a brush in his hand
and another behind his ear, stood up and stretched himself while an
older lady deftly rolled up a large map. The barber was turning out the
gas in his little saloon; the greengrocer was emerging with a cigarette
in his mouth and an aster in his button-hole, and a group of children
were escorting the lamp-lighter on his rounds.

All these good, homely folk were Nevill's Courtiers of the genuine
breed' born in the court, as had been their fathers before them for
generations. And of such to a great extent was the population of the
place. Miss Oman herself claimed aboriginal descent and so did the
sweet-faced Moravian lady next door--a connection of the famous La
Trobes of the old Conventicle, whose history went back to the Gordon
Riots; and as to the gentleman who lived in the ancient
timber-and-plaster house at the bottom of the court, it was reported
that his ancestors had dwelt in that very house since the days of James
the First.

On these facts I reflected as I sauntered down the court, on the strange
phenomenon of an old-world hamlet with its ancient population lingering
in the very heart of the noisy city; an island of peace set in an ocean
of unrest, an oasis in a desert of change and ferment.

My meditations brought me to the shabby gate in the high wall, and as I
raised the latch and pushed it open, I saw Ruth standing at the door of
the house talking to Miss Oman. She was evidently waiting for me, for
she wore her sombre black coat and hat and a black veil, and when she
saw me she came out, closing the door after her, and holding out her
hand.

'You are punctual,' said she. 'St Dunstan's clock is striking now.'

'Yes,' I answered. 'But where is your father?'

'He has gone to bed, poor old dear. He didn't feel well enough to come,
and I did not urge him. He is really very ill. This dreadful suspense
will kill him if it goes on much longer.'

'Let us hope it won't,' I said, but with little conviction, I fear, in
my tone.

It was harrowing to see her torn by anxiety for her father, and I
yearned to comfort her. But what was there to say? Mr. Bellingham was
breaking up visibly under the stress of the terrible menace that hung
over his daughter, and no words of mine could make the fact less
manifest.

We walked silently up the court. The lady at the window greeted us with
a smiling salutation, Mr. Finneymore removed his pipe and raised his
cap, receiving a gracious bow from Ruth in return, and then we passed
through the covered way into Fetter Lane, where my companion paused and
looked about her.

'What are you looking for?' I asked.

'The detective,' she answered quietly. 'It would be a pity if the poor
man should miss me after waiting so long. However, I don't see him.' And
she turned away towards Fleet Street. It was an unpleasant surprise to
me that her sharp eyes detected the secret spy upon her movements; and
the dry, sardonic tone of her remark pained me too, recalling, as it
did, the frigid self-possession that had so repelled me in the early
days of our acquaintance. And yet I could not but admire the cool
unconcern with which she faced her horrible peril.

'Tell me a little more about this conference,' she said, as we walked
down Fetter Lane. 'Your note was rather more concise than lucid; but I
suppose you wrote it in a hurry.'

'Yes, I did. And I can't give you any details now. All I know is that
Doctor Norbury has had a letter from a friend of his in Berlin, an
Egyptologist, as I understand, named Lederbogen, who refers to an
English acquaintance of his and Norbury's whom he saw in Vienna about a
year ago. He cannot remember the Englishman's name, but from some of the
circumstances Norbury seems to think that he is referring to your Uncle
John. Of course, if this should turn out to be really the case, it would
set everything straight; so Thorndyke was anxious that you and your
father should meet Norbury and talk it over.'

'I see,' said Ruth. Her tone was thoughtful but by no means
enthusiastic.

'You don't seem to attach much importance to the matter,' I remarked.

'No. It doesn't seem to fit the circumstances. What is the use of
suggesting that poor Uncle John is alive--and behaving like an imbecile,
which he certainly was not--when his dead body has actually been found?'

'But,' I suggested lamely, 'there may be some mistake. It may not be his
body after all.'

'And the ring?' she asked, with a bitter smile.

'That may be just a coincidence. It was a copy of a well-known form of
antique ring. Other people may have had copies made as well as your
uncle. Besides,' I added with more conviction, 'we haven't seen the
ring. It may not be his at all.'

She shook her head. 'My dear Paul,' she said quietly, 'it is useless to
delude ourselves. Every known fact points to the certainty that it is
his body. John Bellingham is dead: there can be no doubt of that. And to
every one except his unknown murderer and one or two of my own loyal
friends, it must seem that his death lies at my door. I realised from
the beginning that the suspicion lay between George Hurst and me; and
the finding of the ring fixes it definitely on me. I am only surprised
that the police have made no move yet.'

The quiet conviction of her tone left me for a while speechless with
horror and despair. Then I recalled Thorndyke's calm, even confident,
attitude, and I hastened to remind her of it.

'There is one of your friends,' I said, 'who is still undismayed.
Thorndyke seems to anticipate no difficulties.'

'And yet,' she replied, 'he is ready to consider a forlorn hope like
this. However, we shall see.'

I could think of nothing more to say, and it was in gloomy silence that
we pursued our way down Inner Temple Lane and through the dark entries
and tunnel-like passages that brought us out, at length, by the
Treasury.

'I don't see any light in Thorndyke's chambers,' I said, as we crossed
King's Bench Walk; and I pointed out the row of windows all dark and
blank.

'No; and yet the shutters are not closed. He must be out.'

'He can't be after making an appointment with you and your father. It is
most mysterious. Thorndyke is so very punctilious about his
engagements.'

The mystery was solved, when we reached the landing, by a slip of paper
fixed by a tack on the iron-bound 'oak.'

'A note for P. B. is on the table,' was the laconic message: on reading
which I inserted my key, swung the heavy door outward, and opened the
lighter inner door. The note was lying on the table and I brought it out
to the landing to read by the light of the staircase lamp.

'Apologise to our friends,' it ran, 'for the slight change of programme.
Norbury is anxious that I should get my experiments over before the
Director returns, so as to save discussion. He has asked me to begin
to-night and says he will see Mr. and Miss Bellingham here, at the
Museum. Please bring them along at once. I think some matters of
importance may transpire at the interview.--J. E. T.'

'I hope you don't mind,' I said apologetically, when I had read the note
to Ruth.

'Of course I don't,' she replied. 'I am rather pleased. We have so many
associations with the dear old Museum, haven't we?' She looked at me for
a moment with a strange and touching wistfulness and then turned to
descend the stone stairs.--|

At the Temple gate I hailed a hansom, and we were soon speeding westward
and north to the soft twinkle of the horse's bell.

'What are these experiments that Doctor Thorndyke refers to?' she asked
presently.

'I can only answer you vaguely,' I replied. 'Their object, I believe, is
to ascertain whether the penetrability of organic substances by the
X-rays becomes altered by age; whether, for instance, an ancient block
of wood is more or less transparent to the rays than a new block of the
same size.'

'And of what use would the knowledge be, if it were obtained?'

'I can't say. Experiments are made to obtain knowledge without regard to
its utility. The use appears when the knowledge has been acquired. But
in this case, if it should be possible to determine the age of any
organic substance by its reaction to X-rays, the discovery might be
found of some value in legal practice--as in demonstrating a new seal on
an old document, for instance. But I don't know whether Thorndyke has
anything definite in view; I only know that the preparations have been
on a most portentous scale.'

'How do you mean?'

'In regard to size. When I went into the workshop yesterday morning, I
found Polton erecting a kind of portable gallows about nine feet high,
and he had just finished varnishing a pair of enormous wooden trays each
over six feet long. It looked as if he and Thorndyke were contemplating
a few private executions with subsequent post-mortems on the victims.'

'What a horrible suggestion!'

'So Polton said, with his quaint, crinkly smile. But he was mighty close
about the use of the apparatus all the same. I wonder if we shall see
anything of the experiments, when we get there. This is Museum Street,
isn't it?'

'Yes.' As she spoke, she lifted the flap of one of the little windows in
the back of the cab and peered out. Then, closing it with a quiet,
ironic smile, she said:

'It is all right; he hasn't missed us. It will be quite a nice little
change for him.'

The cab swung round into Great Russell Street, and, glancing out as it
turned, I saw another hansom following; but before I had time to inspect
its solitary passenger, we drew up at the Museum gates.

The gate porter, who seemed to expect us, ushered us up the drive to the
great portico and into the Central Hall, where he handed us over to
another official.

'Doctor Norbury is in one of the rooms adjoining the Fourth Egyptian
Room,' the latter stated in answer to our inquiries: and, providing
himself with a wire-guarded lantern, he prepared to escort us thither.

Up the great staircase, now wrapped in mysterious gloom, we passed in
silence with bitter-sweet memories of that day of days when we had first
trodden its steps together; through the Central Saloon, the Mediaeval
Room and the Asiatic Saloon, and so into the long range of the
Ethnographical Galleries.

It was a weird journey. The swaying lantern shot its beams abroad into
the darkness of the great, dim galleries, casting instantaneous flashes
on the objects in the cases, so that they leaped into being and vanished
in the twinkling of an eye. Hideous idols with round, staring eyes
started forth from the darkness, glared at us for an instant and were
gone. Grotesque masks, suddenly revealed by the shimmering light, took
on the semblance of demon faces that seemed to mow and gibber at us as
we passed. As for the life-sized models--realistic enough by
daylight--their aspect was positively alarming; for the moving light and
shadow endowed them with life and movement, so that they seemed to watch
us furtively, to lie in wait and to hold themselves in readiness to
steal out and follow us.

The illusion evidently affected Ruth as well as me, for she drew nearer
to me and whispered:

'These figures are quite startling. Did you see that Polynesian? I
really felt as if he were going to spring out on us.'

'They are rather uncanny,' I admitted, 'but the danger is over now. We
are passing out of their sphere of influence.'

We came out on a landing as I spoke and then turned sharply to the left
along the North Gallery, from the centre of which we entered the Fourth
Egyptian Room.

Almost immediately, a door in the opposite wall opened; a peculiar,
high-pitched humming sound became audible, and Jervis came out on tiptoe
with his hand raised.

'Tread as lightly as you can,' he said. 'We are just making an
exposure.'

The attendant turned back with his lantern, and we followed Jervis into
the room from whence he had come. It was a large room, and little
lighter than the galleries, for the single glow-lamp that burned at the
end where we entered left the rest of the apartment in almost complete
obscurity. We seated ourselves at once on the chairs that had been
placed for us, and, when the mutual salutations had been exchanged, I
looked about me. There were three people in the room besides Jervis:
Thorndyke, who sat with his watch in his hand, a grey-headed gentleman
whom I took to be Dr. Norbury, and a smaller person at the dim farther
end--undistinguishable, but probably Polton. At our end of the room were
the two large trays that I had seen in the workshop, now mounted on
trestles and each fitted with a rubber drain-tube leading down to a
bucket. At the farther end of the room the sinister shape of the gallows
reared itself aloft in the gloom; only now I could see that it was not a
gallows at all. For affixed to the top cross-bar was a large, bottomless
glass basin, inside which was a glass bulb that glowed with a strange
green light; and in the heart of the bulb a bright spot of red.

It was all clear enough so far. The peculiar sound that filled the air
was the hum of the interrupter; the bulb was, of course, a Crookes'
tube, and the red spot inside it, the glowing red-hot disc of the
anti-cathode. Clearly an X-ray photograph was being made; but of what? I
strained my eyes, peering into the gloom at the foot of the gallows, but
though I could make out an elongated object lying on the floor directly
under the bulb, I could not resolve the dimly seen shape into anything
recognisable. Presently, however, Dr. Norbury supplied the clue.

'I am rather surprised,' said he, 'that you chose so composite an object
as a mummy to begin on. I should have thought that a simpler object,
such as a coffin or a wooden figure, would have been more instructive.'

'In some ways it would,' replied Thorndyke, 'but the variety of
materials that the mummy gives us has its advantages. I hope your father
is not ill, Miss Bellingham.'

'He is not at all well,' said Ruth, 'and we agreed that it was better
for me to come alone. I knew Herr Lederbogen quite well. He stayed with
us for a time when he was in England.'

'I trust,' said Dr. Norbury, 'that I have not troubled you for nothing.
Herr Lederbogen speaks of "our erratic English friend with the long name
that I can never remember," and it seemed to me that he might be
referring to your uncle.'

'I should have hardly have called my uncle erratic,' said Ruth.

'No, no. Certainly not,' Dr. Norbury agreed hastily. 'However, you shall
see the letter presently and judge for yourself. We mustn't introduce
irrelevant topics while the experiment is in progress, must we, Doctor?'

'You had better wait until we have finished,' said Thorndyke, 'because I
am going to turn out the light. Switch off the current, Polton.'

The green light vanished from the bulb, the hum of the interrupter swept
down an octave or two and died away. Then Thorndyke and Dr. Norbury rose
from their chairs and went towards the mummy, which they lifted tenderly
while Polton drew from beneath it what presently turned out to be a huge
black paper envelope. The single glow-lamp was switched off, leaving the
room in total darkness until there burst suddenly a bright orange red
light immediately above one of the trays.

We all gathered round to watch, as Polton--the high priest of these
mysteries--drew from the black envelope a colossal sheet of bromide
paper, laid it carefully in the tray and proceeded to wet it with a
large brush which he had dipped in a pail of water.

'I thought you always used plates for this kind of work,' said Dr.
Norbury.

'We do, by preference; but a six-foot plate would be impossible, so I
had a special paper made to the size.'

There is something singularly fascinating in the appearance of a
developing photograph; in the gradual, mysterious emergence of the
picture from the blank, white surface of plate or paper. But a
skiagraph, or X-ray photograph, has a fascination all its own. Unlike
the ordinary photograph, which yields a picture of things already seen,
it gives a presentment of objects hitherto invisible; and hence, when
Polton poured the developer on the already wet paper, we all craned over
the tray with the keenest curiosity.

The developer was evidently a very slow one. For fully half a minute no
change could be seen in the uniform surface. Then, gradually, almost
insensibly, the marginal portion began to darken, leaving the outline of
the mummy in pale relief. The change, once started, proceeded apace.
Darker and darker grew the margin of the paper until from slate grey it
had turned to black; and still the shape of the mummy, now in strong
relief, remained an elongated patch of bald white. But not for long.
Presently the white shape began to be tinged with grey, and, as the
colour deepened, there grew out of it a paler form that seemed to steal
out of the enshrouding grey like an apparition, spectral, awesome,
mysterious. The skeleton was coming into view.

'It is rather uncanny,' said Dr. Norbury. 'I feel as if I were assisting
at some unholy rite. Just look at it now!'

The grey shadow of the cartonnage, the wrappings and the flesh was
fading away into the background and the white skeleton stood out in
sharp contrast. And it certainly was rather a weird spectacle.

'You'll lose the bones if you develop much farther,' said Dr. Norbury.

'I must let the bones darken,' Thorndyke replied, 'in case there are any
metallic objects. I have three more papers in the envelope.'

The white shape of the skeleton now began to grey over and, as Dr.
Norbury had said, its distinctness became less and yet less. Thorndyke
leaned over the tray with his eyes fixed on a point in the middle of the
breast and we all watched him in silence. Suddenly he rose. 'Now,
Polton,' he said sharply, 'get the hypo on as quickly as you can.'

Polton, who had been waiting with his hand on the stop-cock of the
drain-tube, rapidly ran off the developer into the bucket and flooded
the paper with the fixing solution.

'Now we can look at it at our leisure,' said Thorndyke. After waiting a
few seconds, he switched on one of the glow-lamps, and as the flood of
light fell on the photograph, he added: 'You see we haven't quite lost
the skeleton.'

'No.' Dr. Norbury put on a pair of spectacles and bent down over the
tray; and at this moment I felt Ruth's hand touch my arm, lightly, at
first, and then with a strong nervous grasp; and I could feel that her
hand was trembling. I looked round at her anxiously and saw that she had
turned deathly pale.

'Would you rather go out into the gallery?' I asked; for the room with
its tightly shut windows was close and hot.

'No,' she replied quietly, 'I will stay here. I am quite well.' But
still she kept hold of my arm.

Thorndyke glanced at her keenly and then looked away as Dr. Norbury
turned to ask him a question.

'Why is it, think you, that some of the teeth show so much whiter than
others?'

'I think the whiteness of the shadows is due to the presence of metal,'
Thorndyke replied.

'Do you mean that the teeth have metal fillings?' asked Dr. Norbury.

'Yes.'

'Really! This is very interesting. The use of gold stoppings--and
artificial teeth, too--by the ancient Egyptians is well known, but we
have no examples in this Museum. This mummy ought to be unrolled. Do you
think all those teeth are filled with the same metal? They are not
equally white.'

'No,' replied Thorndyke. 'Those teeth that are perfectly white are
undoubtedly filled with gold, but that greyish one is probably filled
with tin.'

'Very interesting,' said Dr. Norbury. 'Very interesting! And what do you
make of that faint mark across the chest, near the top of the sternum?'

It was Ruth who answered his question. 'It is the eye of Osiris!' she
exclaimed in a hushed voice.

'Dear me!' exclaimed Dr. Norbury, 'so it is. You are quite right. It is
the Utchat--the Eye of Horus--or Osiris, if you prefer to call it so.
That, I presume, will be a gilded device on some of the wrappings.'

'No; I should say it is a tattoo mark. It is too indefinite for a gilded
device. And I should say further that the tattooing is done in
vermilion, as carbon tattooing would cast no visible shadow.'

'I think you must be mistaken about that,' said Dr. Norbury, 'but we
shall see, if the Director allows us to unroll the mummy. By the way,
those little objects in front of the knees are metallic, I suppose?'

'Yes, they are metallic. But they are not in front of the knees--they
are in the knees. They are pieces of silver wire which have been I used
to repair fractured kneecaps.'

'Are you sure of that?' exclaimed Dr. Norbury, peering at the little
white marks with ecstasy; 'because if you are, and if these objects are
what you say they are, the mummy of Sebekhotep is an absolutely unique
specimen.'

'I am quite certain of it,' said Thorndyke.

'Then,' said Dr. Norbury, 'we have made a discovery, thanks to your
inquiring spirit. Poor John Bellingham! He little knew what a treasure
he was giving us! How I wish he could have known! How I wish he could
have been here with us to-night!'

He paused once more to gaze in rapture at the photograph. And then
Thorndyke, in his quiet, impassive way, said:

'John Bellingham is here, Doctor Norbury. This is John Bellingham.'

Dr Norbury started back and stared at Thorndyke in speechless amazement.

'You don't mean,' he exclaimed, after a long pause, 'that this mummy is
the body of John Bellingham!'

'I do indeed. There is no doubt of it.'

'But it is impossible! The mummy was here in the gallery a full three
weeks before he disappeared.'

'Not so,' said Thorndyke. 'John Bellingham was last seen alive by you
and Mr. Jellicoe on the fourteenth of October, more than three weeks
before the mummy left Queen Square. After that date he was never seen
alive or dead by any person who knew him and could identify him.'

Dr Norbury reflected awhile in silence. Then, in a faint voice, he
asked:

'How do you suggest that John Bellingham's body came to be inside that
cartonnage?'

'I think Mr. Jellicoe is the most likely person to be able to answer
that question,' Thorndyke replied dryly.

There was another interval of silence, and then Dr. Norbury asked
suddenly:

'But what do you suppose has become of Sebekhotep? The real Sebekhotep,
I mean?'

'I take it,' said Thorndyke, 'that the remains of Sebekhotep, or at
least a portion of them, are at present lying in the Woodford mortuary
awaiting an adjourned inquest.'

As Thorndyke made this statement a flash of belated intelligence,
mingled with self-contempt, fell on me. Now that the explanation was
given, how obvious it was! And yet I, a competent anatomist and
physiologist and actually a pupil of Thorndyke's, had mistaken those
ancient bones for the remains of a recent body!

Dr Norbury considered the last statement for some time in evident
perplexity. 'It is all consistent enough, I must admit,' said he, at
length, 'and yet--are you quite sure there is no mistake? It seems so
incredible.'

There is no mistake, I assure you,' Thorndyke answered. 'To convince
you, I will give you the facts in detail. First, as to the teeth. I have
seen John Bellingham's dentist and obtained particulars from his
case-book. There were in all five teeth that had been filled. The right
upper wisdom-tooth, the molar next to it, and the second lower molar on
the left side, had all extensive gold fillings. You can see them all
quite plainly in the skiagraph. The left lower lateral incisor had a
very small gold filling, which you can see as a nearly circular white
dot. In addition to these, a filling of tin amalgam had been inserted
while the deceased was abroad, in the second left upper bicuspid, the
rather grey spot that we have already noticed. These would, by
themselves, furnish ample means of identification. But in addition,
there is the tattooed device of the eye of Osiris---'

'Horus,' murmured Dr. Norbury.

'Horus, then--in the exact locality in which it was borne by the
deceased and tattooed, apparently, with the same pigment. There are,
further, the suture wires in the knee-caps; Sir Morgan Bennet, having
looked up the notes of the operation, informs me that he introduced
three suture wires into the left patella and two into the right; which
is what the skiagraph shows. Lastly, the deceased had an old Pott's
fracture on the left side. It is not very apparent now, but I saw it
quite distinctly just now when the shadows of the bones were whiter. I
think that you may take it that the identification is beyond all doubt
or question.'

'Yes,' agreed Dr. Norbury, with gloomy resignation, 'it sounds, as you
say, quite conclusive. Well, well, it is a most horrible affair. Poor
old John Bellingham! It looks uncommonly as if he had met with foul
play. Don't you think so?'

'I do,' replied Thorndyke. 'There was a mark on the right side of the
skull that looked rather like a fracture. It was not very clear, being
at the side, but we must develop the negative to show it.'

Dr Norbury drew his breath in sharply through his teeth. 'This is a
gruesome business, Doctor,' said he. 'A terrible business. Awkward for
our people, too. By the way, what is our position in the matter? What
steps ought we to take?'

'You should give notice to the coroner--I will manage the police--and
you should communicate with one of the executors of the will.'

'Mr. Jellicoe?'

'No, not Mr. Jellicoe, under the peculiar circumstances. You had better
write to Mr. Godfrey Bellingham.'

'But I rather understood that Mr. Hurst was the co-executor,' said Dr.
Norbury.

'He is, surely, as matters stand,' said Jervis.

'Not at all,' replied Thorndyke. 'He was as matters stood; but he is not
now. You are forgetting the conditions of clause two. That clause sets
forth the conditions under which Godfrey Bellingham shall inherit the
bulk of the estate and become the co-executor; and those conditions are:
"that the body of the testator shall be deposited in some authorised
place for the reception of the bodies of the dead, situate within the
boundaries of, or appertaining to some place of worship within, the
parish of St George, Bloomsbury, and St Giles in the Fields, or St
Andrews above the Bars and St George the Martyr." Now Egyptian mummies
are bodies of the dead, and this Museum is an authorised place for their
reception; and this building is situate within the boundaries of the
parish of St George, Bloomsbury. Therefore the provisions of clause two
have been duly carried out and therefore Godfrey Bellingham is the
principal beneficiary under the will, and the co-executor, in accordance
with the wishes of the testator. Is that quite clear?'

'Perfectly,' said Dr. Norbury; 'and a most astonishing coincidence--but,
my dear young lady, had you not better sit down? You are looking very
ill.'

He glanced anxiously at Ruth, who was pale to the lips and was now
leaning heavily on my arm.

'I think, Berkeley,' said Thorndyke, 'you had better take Miss
Bellingham out into the gallery, where there is more air. This has been
a tremendous climax to all the trials she has borne so bravely. Go out
with Berkeley,' he added gently, laying his hand on her shoulder, 'and
sit down while we develop the other negatives. You mustn't break down
now, you know, when the storm has passed and the sun is beginning to
shine.' He held the door open and as we passed out his face softened
into a smile of infinite kindness. 'You won't mind my locking you out,'
said he; 'this is a photographic dark-room at present.'

The key grated in the lock and we turned away into the dim gallery. It
was not quite dark, for a beam of moonlight filtered in here and there
through the blinds that covered the sky-lights. We walked on slowly, her
arm linked in mine, and for a while neither of us spoke. The great rooms
were very silent and peaceful and solemn. The hush, the stillness, the
mystery of the half-seen forms in the cases around, were all in harmony
with the deeply-felt sense of a great deliverance that filled our
hearts.

We had passed through into the next room before either of us broke the
silence. Insensibly our hands had crept together, and as they met and
clasped with mutual pressure, Ruth exclaimed: 'How dreadful and tragic
it is! Poor, poor Uncle John! It seems as if he had come back from the
world of shadows to tell us of this awful thing. But, O God! what a
relief it is!'

She caught her breath in one or two quick sobs and pressed my hand
passionately.

'It is over, dearest,' I said. 'It is gone for ever. Nothing remains but
the memory of your sorrow and your noble courage and patience.'

'I can't realise it yet,' she murmured. 'It has been like a frightful,
interminable dream.'

'Let us put it away,' said I, 'and think only of the happy life that is
opening.'

She made no reply, and only a quick catch in her breath, now and again,
told of the long agony that she had endured with such heroic calm.

We walked on slowly, scarcely disturbing the silence with our soft
footfalls, through the wide doorway into the second room. The vague
shapes of mummy-cases standing erect in the wall-cases, loomed out dim
and gigantic, silent watchers keeping their vigil with the memories of
untold centuries locked in their shadowy breasts. They were an awesome
company. Reverend survivors from a vanished world, they looked out from
the gloom of their abiding-place, but with no shade of menace or of
malice in their silent presence; rather with a solemn benison on the
fleeting creatures of to-day.

Half-way along the room a ghostly figure, somewhat aloof from its
companions, showed a dim, pallid blotch where its face would have
been. With one accord we halted before it.

'Do you know who this is, Ruth?' I asked.

'Of course I do,' she answered. 'It is Artemidorus.'

We stood, hand in hand, facing the mummy, letting our memories fill in
the vague silhouette with its well-remembered details. Presently I
drew her nearer to me and whispered:

'Ruth! do you remember when we last stood here?'

'As if I could ever forget!' she answered passionately. 'Oh, Paul! The
sorrow of it! The misery! How it wrung my heart to tell you! Were you
very unhappy when I left you?'

'Unhappy! I never knew, until then, what real, heart-breaking sorrow
was. It seemed as if the light had gone out of my life for ever. But
there was just one little spot of brightness left.'

'What was that?'

'You made me a promise, dear--a solemn promise; and I felt--at least
I hoped--that the day would come, if I only waited patiently, when you
would be able to redeem it.'

She crept closer to me and yet closer, until her head nestled on my
shoulder and her soft cheek lay against mine.

'Dear heart,' I whispered, 'is it now? Is the time fulfilled?'

'Yes, dearest,' she murmured softly. 'It is now--and for ever.'

Reverently I folded her in my arms; gathered her to the heart that
worshipped her utterly. Henceforth no sorrows could hurt us, no
misfortunes vex; for we should walk hand in hand on our earthly
pilgrimage and find the way all too short.

Time, whose sands run out with such unequal swiftness for the just and
the unjust, the happy and the wretched, lagged, no doubt, with the
toilers in the room that we had left. But for us its golden grains
trickled out apace, and left the glass empty before we had begun to
mark their passage. The turning of a key and the opening of a door
aroused us from our dream of perfect happiness. Ruth raised her head
to listen, and our lips met for one brief moment. Then, with a silent
greeting to the friend who had looked on our grief and witnessed our
final happiness, we turned and retraced our steps quickly, filling the
great empty rooms with chattering echoes.

'We won't go back into the dark-room--which isn't dark now,' said
Ruth.

'Why not?' I asked.

'Because--when I came out I was very pale; and I'm--well, I don't
think I am very pale now. Besides, poor Uncle John is in there--and--I
should be ashamed to look at him with my selfish heart overflowing
with happiness.'

'You needn't be,' said I. 'It is the day of our lives and we have a
right to be happy. But you shan't go in, if you don't wish to,' and I
accordingly steered her adroitly past the beam of light that streamed
from the open door.

'We have developed four negatives,' said Thorndyke, as he emerged with
the others, 'and I am leaving them in the custody of Doctor Norbury,
who will sign each when they are dry, as they may have to be put in
evidence. What are you going to do?'

I looked at Ruth to see what she wished.

'If you won't think me ungrateful,' said she, 'I should rather be
alone with my father to-night. He is very weak, and--'

'Yes, I understand,' I said hastily. And I did. Mr. Bellingham was a
man of strong emotions and would probably be somewhat overcome by the
sudden change of fortune and the news of his brother's tragic death.

'In that case,' said Thorndyke, 'I will bespeak your services. Will
you go on and wait for me at my chambers, when you have seen Miss
Bellingham home?'

I agreed to this, and we set forth under the guidance of Dr. Norbury
(who carried an electric lamp) to return by the way we had come; two of
us, at least, in a vastly different frame of mind. The party broke up at
the entrance gates, and as Thorndyke wished my companion 'Good-night,'
she held his hand and looked up in his face with swimming eyes.

'I haven't thanked you, Doctor Thorndyke,' she said, 'and I don't feel
that I ever can. What you have done for me and my father is beyond all
thanks. You have saved his life and you have rescued me from the most
horrible ignominy. Good-bye! and God bless you!'

The hansom that bowled along eastward--at most unnecessary speed--bore
two of the happiest human beings within the wide boundaries of the town.
I looked at my companion as the lights of the street shone into the cab,
and was astonished at the transformation. The pallor of her cheek had
given place to a rosy pink; the hardness, the tension, the haggard
self-repression that had aged her face, were all gone, and the girlish
sweetness that had so bewitched me in the early days of our love had
stolen back. Even the dimple was there when the sweeping lashes lifted
and her eyes met mine in a smile of infinite tenderness.

Little was said on that brief journey. It was happiness enough to sit,
hand clasped in hand, and know that our time of trial was past; that no
cross of Fate could ever part us now.

The astonished cabman set us down, according to instructions, at the
entrance to Nevill's Court, and watched us with open mouth as we
vanished into the narrow passage. The court had settled down for the
night, and no one marked our return; no curious eye looked down on us
from the dark house-front as we said 'Good-bye' just inside the gate.

'You will come and see us to-morrow, dear, won't you?' she asked.

'Do you think it possible that I could stay away, then?'

'I hope not, but come as early as you can. My father will be positively
frantic to see you; because I shall have told him, you know. And,
remember, that it is you who have brought us this great deliverance.
Good-night, Paul.'

'Good-night, sweetheart.'

She put up her face frankly to be kissed and then ran up to the ancient
door; whence she waved me a last good-bye. The shabby gate in the wall
closed behind me and hid her from my sight; but the light of her love
went with me and turned the dull street into a path of glory.



CHAPTER XIX. A STRANGE SYMPOSIUM



IT came upon me with something of a shock of surprise to find the
scrap of paper still tacked to the oak of Thorndyke's chambers. So
much had happened since I had last looked on it that it seemed to
belong to another epoch of my life. I removed it thoughtfully and
picked out the tack before entering, and then, closing the inner door,
but leaving the oak open, I lit the gas and fell to pacing the room.

What a wonderful episode it had been! How the whole aspect of the
world had been changed in a moment by Thorndyke's revelation! At
another time, curiosity would have led me to endeavour to trace back
the train of reasoning by which the subtle brain of my teacher had
attained this astonishing conclusion. But now my own happiness held
exclusive possession of my thoughts. The image of Ruth filled the
field of my mental vision. I saw her again as I had seen her in the
cab with her sweet, pensive face and downcast eyes; I felt again the
touch of her soft cheek and the parting kiss by the gate, so frank and
simple, so intimate and final.

I must have waited quite a long time, though the golden minutes sped
unreckoned, for when my two colleagues arrived they tendered needless
apologies.

'And I suppose,' said Thorndyke, 'you have been wondering what I
wanted you for.'

I had not, as a matter of fact, given the matter a moment's
consideration.

'We are going to call on Mr. Jellicoe,' Thorndyke explained. 'There is
something behind this affair, and until I have ascertained what it is,
the case is not complete from my point of view.'

'Wouldn't it have done as well to-morrow?' I asked.

'It might; and then it might not. There is an old saying as to
catching a weasel asleep. Mr. Jellicoe is a somewhat wide-awake
person, and I think it best to introduce him to Inspector Badger at
the earliest possible moment.'

'The meeting of a weasel and a badger suggests a sporting interview,'
remarked Jervis. 'But you don't expect Jellicoe to give himself away,
do you?'

'He can hardly do that, seeing that there is nothing to give away. But
I think he may make a statement. There were some exceptional
circumstances, I feel sure.'

'How long have you known that the body was in the Museum?' I asked.

'About thirty or forty seconds longer than you have, I should say.'

'Do you mean,' I exclaimed, 'that you did not know until the negative
was developed?'

'My dear fellow,' he replied, 'do you suppose that, if I had had
certain knowledge where the body was, I should have allowed that noble
girl to go on dragging out a lingering agony of suspense that I could
have cut short in a moment? Or that I should have made these
humbugging pretences of scientific experiments if a more dignified
course had been open to me?'

'As to the experiments,' said Jervis, 'Norbury could hardly have
refused if you had taken him into your confidence.'

'Indeed he could, and probably would. My "confidence" would have
involved a charge of murder against a highly respectable gentleman who
was well known to him. He would probably have referred me to the
police, and then what could I have done? I had plenty of suspicions,
but not a single solid fact.'

Our discussion was here interrupted by hurried footsteps on the stairs
and a thundering rat-tat on our knocker.

As Jervis opened the door, Inspector Badger burst into the room in a
highly excited state.

'What is all this, Doctor Thorndyke?' he asked. 'I see you've sworn an
information against Mr. Jellicoe, and I have a warrant to arrest him;
but before anything else is done I think it right to tell you that we
have more evidence than is generally known pointing to quite a
different quarter.'

'Derived from Mr. Jellicoe's information,' said Thorndyke. 'But the
fact is that I have just examined and identified the body at the
British Museum, where it was deposited by Mr. Jellicoe. I don't say
that he murdered John Bellingham--though that is what appearances
suggest--but I do say that he will have to account for his secret
disposal of the body.'

Inspector Badger was thunderstruck. Also he was visibly annoyed. The
salt which Mr. Jellicoe had so adroitly sprinkled on the constabulary
tail appeared to develop irritating properties, for when Thorndyke had
given him a brief outline of the facts he stuck his hands in his
pockets and exclaimed gloomily:

'Well, I'm hanged! And to think of all the time and trouble I've spent
on those damned bones! I suppose they were just a plant?'

'Don't let us disparage them,' said Thorndyke. 'They have played a
useful part. They represent the inevitable mistake that every criminal
makes sooner or later. The murderer will always do a little too much.
If he would only lie low and let well alone, the detective might
whistle for a clue. But it is time we were starting.'

'Are we all going?' asked the inspector, looking at me in particular
with no very gracious recognition.

'We will all come with you,' said Thorndyke; 'but you will, naturally,
make the arrest in the way that seems best to you.'

'It's a regular procession,' grumbled the inspector; but he made no
more definite objection, and we started forth on our quest.

The distance from the Temple to Lincoln's Inn is not great. In five
minutes we were at the gateway in Chancery Lane, and a couple of
minutes later saw us gathered round the threshold of the stately old
house in New Square.

'Seems to be a light in the first-floor front,' said Badger. 'You'd
better move away before I ring the bell.'

But the precaution was unnecessary. As the inspector advanced to the
bell-pull a head was thrust out of the open window immediately above
the street door.

'Who are you?' inquired the owner of the head in a voice which I
recognised as that of Mr. Jellicoe.

'I am Inspector Badger of the Criminal Investigation Department. I
wish to see Mr. Arthur Jellicoe.'

'Then look at me. I am Mr. Arthur Jellicoe.'

'I hold a warrant for your arrest, Mr. Jellicoe. You are charged with
the murder of Mr. John Bellingham, whose body has been discovered in
the British Museum.'

'By whom?'

'By Doctor Thorndyke.'

'Indeed,' said Mr. Jellicoe. 'Is he here?'

'Yes.'

'Ha! and you wish to arrest me, I presume?'

'Yes. That is what I am here for.'

'Well, I will agree to surrender myself subject to certain
conditions.'

'I can't make any conditions, Mr. Jellicoe.'

'No, I will make them, and you will accept them. Otherwise you will
not arrest me.'

'It's no use for you to talk like that,' said Badger. 'If you don't
let me in I shall have to break in. And I may as well tell you,' he
added mendaciously, 'that the house is surrounded.'

'You may accept my assurance,' Mr. Jellicoe replied calmly, 'that you
will not arrest me if you do not accept my conditions.'

'Well, what are your conditions?' demanded Badger.

'I desire to make a statement,' said Mr. Jellicoe.

'You can do that, but I must caution you that anything you say may be
used in evidence against you.'

'Naturally. But I wish to make the statement in the presence of Doctor
Thorndyke, and I desire to hear a statement from him of the method of
investigation by which he discovered the whereabouts of the body. That
is to say, if he is willing.'

'If you mean that we should mutually enlighten one another, I am very
willing indeed,' said Thorndyke.

'Very well. Then my conditions, Inspector, are that I shall hear
Doctor Thorndyke's statement and that I shall be permitted to make a
statement myself, and that until those statements are completed, with
any necessary interrogation and discussion, I shall remain at liberty
and shall suffer no molestation or interference of any kind. And I
agree that, on the conclusion of the said proceedings, I will submit
without resistance to any course that you may adopt.'

'I can't agree to that,' said Badger.

'Can't you?' said Mr. Jellicoe coldly; and after a pause he added:
'Don't be hasty. I have given you warning.'

There was something in Mr. Jellicoe's passionless tone that disturbed
the inspector exceedingly, for he turned to Thorndyke and said in a
low tone:

'I wonder what his game is? He can't get away, you know.'

'There are several possibilities,' said Thorndyke.

'M'm, yes,' said Badger, stroking his chin perplexedly.

'After all, is there any objection? His statement might save trouble,
and you'd be on the safe side. It would take you some time to break
in.'

'Well,' said Mr. Jellicoe, with his hand on the window, 'do you
agree--yes or no?'

'All right,' said Badger sulkily. 'I agree.'

'You promise not to molest me in any way until I have quite finished?'

'I promise.'

Mr. Jellicoe's head disappeared and the window closed. After a short
pause we heard the jar of massive bolts and the clank of a chain, and,
as the heavy door swung open, Mr. Jellicoe stood revealed, calm and
impassive, with an old-fashioned office candlestick in his hand.

Who are the others?' he inquired, peering out sharply through his
spectacles.

'Oh, they are nothing to do with me,' replied Badger.

They are Doctor Berkeley and Doctor Jervis,' said Thorndyke.

Ha!' said Mr. Jellicoe; 'very kind and attentive of them to call.
Pray, come in, gentlemen. I am sure you will be interested to hear our
little discussion.'

He held the door open with a certain stiff courtesy, and we all
entered the hall led by Inspector Badger. He closed the door softly
and preceded us up the stairs and into the apartment from the window
of which he had dictated the terms of surrender. It was a fine old
room, spacious, lofty, and dignified, with panelled walls and a carved
mantelpiece, the central escutcheon of which bore the initials 'J. W.
P.' with the date '1671.' A large writing-table stood at the farther
end, and behind it an iron safe.

'I have been expecting this visit,' Mr. Jellicoe remarked tranquilly
as he placed four chairs opposite the table. 'Since when?' asked
Thorndyke.

'Since last Monday evening, when I had the pleasure of seeing you
conversing with my friend Doctor Berkeley at the Inner Temple gate,
and then inferred that you were retained in the case. That was a
circumstance that had not been fully provided for. May I offer you
gentlemen a glass of sherry?'

As he spoke he placed on the table a decanter and a tray of glasses,
and looked at us interrogatively with his hand on the stopper.

'Well, I don't mind if I do, Mr. Jellicoe,' said Badger, on whom the
lawyer's glance had finally settled. Mr. Jellicoe filled a glass and
handed it to him with a stiff bow; then, with the decanter still in
his hand, he said persuasively: 'Doctor Thorndyke, pray allow me to
fill you a glass?'

'No, thank you,' said Thorndyke, in a tone so decided that the
inspector looked round at him quickly. And as Badger caught his eye,
the glass which he was about to raise to his lips became suddenly
arrested and was slowly returned to the table untasted.

'I don't want to hurry you, Mr. Jellicoe,' said the inspector, 'but
it's rather late, and I should like to get this business settled. What
is it that you wish to do?'

'I desire,' replied Mr. Jellicoe, 'to make a detailed statement of the
events that have happened, and I wish to hear from Doctor Thorndyke
precisely how he arrived at his very remarkable conclusion. When this
has been done I shall be entirely at your service; and I suggest that
it would be more interesting if Doctor Thorndyke would give us his
statement before I furnish you with the actual facts.'

'I am entirely of your opinion,' said Thorndyke.--I

'Then in that case,' said Mr. Jellicoe, 'I suggest that you disregard
me, and address your remarks to your friends as if I were not
present.'

Thorndyke acquiesced with a bow, and Mr. Jellicoe, having seated
himself in his elbow-chair behind the table, poured himself out a
glass of water, selected a cigarette from a neat silver case, lighted
it deliberately, and leaned back to listen at his ease.

'My first acquaintance with this case,' Thorndyke began without
preamble, 'was made through the medium of the daily papers about two
years ago; and I may say that, although I had no interest in it beyond
the purely academic interest of a specialist in a case that lies in
his particular speciality, I considered it with deep attention. The
newspaper reports contained no particulars of the relations of the
parties that could furnish any hints as to motives on the part of any
of them, but merely a bare statement of the events. And this was a
distinct advantage, inasmuch as it left one to consider the facts of
the case without regard to motive--to balance the prima facie
probabilities with an open mind. And it may surprise you to learn that
those prima facie probabilities pointed from the very first to that
solution which has been put to the test of experiment this evening.
Hence it will be well for me to begin by giving the conclusions that I
reached by reasoning from the facts set forth in the newspapers before
any of the further facts came to my knowledge.

'From the facts as stated in the newspaper reports it is obvious that
there were four possible explanations of the disappearance.

'1. The man might be alive and in hiding. This was highly improbable,
for the reasons that were stated by Mr. Loram at the late hearing of
the application, and for a further reason that I shall mention
presently.

'2. He might have died by accident or disease, and his body failed to
be identified. This was even more improbable, seeing that he carried
on his person abundant means of identification, including visiting
cards.

'3. He might have been murdered by some stranger for the sake of his
portable property. This was highly improbable for the same reason: his
body could hardly have failed to be identified.

'These three explanations are what we may call the outside
explanations. They touched none of the parties mentioned; they were
all obviously improbable on general grounds; and to all of them there
was one conclusive answer--the scarab which was found in Godfrey
Bellingham's garden. Hence I put them aside and gave my attention to
the fourth explanation. This was that the missing man had been made
away with by one of the parties mentioned in the report. But, since
the reports mentioned three parties, it was evident that there was a
choice of three hypotheses namely:

4' (a) That John Bellingham had been made away with by Hurst; or (b)
by the Bellinghams; or (c) by Mr. Jellicoe.

'Now, I have constantly impressed on my pupils that the indispensable
question that must be asked at the outset of such an inquiry as this
is, "When was the missing person last undoubtedly seen or known to be
alive?" That is the question that I asked myself after reading the
newspaper report; and the answer was, that he was last certainly seen
alive on the fourteenth of October, nineteen hundred and two, at 141,
Queen Square, Bloomsbury. Of the fact that he was alive at that time
and place there could be no doubt whatever; for he was seen at the
same moment by two persons, both of whom were intimately acquainted
with him, and one of whom, Doctor Norbury, was apparently a
disinterested witness. After that date he was never seen, alive or
dead, by any person who knew him and was able to identify him. It was
stated that he had been seen on the twenty-third of November following
by the housemaid of Mr. Hurst; but as this person was unacquainted
with him, it was uncertain whether the person whom she saw was or was
not John Bellingham.

'Hence the disappearance dated, not from the twenty-third of November,
as every one seems to have assumed, but from the fourteenth of
October; and the question was not, "What became of John Bellingham
after he entered Mr. Hurst's house?" but, "What became of him after
his interview in Queen Square?"

'But as soon as I had decided that that interview must form the real
starting point of the inquiry, a most striking set of circumstances
came into view. It became obvious that if Mr. Jellicoe had had any
reason for wishing to make away with John Bellingham, he had such an
opportunity as seldom falls to the lot of an intending murderer.

'Just consider the conditions. John Bellingham was known to be setting
out alone upon a journey beyond the sea. His exact destination was not
stated. He was to be absent for an undetermined period, but at least
three weeks. His disappearance would occasion no comment; his absence
would lead to no inquiries, at least for several weeks, during which
the murderer would have leisure quietly to dispose of the body and
conceal all traces of the crime. The conditions were, from a
murderer's point of view, ideal.

'But that was not all. During that very period of John Bellingham's
absence Mr. Jellicoe was engaged to deliver to the British Museum what
was admittedly a dead human body; and that body was to be enclosed in
a sealed case. Could any more perfect or secure method of disposing of
a body be devised by the most ingenious murderer? The plan would have
had only one weak point: the mummy would be known to have left Queen
Square after the disappearance of John Bellingham, and suspicion might
in the end have arisen. To this point I shall return presently;
meanwhile we will consider the second hypothesis--that the missing man
was made away with by Mr. Hurst.

'Now, there seemed to be no doubt that some person, purporting to be
John Bellingham, did actually visit Mr. Hurst's house; and he must
either have left the house or remained in it. If he left, he did so
surreptitiously; if he remained, there could be no reasonable doubt
that he had been murdered and that his body had been concealed. Let us
consider the probabilities in each case.

'Assuming--as every one seems to have done--that the visitor was
really John Bellingham, we are dealing with a responsible, middle-aged
gentleman, and the idea that such a person would enter a house,
announce his intention of staying, and then steal away unobserved is
very difficult to accept. Moreover, he would appear to have come down
to Eltham by rail immediately on landing in England, leaving his
luggage in the cloak-room at Charing Cross. This pointed to a
definiteness of purpose quite inconsistent with his casual
disappearance from the house.

'On the other hand, the idea that he might have been murdered by Hurst
was not inconceivable. The thing was physically possible. If
Bellingham had really been in the study when Hurst came home, the
murder could have been committed--by appropriate means--and the body
temporarily concealed in the cupboard or elsewhere. But, although
possible it was not at all probable. There was no real opportunity.
The risk and the subsequent difficulties would be very great; there
was not a particle of positive evidence that a murder had occurred;
and the conduct of Hurst in immediately leaving the house in
possession of the servants is quite inconsistent with the supposition
that there was a body concealed in it. So that, while it is almost
impossible to believe that John Bellingham left the house of his own
accord, it is equally difficult to believe that he did not leave it.

'But there is a third possibility, which, strange to say, no one seems
to have suggested. Supposing that the visitor was not John Bellingham
at all, but some one who was personating him? That would dispose of
the difficulties completely. The strange disappearance ceases to be
strange, for a personator would necessarily make off before Mr. Hurst
should arrive and discover the imposture. But if we accept this
supposition, we raise two further questions: "Who was the personator?"
and "What was the object of the personation?"

'Now, the personator was clearly not Hurst himself, for he would have
been recognised by his housemaid; he was therefore either Godfrey
Bellingham or Mr. Jellicoe or some other person; and as no other
person was mentioned in the newspaper reports I confined my
speculations to these two.

'And, first, as to Godfrey Bellingham. It did not appear whether he
was or was not known to the housemaid, so I assumed--wrongly, as it
turns out--that he was not. Then he might have been the personator.
But why should he have personated his brother? He could not have
already committed the murder. There had not been time enough. He would
have had to leave Woodford before John Bellingham had set out from
Charing Cross. And even if he had committed the murder, he would have
no object in raising this commotion. His cue would have been to remain
quiet and know nothing. The probabilities were all against the
personator being Godfrey Bellingham.

'Then could it be Mr. Jellicoe? The answer to this question is
contained in the answer to the further question: What could have been
the object of the personation?

'What motive could this unknown person have had in appearing,
announcing himself as John Bellingham, and forthwith vanishing? There
could only have been one motive: that, namely, of fixing the date of
John Bellingham's disappearance--of furnishing a definite moment at
which he was last seen alive.

'But who was likely to have had such a motive? Let us see.

'I said just now that if Mr. Jellicoe had murdered John Bellingham and
disposed of the body in the mummy-case, he would have been absolutely
safe for the time being. But there would be a weak spot in his armour.
For a month or more the disappearance of his client would occasion no
remark. But presently, when he failed to return, inquiries would be
set on foot; and then it would appear that no one had seen him since
he left Queen Square. Then it would be noted that the last person with
whom he was seen was Mr. Jellicoe. It might, further, be remembered
that the mummy had been delivered to the Museum some time after the
missing man was last seen alive. And so suspicion might arise and be
followed by disastrous investigations. But supposing it should be made
to appear that John Bellingham had been seen alive more than a month
after his interview with Mr. Jellicoe and some weeks after the mummy
had been deposited in the Museum? Then Mr. Jellicoe would cease to be
in any way connected with the disappearance and henceforth would be
absolutely safe.

'Hence, after carefully considering this part of the newspaper report,
I came to the conclusion that the mysterious occurrence at Mr. Hurst's
home had only one reasonable explanation, namely, that the visitor was
not John Bellingham, but some one personating him; and that that some
one was Mr. Jellicoe.

'It remains to consider the case of Godfrey Bellingham and his
daughter, though I cannot understand how any sane person can have
seriously suspected either' (here Inspector Badger smiled a sour
smile). 'The evidence against them was negligible, for there was
nothing to connect them with the affair save the finding of the scarab
on their premises; and that event, which might have been highly
suspicious under other circumstances, was robbed of any significance
by the fact that the scarab was found on a spot which had been passed
a few minutes previously by the other suspected party, Hurst. The
finding of the scarab did, however, establish two important
conclusions: namely, that John Bellingham had probably met with foul
play, and that of the four persons present when it was found, one at
least had had possession of the body. As to which of the four was the
one, the circumstances furnished only a hint, which was this: If the
scarab had been purposely dropped, the most likely person to find it
was the one who dropped it. And the person who discovered it was Mr.
Jellicoe.

'Following up this hint, if we ask ourselves what motive Mr. Jellicoe
could have had for dropping it--assuming him to be the murderer--the
answer is obvious. It would not be his policy to fix the crime on any
particular person, but rather to set up a complication of conflicting
evidence which would occupy the attention of investigators and divert
it from himself.

'Of course, if Hurst had been the murderer, he would have had a
sufficient motive for dropping the scarab, so that the case against
Mr. Jellicoe was not conclusive; but the fact that it was he who found
it was highly significant.

'This completes the analysis of the evidence contained in the original
newspaper report describing the circumstances of the disappearance.
The conclusions that followed from it were, as you will have seen:

'1. That the missing man was almost certainly dead, as proved by the
finding of the scarab after his disappearance.

'2. That he had probably been murdered by one or more of four persons,
as proved by the finding of the scarab on the premises occupied by two
of them and accessible to the others.

'3. That, of those four persons, one--Mr. Jellicoe--was the last
person who was known to have been in the company of the missing man;
had had an exceptional opportunity for committing the murder; and was
known to have delivered a dead body to the Museum subsequently to the
disappearance.

'4. That the supposition that Mr. Jellicoe had committed the murder
rendered all the other circumstances of the disappearance clearly
intelligible, whereas on any other supposition they were quite
inexplicable.

'The evidence of the newspaper report, therefore, clearly pointed to
the probability that John Bellingham had been murdered by Mr. Jellicoe
and his body concealed in the mummy-case.

'I do not wish to give you the impression that I, then and there,
believed that Mr. Jellicoe was the murderer. I did not. There was no
reason to suppose that the report contained all the essential facts,
and I merely considered it speculatively as a study in probabilities.
But I did decide that that was the only probable conclusion from the
facts that were given.

'Nearly two years had passed before I heard anything more of the case.
Then it was brought to my notice by my friend, Doctor Berkeley, and I
became acquainted with certain new facts, which I will consider in the
order in which they became known to me.

'The first new light on the case came from the will. As soon as I had
read the document I felt convinced that there was something wrong. The
testator's evident intention was that his brother should inherit the
property, whereas the construction of the will was such as almost
certainly to defeat that intention. The devolution of the property
depended on the burial clause--clause two; but the burial arrangements
would ordinarily be decided by the executor, who happened to be Mr.
Jellicoe. Thus the will left the disposition of the property under the
control of Mr. Jellicoe, though his action could have been contested.

'Now, this will, although drawn up by John Bellingham, was executed in
Mr. Jellicoe's office as is proved by the fact that it was witnessed
by two of his clerks. He was the testator's lawyer, and it was his
duty to insist on the will being properly drawn. Evidently he did
nothing of the kind, and this fact strongly suggested some kind of
collusion on his part with Hurst, who stood to benefit by the
miscarriage of the will. And this was the odd feature in the case; for
whereas the party responsible for the defective provisions was Mr.
Jellicoe, the party who benefited was Hurst.

'But the most startling peculiarity of the will was the way in which
it fitted the circumstances of the disappearance. It looked as if
clause two had been drawn up with those very circumstances in view.
Since, however, the will was ten years old, this was impossible. But
if clause two could not have been devised to fit the disappearance,
could the disappearance have been devised to fit clause two? That was
by no means impossible: under the circumstances it looked rather
probable. And if it had been so contrived, who was the agent in that
contrivance? Hurst stood to benefit, but there was no evidence that he
even knew the contents of the will. There only remained Mr. Jellicoe,
who had certainly connived at the misdrawing of the will for some
purpose of his own--some dishonest purpose.

'The evidence of the will, then, pointed to Mr. Jellicoe as the agent
in the disappearance, and, after reading it, I definitely suspected
him of the crime.

'Suspicion, however, is one thing and proof is another; I had not
nearly enough evidence to justify me in laying an information, and I
could not approach the Museum officials without making a definite
accusation. The great difficulty of the case was that I could discover
no motive. I could not see any way in which Mr. Jellicoe would benefit
by the disappearance. His own legacy was secure, whenever and however
the testator died. The murder and concealment apparently benefited
Hurst alone; and, in the absence of any plausible motive, the facts
required to be much more conclusive than they were.'

'Did you form absolutely no opinion as to motive?' asked Mr. Jellicoe.

He put the question in a quiet, passionless tone, as if he were
discussing some cause celebre in which he had nothing more than a
professional interest. Indeed, the calm, impersonal interest that he
displayed in Thorndyke's analysis, his unmoved attention, punctuated
by little nods of approval at each telling point in the argument, were
the most surprising features of this astounding interview.

'I did form an opinion,' replied Thorndyke, 'but it was merely
speculative, and I was never able to confirm it. I discovered that
about ten years ago Mr. Hurst had been in difficulties and that he had
suddenly raised a considerable sum of money, no one knew how or on
what security. I observed that this event coincided with the execution
of the will, and I surmised that there might be some connection
between them. But that was only a surmise; and, as the proverb has it,
"He discovers who proves." I could prove nothing, so that I never
discovered Mr. Jellicoe's motive, and I don't know it now.'

'Don't you really?' said Mr. Jellicoe, in something approaching a tone
of animation. He laid down the end of his cigarette, and, as he
selected another from the silver case, he continued: 'I think that is
the most interesting feature of your really remarkable analysis. It
does you great credit. The absence of motive would have appeared to
most persons a fatal objection to the theory of, what I may call, the
prosecution. Permit me to congratulate you on the consistency and
tenacity with which you have pursued the actual, visible facts.'

He bowed stiffly to Thorndyke (who returned his bow with equal
stiffness), lighted a fresh cigarette, and once more leaned back in
his chair with the calm, attentive manner of a man who is listening to
a lecture or a musical performance.

'The evidence, then, being insufficient to act upon,' Thorndyke
resumed, 'there was nothing for it but to wait for some new facts.
Now, the study of a large series of carefully conducted murders brings
into view an almost invariable phenomenon. The cautious murderer, in
his anxiety to make himself secure, does too much; and it is this
excess of precaution that leads to detection. It happens constantly;
indeed, I may say that it always happens--in those murders that are
detected; of those that are not we say nothing--and I had strong
hopes that it would happen in this case. And it did.

'At the very moment when my client's case seemed almost hopeless, some
human remains were discovered at Sidcup. I read the account of the
discovery in the evening paper, and, scanty as the report was, it
recorded enough facts to convince me that the inevitable mistake had
been made.'

'Did it, indeed?' said Mr. Jellicoe. 'A mere, inexpert, hearsay
report! I should have supposed it to be quite valueless from a
scientific point of view.'

'So it was,' said Thorndyke. 'But it gave the date of the discovery
and the locality, and it also mentioned what bones had been found.
Which were all vital facts. Take the question of time. These remains,
after lying perdu for two years, suddenly come to light just as the
parties--who have also been lying perdu--have begun to take action in
respect of the will; in fact, within a week or two of the hearing of
the application. It was certainly a remarkable coincidence. And when
the circumstances that occasioned the discovery were considered, the
coincidence became more remarkable still. For these remains were found
on land actually belonging to John Bellingham, and their discovery
resulted from certain operations (the clearing of the watercress-beds)
carried out on behalf of the absent landlord. But by whose orders were
those works undertaken? Clearly by the orders of the landlord's agent.
But the landlord's agent was known to be Mr. Jellicoe. Therefore these
remains were brought to light at this peculiarly opportune moment by
the action of Mr. Jellicoe. The coincidence, I say again, was very
remarkable.

'But what instantly arrested my attention on reading the newspaper
report was the unusual manner in which the arm had been separated; for,
beside the bones of the arm proper, there were those of what anatomists
call the "shoulder-girdle"--the shoulder-blade and collar-bone. This was
very remarkable. It seemed to suggest a knowledge of anatomy, and yet no
murderer, even if he possessed such knowledge, would make a display of
it on such an occasion. It seemed to me that there must be some other
explanation. Accordingly, when other remains had come to light and all
had been collected at Woodford, I asked my friend Berkeley to go down
there and inspect them. He did so, and this is what he found:

'Both arms had been detached in the same peculiar manner; both were
complete, and all the bones were from the same body. The bones were
quite clean--of soft structures, I mean. There were no cuts, scratches
or marks on them. There was not a trace of adipocere--the peculiar waxy
soap that forms in bodies that decay in water or in a damp situation.
The right hand had been detached at the time the arm was thrown into the
pond, and the left ring finger had been separated and had vanished. This
latter fact had attracted my attention from the first, but I will leave
its consideration for the moment and return to it later.'

'How did you discover that the hand had been detached?' Mr. Jellicoe
asked.

'By the submersion marks,' replied Thorndyke. 'It was lying on the
bottom of the pond in a position which would have been impossible if it
had been attached to the arm.'

'You interest me exceedingly,' said Mr. Jellicoe. 'It appears that a
medico-legal expert finds "books in the running brooks, sermons in
bones, and evidence in everything." But don't let me interrupt you.'

'Doctor Berkeley's observations,' Thorndyke resumed, 'together with the
medical evidence at the inquest, led me to certain conclusions.

'Let me state the facts which were disclosed.

'The remains which had been assembled formed a complete human skeleton
with the exception of the skull, one finger, and the legs from the knee
to the ankle, including both knee-caps. This was a very impressive fact;
for the bones that were missing included all those which could have been
identified as belonging or not belonging to John Bellingham; and the
bones that were present were the unidentifiable remainder.

'It had a suspicious appearance of selection.

'But the parts that were present were also curiously suggestive. In all
cases the mode of dismemberment was peculiar; for an ordinary person
would have divided the knee-joint leaving the kneecap attached to the
thigh, whereas it had evidently been left attached to the shin-bone; and
the head would most probably have been removed by cutting through the
neck instead of being neatly detached from the spine. And all these
bones were almost entirely free from marks or scratches such as would
naturally occur in an ordinary dismemberment, and all were quite free
from adipocere. And now as to the conclusions which I drew from these
facts. First, there was the peculiar grouping of the bones. What was the
meaning of that? Well, the idea of a punctilious anatomist was obviously
absurd, and I put it aside. But was there any other explanation? Yes,
there was. The bones had appeared in the natural groups that are held
together by ligaments; and they had separated at points where they were
attached principally by muscles. The knee-cap, for instance, which
really belongs to the thigh, is attached to it by muscle, but to the
shin-bone by a stout ligament. And so with the bones of the arm; they
are connected to one another by ligaments; but to the trunk only by
muscle, excepting at one end of the collarbone.

But this was a very significant fact. Ligament decays much more slowly
than muscle, so that in a body of which the muscles had largely decayed
the bones might still be held together by ligament. The peculiar
grouping therefore suggested that the body had been partly reduced to a
skeleton before it was dismembered; that it had then been merely pulled
apart and not divided with a knife.

'This suggestion was remarkably confirmed by the total absence of
knife-cuts or scratches.

'Then there was the fact that all the bones were quite free from
adipocere. Now, if an arm or a thigh should be deposited in water and
left undisturbed to decay, it is certain that large masses of adipocere
would be formed. Probably more than half of the flesh would be converted
into this substance. The absence of adipocere therefore proved that the
bulk of the flesh had disappeared or been removed from the bones before
they were deposited in the pond. That, in fact, it was not a body, but a
skeleton, that had been deposited.

'But what kind of skeleton? If it was the recent skeleton of a murdered
man, then the bones had been carefully stripped of flesh so as to leave
the ligaments intact. But this was highly improbable; for there could be
no object in preserving the ligaments. And the absence of scratches was
against this view.

'Then they did not appear to be graveyard bones. The collection was too
complete. It is very rare to find a graveyard skeleton of which many of
the small bones are not missing. And such bones are usually more or less
weathered or friable.

'They did not appear to be bones such as may be bought at an
osteological dealer's, for these usually have perforations to admit the
macerating fluid to the marrow cavities. Dealers' bones, too, are very
seldom all from the same body; and the small bones of the hand are
drilled with holes to enable them to be strung on catgut.

'They were not dissecting-room bones, as there was no trace of red lead
in the openings for the nutrient arteries.

'What the appearances did suggest was that these were parts of a body
which had decayed in a very dry atmosphere (in which no adipocere would
be formed), and which had been pulled or broken apart. Also that the
ligaments which held the body--or rather skeleton--together were brittle
and friable as suggested by the detached hand, which had probably broken
off accidentally. But the only kind of body that completely answered
this description is an Egyptian mummy. A mummy, it is true, has been
more or less preserved; but on exposure to the air of such a climate as
ours it perishes rapidly, the ligaments being the last of the soft parts
to disappear.

'The hypothesis that these bones were parts of a mummy naturally
suggested Mr. Jellicoe. If he had murdered John Bellingham and concealed
his body in the mummy-case, he would have a spare mummy on his hands,
and that mummy would have been exposed to the air and to somewhat rough
handling.

'A very interesting circumstance connected with these remains was that
the ring finger was missing. Now, fingers have on sundry occasions been
detached from dead hands for the sake of the rings on them. But in such
cases the object has been to secure a valuable ring uninjured. If this
hand was the hand of John Bellingham, there was no such object. The
purpose was to prevent identification; and that purpose would have been
more easily, and much more completely, achieved by sacrificing the ring,
by filing through it or breaking it off the finger. The appearances,
therefore, did not quite agree with the apparent purpose.

'Then, could there be any other purpose with which they agreed better?
Yes, there could.

'If it had happened that John Bellingham were known to have worn a ring
on that finger, and especially if that ring fitted tightly, the removal
of the finger would serve a very useful purpose. It would create an
impression that the finger had been removed on account of a ring, to
prevent identification; which impression would, in turn, produce a
suspicion that the hand was that of John Bellingham. And yet it would
not be evidence that could be used to establish identity. Now, if Mr.
Jellicoe were the murderer and had the body hidden elsewhere, vague
suspicion would be precisely what he would desire, and positive evidence
what he would wish to avoid.

'It transpired later that John Bellingham did wear a ring on that finger
and that the ring fitted very tightly. Whence it followed that the
absence of the finger was an additional point tending to implicate Mr.
Jellicoe.

'And now let us briefly review this mass of evidence. You will see that
it consists of a multitude of items, each either trivial or speculative.
Up to the time of the actual discovery I had not a single crucial fact,
nor any clue as to motive. But, slight as the individual points of
evidence were, they pointed with impressive unanimity to one person--Mr.
Jellicoe. Thus:

'The person who had the opportunity to commit murder and dispose of the
body was Mr. Jellicoe.

'The deceased was last certainly seen alive with Mr. Jellicoe.

'An unidentified human body was delivered to the Museum by Mr. Jellicoe.

'The only person who could have a motive for personating the deceased
was Mr. Jellicoe.

'The only known person who could possibly have done so was Mr. Jellicoe.

'One of the two persons who could have had a motive for dropping the
scarab was Mr. Jellicoe. The person who found that scarab was Mr.
Jellicoe, although, owing to his defective eyesight and his spectacles,
he was the most unlikely person of those present to find it.

'The person who was responsible for the execution of the defective will
was Mr. Jellicoe.

'Then as to the remains. They were apparently not those of John
Bellingham, but parts of a particular kind of body. But the only person
who was known to have had such a body in his possession was Mr.
Jellicoe.

'The only person who could have had any motive for substituting those
remains for the remains of the deceased was Mr. Jellicoe.

'Finally, the person who caused the discovery of those remains at that
singularly opportune moment was Mr. Jellicoe.

'This was the sum of the evidence that was in my possession up to the
time of the hearing and, indeed, for some time after, and it was not
enough to act upon. But when the case had been heard in Court, it was
evident either that the proceedings would be abandoned--which was
unlikely--or that there would be new developments.

'I watched the progress of events with profound interest. An attempt had
been made (by Mr. Jellicoe or some other person) to get the will
administered without producing the body of John Bellingham; and that
attempt had failed. The coroner's jury had refused to identify the
remains; the Probate Court had refused to presume the death of the
testator. As affairs stood the will could not be administered.

'What would be the next move?

'It was virtually certain that it would consist in the production of
something which would identify the unrecognised remains as those of the
testator.

'But what would that something be?

'The answer to that question would contain the answer to another
question: Was my solution of the mystery the true solution?

'If I was wrong, it was possible that some of the undoubtedly genuine
bones of John Bellingham might presently be discovered; for instance,
the skull, the knee-cap, or the left fibula, by any of which the remains
could be positively identified.

'If I was right, only one thing could possibly happen. Mr. Jellicoe
would have to play the trump card that he had been holding back in case
the Court should refuse the application; a card that he was evidently
reluctant to play.

'He would have to produce the bones of the mummy's finger, together with
John Bellingham's ring. No other course was possible.

'But not only would the bones and the ring have to be found together.
They would have to be found in a place which was accessible to Mr.
Jellicoe, and so far under his control that he could determine the exact
time when the discovery should be made.

'I waited patiently for the answer to my question. Was I right or was I
wrong?

'And, in due course, the answer came.

'The bones and the ring were discovered in the well in the grounds of
Godfrey Bellingham's late house. That house was the property of John
Bellingham. Mr. Jellicoe was John Bellingham's agent. Hence it was
practically certain that the date on which the well was emptied was
settled by Mr. Jellicoe.

'The oracle had spoken.

'The discovery proved conclusively that the bones were not those of John
Bellingham (for if they had been the ring would have been unnecessary
for identification). But if the bones were not John Bellingham's, the
ring was; from which followed the important corollary that whoever had
deposited those bones in the well had had possession of the body of John
Bellingham. And there could be no doubt that that person was Mr.
Jellicoe.

'On receiving this final confirmation of my conclusions, I applied
forthwith to Doctor Norbury for permission to examine the mummy of
Sebekhotep, with the result that you are already acquainted with.'

As Thorndyke concluded, Mr. Jellicoe regarded him thoughtfully for a
moment and then said: 'You have given us a most complete and lucid
exposition of your method of investigation, sir. I have enjoyed it
exceedingly, and should have profited by it hereafter--under other
circumstances. Are you sure you won't allow me to fill your glass?' He
touched the stopper of the decanter, and Inspector Badger ostentatiously
consulted his watch.

'Time is running on, I fear,' said Mr. Jellicoe.

'It is, indeed,' Badger assented emphatically.

'Well, I need not detain you long,' said the lawyer. 'My statement is a
narration of events. But I desire to make it, and you, no doubt, will be
interested to hear it.'

He opened the silver case and selected a fresh cigarette, which,
however, he did not light. Inspector Badger produced a funereal
notebook, which he laid open on his knee; and the rest of us settled
ourselves in our chairs with no little curiosity to hear Mr. Jellicoe's
statement.



CHAPTER XX. THE END OF THE CASE



A PROFOUND silence had fallen on the room and its occupants. Mr.
Jellicoe sat with his eyes fixed on the table as if deep in thought, the
unlighted cigarette in one hand, the other grasping the tumbler of
water. Presently Inspector Badger coughed impatiently and he looked up.
'I beg your pardon, gentlemen,' he said. 'I am keeping you waiting.'

He took a sip from the tumbler, opened a match-box and took out a match,
but apparently altering his mind, laid it down and commenced:

'The unfortunate affair which has brought you here to-night, had its
origin ten years ago. At that time my friend Hurst became suddenly
involved in financial difficulties--am I speaking too fast for you, Mr.
Badger?'

'No not at all,' replied Badger. 'I am taking it down in shorthand.'

'Thank you,' said Mr. Jellicoe. 'He became involved in serious
difficulties and came to me for assistance. He wished to borrow five
thousand pounds to enable him to meet his engagements. I had a certain
amount of money at my disposal, but I did not consider Hurst's security
satisfactory; accordingly I felt compelled to refuse. But on the very
next day, John Bellingham called on me with a draft of his will which he
wished me to look over before it was executed.

'It was an absurd will, and I nearly told him so; but then an idea
occurred to me in connection with Hurst. It was obvious to me, as soon
as I glanced through the will, that, if the burial clause was left as
the testator had drafted it, Hurst had a very good chance of inheriting
the property; and, as I was named as the executor I should be able to
give full effect to that clause. Accordingly, I asked for a few days to
consider the will, and then I called upon Hurst and made a proposal to
him; which was this: That I should advance him five thousand pounds
without security; that I should ask for no repayment, but that he should
assign to me any interest that he might have or acquire in the estate of
John Bellingham up to ten thousand pounds, or two-thirds of any sum that
he might inherit if over that amount. He asked if John had yet made any
will, and I replied, quite correctly, that he had not. He inquired if I
knew what testamentary arrangements John intended to make, and again I
answered, quite correctly, that I believed John proposed to devise the
bulk of his property to his brother, Godfrey.

'Thereupon, Hurst accepted my proposal; I made him the advance and he
executed the assignment. After a few days' delay, I passed the will as
satisfactory. The actual document was written from the draft by the
testator himself; and a fortnight after Hurst had executed the
assignment, John signed the will in my office. By the provisions of that
will I stood an excellent chance of becoming virtually the principal
beneficiary, unless Godfrey should contest Hurst's claim and the Court
should override the conditions of clause two.

'You will now understand the motives which governed my subsequent
actions. You will also see, Doctor Thorndyke, how very near to the truth
your reasoning carried you; and you will understand, as I wish you to
do, that Mr. Hurst was no party to any of those proceedings which I am
about to describe.

'Coming now to the interview in Queen Square in October, nineteen
hundred and two, you are aware of the general circumstances from my
evidence in Court, which was literally correct up to a certain point.
The interview took place in a room on the third floor, in which were
stored the cases which John had brought with him from Egypt. The mummy
was unpacked, as were some other objects that he was not offering to the
Museum, but several cases were still unopened. At the conclusion of the
interview I accompanied Doctor Norbury down to the street door, and we
stood on the doorstep conversing for perhaps a quarter of an hour. Then
Doctor Norbury went away and I returned upstairs.

'Now the house in Queen Square is virtually a museum. The upper part is
separated from the lower by a massive door which opens from the hall and
gives access to the staircase and which is fitted with a Chubb
night-latch. There are two latch-keys, of which John used to keep one
and I the other. You will find them both in the safe behind me. The
caretaker had no key and no access to the upper part of the house unless
admitted by one of us.

'At the time when I came in, after Doctor Norbury had left, the
caretaker was in the cellar, where I could hear him breaking coke for
the hot-water furnace. I had left John on the third floor opening some
of the packing-cases by the light of a lamp with a tool somewhat like a
plasterer's hammer; that is, a hammer with a small axe-blade at the
reverse of the head. As I stood talking to Doctor Norbury, I could hear
him knocking out the nails and wrenching up the lids; and when I entered
the doorway leading to the stairs, I could still hear him. Just as I
closed the staircase door behind me, I heard a rumbling noise from
above; then all was still.

'I went up the stairs to the second floor, where, as the staircase was
all in darkness, I stopped to light the gas. As I turned to ascend the
next flight, I saw a hand projecting over the edge of the halfway
landing. I ran up the stairs, and there, on the landing, I saw John
lying huddled up in a heap at the foot of the top flight. There was a
wound at the side of his forehead from which a little blood was
trickling. The case-opener lay on the floor close by him and there was
blood on the axe-blade. When I looked up the stairs I saw a rag of torn
matting over the top stair.

'It was quite easy to see what had happened. He had walked quickly out
on the landing with the case-opener in his hand. His foot had caught in
the torn matting and he had pitched head foremost down the stairs still
holding the case-opener. He had fallen so that his head had come down on
the upturned edge of the axe-blade; he had then rolled over and the
case-opener had dropped from his hand.

'I lit a wax match and stooped down to look at him. His head was in a
very peculiar position, which made me suspect that his neck was broken.
There was extremely little bleeding from the wound; he was perfectly
motionless; I could detect no sign of breathing; and I felt no doubt
that he was dead.

'It was an exceedingly regrettable affair, and it placed me, as I
perceived at once, in an extremely awkward position. My first impulse
was to send the caretaker for a doctor and a policeman; but a moment's
reflection convinced me that there were serious objections to this
course.

'There was nothing to show that I had not, myself, knocked him down with
the case-opener. Of course, there was nothing to show that I had; but we
were alone in the house with the exception of the caretaker, who was
down in the basement out of earshot.

'There would be an inquest. At the inquest inquiries would be made as to
the will which was known to exist. But as soon as the will was produced,
Hurst would become suspicious. He would probably make a statement to the
coroner and I should be charged with the murder. Or, even if I were not
charged, Hurst would suspect me and would probably repudiate the
assignment; and, under the circumstances, it would be practically
impossible for me to enforce it. He would refuse to pay and I could not
take my claim into Court.

I sat down on the stairs just above poor John's body and considered the
matter in detail. At the worst, I stood a fair chance of hanging; at the
best, I stood to lose close upon fifty thousand pounds. These were not
pleasant alternatives.

'Supposing, on the other hand, I concealed the body and gave out that
John had gone to Paris. There was, of course, the risk of discovery, in
which case I should certainly be convicted of the murder. But if no
discovery occurred, I was not only safe from suspicion, but I secured
the fifty thousand pounds. In either case there was considerable risk,
but in one there was the certainty of loss, whereas in the other there
was a material advantage to justify the risk. The question was whether
it would be possible to conceal the body. If it were, then the
contingent profit was worth the slight additional risk. But a human body
is a very difficult thing to dispose of, especially to a person of so
little scientific culture as myself.

'It is curious that I considered this question for a quite considerable
time before the obvious solution presented itself. I turned over at
least a dozen methods of disposing of the body, and rejected them all as
impracticable. Then, suddenly, I remembered the mummy upstairs.

'At first it only occurred to me as a fantastic possibility that I could
conceal the body in the mummy-case. But as I turned over the idea I
began to see that it was really practicable; and not only practicable
but easy; and not only easy but eminently safe. If once the mummy-case
was in the Museum, I was rid of it for ever.

'The circumstances were, as you, sir, have justly observed, singularly
favourable. There would be no hue and cry, no hurry, no anxiety; but
ample time for all the necessary preparations. Then the mummy-case
itself was curiously suitable. Its length was ample, as I knew from
having measured it. It was a cartonnage of rather flexible material and
had an opening behind, secured with a lacing so that it could be opened
without injury. Nothing need be cut but the lacing, which could be
replaced. A little damage might be done in extracting the mummy and in
introducing the deceased; but such cracks as might occur would be of no
importance. For here again Fortune favoured me. The whole of the back of
the mummy-case was coated with bitumen, and it would be easy when once
the deceased was safely inside to apply a fresh coat, which would cover
up not only the cracks but also the new lacing.

'After careful consideration, I decided to adopt the plan. I went
downstairs and sent the caretaker on an errand to the Law Courts. Then I
returned and carried the deceased up to one of the third-floor rooms,
where I removed his clothes and laid him out on a long packing-case in
the position in which he would lie in the mummy-case. I folded his
clothes neatly and packed them, with the exception of his boots, in a
suit-case that he had been taking to Paris and which contained nothing
but his night-clothes, toilet articles, and a change of linen. By the
time I had done this and thoroughly washed the oilcloth on the stairs
and landing, the caretaker had returned. I informed him that Mr.
Bellingham had started for Paris and then I went home. The upper part of
the house was, of course, secured by the Chubb lock, but I had also--ex
abundantia caulela--locked the door of the room in which I had deposited
the deceased.

'I had, of course, some knowledge of the methods of embalming, but
principally of those employed by the ancients. Hence, on the following
day, I went to the British Museum library and consulted the most recent
works on the subject; and exceedingly interesting they were, as showing
the remarkable improvements that modern knowledge has effected in this
ancient art. I need not trouble you with details that are familiar to
you. The process that I selected as the simplest for a beginner was that
of formalin injection, and I went straight from the Museum to purchase
the necessary materials. I did not, however, buy an embalming syringe:
the book stated that an ordinary anatomical injecting syringe would
answer the same purpose, and I thought it a more discreet purchase.

'I fear that I bungled the injection terribly, although I had carefully
studied the plates in a treatise on anatomy--Gray's, I think. However,
if my methods were clumsy, they were quite effectual. I carried out the
process on the evening of the third day; and when I locked up the house
that night, I had the satisfaction of knowing that poor John's remains
were secure from corruption and decay.

'But this was not enough. The great weight of a fresh body as compared
with that of a mummy would be immediately noticed by those who had the
handling of the mummy-case. Moreover, the damp from the body would
quickly ruin the cartonnage and would cause a steamy film on the inside
of the glass case in which it would be exhibited. And this would
probably lead to an examination. Clearly, then, it was necessary that
the remains of the deceased should be thoroughly dried before they were
enclosed in the cartonnage.

'Here my unfortunate deficiency in scientific knowledge was a great
drawback. I had no idea how this result would be achieved and, in the
end, was compelled to consult a taxidermist, to whom I represented that
I wished to collect some small animals and reptiles and rapidly dry them
for convenience of transport. By this person I was advised to immerse
the dead animals in a jar of methylated spirit for a week and then
expose them in a current of warm, dry air.

'But the plan of immersing the remains of the deceased in ajar of
methylated spirit was obviously impracticable. However, I bethought me
that we had in our collection a porphyry sarcophagus, the cavity of
which had been shaped to receive a small mummy in its case. I tried the
deceased in the sarcophagus and found that he just fitted the cavity
loosely. I obtained a few gallons of methylated spirit, which I poured
into the cavity, just covering the body, and then I put on the lid and
luted it down air-tight with putty. I trust I do not weary you with
these particulars?'

'I'll ask you to cut it as short as you can, Mr. Jellicoe,' said Badger.
'It has been a long yarn and time is running on.'

'For my part,' said Thorndyke, 'I find these details deeply interesting
and instructive. They fill in the outline that I had drawn by
inference.'

'Precisely,' said Mr. Jellicoe; 'then I will proceed.

'I left the deceased soaking in the spirit for a fortnight and then took
him out, wiped him dry, and laid him on four cane-bottomed chairs just
over the hot-water pipes, and I let a free current of air pass through
the room. The result interested me exceedingly. By the end of the third
day the hands and feet had become quite dry and shrivelled and horny--so
that the ring actually dropped off the shrunken finger--the nose looked
like a fold of parchment; and the skin of the body was so dry and smooth
that you could have engrossed a lease on it. For the first day or two I
turned the deceased at intervals so that he should dry evenly, and then
I proceeded to get the case ready. I divided the lacing and extracted
the mummy with great care--with great care as to the case, I mean; for
the mummy suffered some injury in the extraction. It was very badly
embalmed, and so brittle that it broke in several places while I was
getting it out; and when I unrolled it the head separated and both the
arms came off.

'On the sixth day after the removal from the sarcophagus, I took the
bandages that I had removed from Sebekhotep and very carefully wrapped
the deceased in them, sprinkling powdered myrrh and gum benzoin freely
on the body and between the folds of the wrappings to disguise the faint
odour of the spirit and the formalin that still lingered about the body.
When the wrappings had been applied, the deceased really had a most
workmanlike appearance; he would have looked quite well in a glass case
even without the cartonnage, and I felt almost regretful at having to
put him out of sight for ever.

'It was a difficult business getting him into the case without
assistance, and I cracked the cartonnage badly in several places before
he was safely enclosed. But I got him in at last, and then, when I had
closed up the case with a new lacing, I applied a fresh layer of bitumen
which effectually covered up the cracks and the new cord. A dusty cloth
dabbed over the bitumen when it was dry disguised its newness, and the
cartonnage with its tenant was ready for delivery. I notified Doctor
Norbury of the fact, and five days later he came and removed it to the
Museum.

'Now that the main difficulty was disposed of, I began to consider the
further difficulty to which you, sir, have alluded with such admirable
perspicuity. It was necessary that John Bellingham should make one more
appearance in public before sinking into final oblivion.

'Accordingly, I devised the visit to Hurst's house, which was calculated
to serve two purposes. It created a satisfactory date for the
disappearance, eliminating me from any connection with it, and by
throwing some suspicion on Hurst it would make him more amenable--less
likely to dispute my claim when he learned the provisions of the will.

'The affair was quite simple. I knew that Hurst had changed his servants
since I was last at his house, and I knew his habits. On that day I took
the suit-case to Charing Cross and deposited it in the cloak-room,
called at Hurst's office to make sure that he was there, and went from
thence direct to Cannon Street and caught the train to Eltham. On
arriving at the house, I took the precaution to remove my
spectacles--the only distinctive feature of my exterior--and was duly
shown into the study at my request. As soon as the housemaid had left
the room I quietly let myself out by the French window, which I closed
behind me but could not fasten, went out at the side gate and closed
that also behind me, holding the bolt of the latch back with my
pocket-knife so that I need not slam the gate to shut it.

'The other events of that day, including the dropping of the scarab, I
need not describe, as they are known to you. But I may fitly make a few
remarks on the unfortunate tactical error into which I fell in respect
of the bones. That error arose, as you have doubtless perceived, from
the lawyer's incurable habit of underestimating the scientific expert. I
had no idea mere bones were capable of furnishing so much information to
a man of science.

'The way in which the affair came about was this: the damaged mummy of
Sebekhotep, perishing gradually by exposure to the air, was not only an
eyesore to me: it was a definite danger. It was the only remaining link
between me and the disappearance. I resolved to be rid of it and cast
about for some means of destroying it. And then, in an evil moment, the
idea of utilising it occurred to me.

'There was an undoubted danger that the Court might refuse to presume
death after so short an interval; and if the permission should be
postponed, the will might never be administered during my lifetime.
Hence, if these bones of Sebekhotep could be made to simulate the
remains of the deceased testator, a definite good would be achieved. But
I knew that the entire skeleton could never be mistaken for his. The
deceased had broken his knee-caps and damaged his ankle, injuries which
I assumed would leave some permanent trace. But if a judicious selection
of the bones were deposited in a suitable place, together with some
object clearly identifiable as appertaining to the deceased, it seemed
to me that the difficulty would be met. I need not trouble you with
details. The course which I adopted is known to you with the attendant
circumstances, even to the accidental detachment of the right
hand--which broke off as I was packing the arm in my handbag. Erroneous
as that course was, it would have been successful but for the unforeseen
contingency of your being retained in the case.

'Thus, for nearly two years, I remained in complete security. From time
to time I dropped in at the Museum to see if the deceased was keeping in
good condition; and on those occasions I used to reflect with
satisfaction on the gratifying circumstance--accidental though it
was--that his wishes, as expressed (very imperfectly) in clause two, had
been fully complied with, and that without prejudice to my interests.

'The awakening came on that evening when I saw you at the Temple gate
talking with Doctor Berkeley. I suspected immediately that something was
gone amiss and that it was too late to take any useful action. Since
then, I have waited here in hourly expectation of this visit. And now
the time has come. You have made the winning move and it remains only
for me to pay my debts like an honest gambler.'

He paused and quietly lit his cigarette. Inspector Badger yawned and put
away his notebook.

'Have you done, Mr. Jellicoe?' the inspector asked. 'I want to carry out
my contract to the letter, you know, though it's getting devilish late.'

Mr. Jellicoe took his cigarette from his mouth and drank a glass of
water.

'I forgot to ask,' he said, 'whether you unrolled the mummy--if I may
apply the term to the imperfectly treated remains of my deceased
client.'

'I did not open the mummy-case,' replied Thorndyke.

'You did not!' exclaimed Mr. Jellicoe. 'Then how did you verify your
suspicions?'

'I took an X-ray photograph.'

'Ah! Indeed!' Mr. Jellicoe pondered for some moments. 'Astonishing!' he
murmured; 'and most ingenious. The resources of science at the present
day are truly wonderful.'

'Is there anything more that you want to say?' asked Badger; 'because if
you don't, time's up.'

'Anything more?' Mr. Jellicoe repeated slowly; 'anything more?
No--I--think--think--the time--is--up. Yes--the--the--time--'

He broke off and sat with a strange look fixed on Thorndyke.

His face had suddenly undergone a curious change. It looked shrunken and
cadaverous and his lips had assumed a peculiar cherry-red colour.

'Is anything the matter, Mr. Jellicoe?' Badger asked uneasily. 'Are you
not feeling well, sir?'

Mr. Jellicoe did not appear to have heard the question, for he returned
no answer, but sat motionless, leaning back in his chair, with his hands
spread out on the table and his strangely intent gaze bent on Thorndyke.

Suddenly his head dropped on his breast and his body seemed to collapse;
and as with one accord we sprang to our feet, he slid forward off his
chair and disappeared under the table.

'Good Lord! The man's fainted!' exclaimed Badger.

In a moment he was down on his hands and knees, trembling with
excitement, groping under the table. He dragged the unconscious lawyer
out into the light and knelt over him, staring into his face.

'What's the matter with him, Doctor?' he asked, looking up at Thorndyke.
'Is it apoplexy? Or is it a heart attack, think you?'

Thorndyke shook his head, though he stooped and put his fingers on the
unconscious man's wrist.

'Prussic acid or potassium cyanide is what the appearances suggest,' he
replied.

'But can't you do anything?' demanded the inspector.

Thorndyke dropped the arm, which fell limply to the floor.

'You can't do much for a dead man,' he said.

'Dead! Then he has slipped through our fingers after all!'

'He has anticipated the sentence. That is all.' Thorndyke spoke in an
even, impassive tone which struck me as rather strange, considering the
suddenness of the tragedy, as did also the complete absence of surprise
in his manner. He seemed to treat the occurrence as a perfectly natural
one.

Not so Inspector Badger; who rose to his feet and stood with his hands
thrust into his pockets scowling sullenly down at the dead lawyer.

'I was an infernal fool to agree to his blasted conditions,' he growled
savagely.

'Nonsense,' said Thorndyke. 'If you had broken in you would have found a
dead man. As it was you found a live man and obtained an important
statement. You acted quite properly.'

'How do you suppose he managed it?' asked Badger.

Thorndyke held out his hand.

'Let us look at his cigarette case,' said he.

Badger extracted the little silver case from the dead man's pocket and
opened it. There were five cigarettes in it, two of which were plain,
while the other three were gold-tipped. Thorndyke took out one of each
kind and gently pinched their ends. The gold-tipped one he returned; the
plain one he tore through, about a quarter of an inch from the end; when
two little black tabloids dropped out on to the table. Badger eagerly
picked one up and was about to smell it when Thorndyke grasped his
wrist. 'Be careful,' said he; and when he had cautiously sniffed at the
tabloid--held at a safe distance from his nose--he added: 'Yes,
potassium cyanide. I thought so when his lips turned that queer colour.
It was in that last cigarette; you can see that he has bitten the end
off.'

For some time we stood silently looking down at the still form stretched
on the floor. Presently Badger looked up.

'As you pass the porter's lodge on your way out,' said he, 'you might
just drop in and tell him to send a constable to me.'

'Very well,' said Thorndyke. 'And by the way, Badger, you had better tip
that sherry back into the decanter and put it under lock and key, or
else pour it out of the window.'

'Gad, yes!' exclaimed the inspector. 'I'm glad you mentioned it. We
might have had an inquest on a constable as well as a lawyer.
Good-night, gentlemen, if you are off.'

We went out and left him with his prisoner--passive enough, indeed,
according to his ambiguously worded promise. As we passed through the
gateway Thorndyke gave the inspector's message, curtly and without
comment, to the gaping porter, and then we issued forth into Chancery
Lane.

We were all silent and very grave, and I thought that Thorndyke seemed
somewhat moved. Perhaps Mr. Jellicoe's last intent look--which I suspect
he knew to be the look of a dying man--lingered in his memory as it did
in mine. Half-way down Chancery Lane he spoke for the first time; and
then it was only to ejaculate, 'Poor devil!'

Jervis took him up. 'He was a consummate villain, Thorndyke.'

'Hardly that,' was the reply. 'I should rather say that he was
non-moral. He acted without malice and without scruple or remorse. His
conduct exhibited a passionateless expediency which was dreadful because
utterly unhuman. But he was a strong man--a courageous, self-contained
man, and I had been better pleased if it could have been ordained that
some other hand than mine should let the axe fall.'

Thorndyke's compunction may appear strange and inconsistent, but yet his
feeling was also my own. Great as was the misery and suffering that this
inscrutable man had brought into the lives of those I loved, I forgave
him; and in his downfall forgot the callous relentlessness with which he
had pursued his evil purpose. For it was he who had brought Ruth into my
life; who had opened for me the Paradise of Love into which I had just
entered. And so my thoughts turned away from the still shape that lay on
the floor of the stately old room in Lincoln's Inn, away to the sunny
vista of the future, where I should walk hand in hand with Ruth until my
time, too, should come; until I, too, like the grim lawyer, should hear
the solemn evening bell bidding me put out into the darkness of the
silent sea.



THE END

﻿
THE MYSTERY OF 31 NEW INN

BY R. AUSTIN FREEMAN

Author of "The Red Thumb Mark,"
"The Eye of Osiris," etc.




TO MY FRIEND

BERNARD E. BISHOP




Preface


Commenting upon one of my earlier novels, in respect of which I had
claimed to have been careful to adhere to common probabilities and to
have made use only of really practicable methods of investigation, a
critic remarked that this was of no consequence whatever, so long as the
story was amusing.

Few people, I imagine, will agree with him. To most readers, and
certainly to the kind of reader for whom an author is willing to take
trouble, complete realism in respect of incidents and methods is an
essential factor in maintaining the interest of a detective story. Hence
it may be worth while to mention that Thorndyke's method of producing
the track chart, described in Chapters II and III, has been actually
used in practice. It is a modification of one devised by me many years
ago when I was crossing Ashanti to the city of Bontuku, the whereabouts
of which in the far interior was then only vaguely known. My
instructions were to fix the positions of all towns, villages, rivers
and mountains as accurately as possible; but finding ordinary methods of
surveying impracticable in the dense forest which covers the whole
region, I adopted this simple and apparently rude method, checking the
distances whenever possible by astronomical observation.

The resulting route-map was surprisingly accurate, as shown by the
agreement of the outward and homeward tracks, It was published by the
Royal Geographical Society, and incorporated in the map of this region
compiled by the Intelligence Branch of the War Office, and it formed the
basis of the map which accompanied my volume of <i>Travels in Ashanti and
Jaman</i>. So that Thorndyke's plan must be taken as quite a practicable
one.

New Inn, the background of this story, and one of the last surviving
inns of Chancery, has recently passed away after upwards of four
centuries of newness. Even now, however, a few of the old, dismantled
houses (including perhaps, the mysterious 31) may be seen from the
Strand peeping over the iron roof of the skating rink which has
displaced the picturesque hall, the pension-room and the garden. The
postern gate, too, in Houghton Street still remains, though the arch is
bricked up inside. Passing it lately, I made the rough sketch which
appears on next page, and which shows all that is left of this pleasant
old London backwater.

R. A. F.

GRAVESEND




[Illustration: New Inn]




Contents


CHAPTER.

   I  THE MYSTERIOUS PATIENT
  II  THORNDYKE DEVISES A SCHEME
 III  "A CHIEL'S AMANG YE TAKIN' NOTES"
  IV  THE OFFICIAL VIEW
   V  JEFFREY BLACKMORE'S WILL
  VI  JEFFREY BLACKMORE, DECEASED
 VII  THE CUNEIFORM INSCRIPTION
VIII THE TRACK CHART
  IX  THE HOUSE OF MYSTERY
   X  THE HUNTER HUNTED
  XI  THE BLACKMORE CASE REVIEWED
 XII  THE PORTRAIT
XIII  THE STATEMENT OF SAMUEL WILKINS
 XIV  THORNDYKE LAYS THE MINE
  XV  THORNDYKE EXPLODES THE MINE
 XVI  AN EXPOSITION AND A TRAGEDY




Chapter I

The Mysterious Patient


As I look back through the years of my association with John Thorndyke,
I am able to recall a wealth of adventures and strange experiences such
as falls to the lot of very few men who pass their lives within hearing
of Big Ben. Many of these experiences I have already placed on record;
but it now occurs to me that I have hitherto left unrecorded one that
is, perhaps, the most astonishing and incredible of the whole series; an
adventure, too, that has for me the added interest that it inaugurated
my permanent association with my learned and talented friend, and marked
the close of a rather unhappy and unprosperous period of my life.

Memory, retracing the journey through the passing years to the
starting-point of those strange events, lands me in a shabby little
ground-floor room in a house near the Walworth end of Lower Kennington
Lane. A couple of framed diplomas on the wall, a card of Snellen's
test-types and a stethoscope lying on the writing-table, proclaim it a
doctor's consulting-room; and my own position in the round-backed chair
at the said table, proclaims me the practitioner in charge.

It was nearly nine o'clock. The noisy little clock on the mantelpiece
announced the fact, and, by its frantic ticking, seemed as anxious as I
to get the consultation hours over. I glanced wistfully at my
mud-splashed boots and wondered if I might yet venture to assume the
slippers that peeped coyly from under the shabby sofa. I even allowed my
thoughts to wander to the pipe that reposed in my coat pocket. Another
minute and I could turn down the surgery gas and shut the outer door.
The fussy little clock gave a sort of preliminary cough or hiccup, as if
it should say: "Ahem! ladies and gentlemen, I am about to strike." And
at that moment, the bottle-boy opened the door and, thrusting in his
head, uttered the one word: "Gentleman."

Extreme economy of words is apt to result in ambiguity. But I
understood. In Kennington Lane, the race of mere men and women appeared
to be extinct. They were all gentlemen--unless they were ladies or
children--even as the Liberian army was said to consist entirely of
generals. Sweeps, labourers, milkmen, costermongers--all were
impartially invested by the democratic bottle-boy with the rank and
title of <i>armigeri</i>. The present nobleman appeared to favour the
aristocratic recreation of driving a cab or job-master's carriage, and,
as he entered the room, he touched his hat, closed the door somewhat
carefully, and then, without remark, handed me a note which bore the
superscription "Dr. Stillbury."

"You understand," I said, as I prepared to open the envelope, "that I
am not Dr. Stillbury. He is away at present and I am looking after his
patients."

"It doesn't signify," the man replied. "You'll do as well."

On this, I opened the envelope and read the note, which was quite brief,
and, at first sight, in no way remarkable.

"DEAR SIR," it ran, "Would you kindly come and see a friend of mine who
is staying with me? The bearer of this will give you further particulars
and convey you to the house. Yours truly, H. WEISS."

There was no address on the paper and no date, and the writer was
unknown to me.

"This note," I said, "refers to some further particulars. What are
they?"

The messenger passed his hand over his hair with a gesture of
embarrassment. "It's a ridicklus affair," he said, with a contemptuous
laugh. "If I had been Mr. Weiss, I wouldn't have had nothing to do with
it. The sick gentleman, Mr. Graves, is one of them people what can't
abear doctors. He's been ailing now for a week or two, but nothing would
induce him to see a doctor. Mr. Weiss did everything he could to
persuade him, but it was no go. He wouldn't. However, it seems Mr. Weiss
threatened to send for a medical man on his own account, because, you
see, he was getting a bit nervous; and then Mr. Graves gave way. But
only on one condition. He said the doctor was to come from a distance
and was not to be told who he was or where he lived or anything about
him; and he made Mr. Weiss promise to keep to that condition before he'd
let him send. So Mr. Weiss promised, and, of course, he's got to keep
his word."

"But," I said, with a smile, "you've just told me his name--if his name
really is Graves."

"You can form your own opinion on that," said the coachman.

"And," I added, "as to not being told where he lives, I can see that for
myself. I'm not blind, you know."

"We'll take the risk of what you see," the man replied. "The question
is, will you take the job on?"

Yes; that was the question, and I considered it for some time before
replying. We medical men are pretty familiar with the kind of person who
"can't abear doctors," and we like to have as little to do with him as
possible. He is a thankless and unsatisfactory patient. Intercourse with
him is unpleasant, he gives a great deal of trouble and responds badly
to treatment. If this had been my own practice, I should have declined
the case off-hand. But it was not my practice. I was only a deputy. I
could not lightly refuse work which would yield a profit to my
principal, unpleasant though it might be.

As I turned the matter over in my mind, I half unconsciously scrutinized
my visitor--somewhat to his embarrassment--and I liked his appearance
as little as I liked his mission. He kept his station near the door,
where the light was dim--for the illumination was concentrated on the
table and the patient's chair--but I could see that he had a somewhat
sly, unprepossessing face and a greasy, red moustache that seemed out of
character with his rather perfunctory livery; though this was mere
prejudice. He wore a wig, too--not that there was anything discreditable
in that--and the thumb-nail of the hand that held his hat bore
disfiguring traces of some injury--which, again, though unsightly, in no
wise reflected on his moral character. Lastly, he watched me keenly with
a mixture of anxiety and sly complacency that I found distinctly
unpleasant. In a general way, he impressed me disagreeably. I did not
like the look of him at all; but nevertheless I decided to undertake the
case.

"I suppose," I answered, at length, "it is no affair of mine who the
patient is or where he lives. But how do you propose to manage the
business? Am I to be led to the house blindfolded, like the visitor to
the bandit's cave?"

The man grinned slightly and looked very decidedly relieved.

"No, sir," he answered; "we ain't going to blindfold you. I've got a
carriage outside. I don't think you'll see much out of that."

"Very well," I rejoined, opening the door to let him out, "I'll be with
you in a minute. I suppose you can't give me any idea as to what is the
matter with the patient?"

"No, sir, I can't," he replied; and he went out to see to the carriage.

I slipped into a bag an assortment of emergency drugs and a few
diagnostic instruments, turned down the gas and passed out through the
surgery. The carriage was standing at the kerb, guarded by the coachman
and watched with deep interest by the bottle-boy. I viewed it with
mingled curiosity and disfavour. It was a kind of large brougham, such
as is used by some commercial travellers, the usual glass windows being
replaced by wooden shutters intended to conceal the piles of
sample-boxes, and the doors capable of being locked from outside with a
railway key.

As I emerged from the house, the coachman unlocked the door and held it
open.

"How long will the journey take?" I asked, pausing with my foot on the
step.

The coachman considered a moment or two and replied:

"It took me, I should say, nigh upon half an hour to get here."

This was pleasant hearing. A half an hour each way and a half an hour at
the patient's house. At that rate it would be half-past ten before I was
home again, and then it was quite probable that I should find some other
untimely messenger waiting on the doorstep. With a muttered anathema on
the unknown Mr. Graves and the unrestful life of a locum tenens, I
stepped into the uninviting vehicle. Instantly the coachman slammed the
door and turned the key, leaving me in total darkness.

One comfort was left to me; my pipe was in my pocket. I made shift to
load it in the dark, and, having lit it with a wax match, took the
opportunity to inspect the interior of my prison. It was a shabby
affair. The moth-eaten state of the blue cloth cushions seemed to
suggest that it had been long out of regular use; the oil-cloth
floor-covering was worn into holes; ordinary internal fittings there
were none. But the appearances suggested that the crazy vehicle had been
prepared with considerable forethought for its present use. The inside
handles of the doors had apparently been removed; the wooden shutters
were permanently fixed in their places; and a paper label, stuck on the
transom below each window, had a suspicious appearance of having been
put there to cover the painted name and address of the job-master or
livery-stable keeper who had originally owned the carriage.

These observations gave me abundant food for reflection. This Mr. Weiss
must be an excessively conscientious man if he had considered that his
promise to Mr. Graves committed him to such extraordinary precautions.
Evidently no mere following of the letter of the law was enough to
satisfy his sensitive conscience. Unless he had reasons for sharing Mr.
Graves's unreasonable desire for secrecy--for one could not suppose that
these measures of concealment had been taken by the patient himself.

The further suggestions that evolved themselves from this consideration
were a little disquieting. Whither was I being carried and for what
purpose? The idea that I was bound for some den of thieves where I
might be robbed and possibly murdered, I dismissed with a smile. Thieves
do not make elaborately concerted plans to rob poor devils like me.
Poverty has its compensations in that respect. But there were other
possibilities. Imagination backed by experience had no difficulty in
conjuring up a number of situations in which a medical man might be
called upon, with or without coercion, either to witness or actively to
participate in the commission of some unlawful act.

Reflections of this kind occupied me pretty actively if not very
agreeably during this strange journey. And the monotony was relieved,
too, by other distractions. I was, for example, greatly interested to
notice how, when one sense is in abeyance, the other senses rouse into a
compensating intensity of perception. I sat smoking my pipe in darkness
which was absolute save for the dim glow from the smouldering tobacco in
the bowl, and seemed to be cut off from all knowledge of the world
without. But yet I was not. The vibrations of the carriage, with its
hard springs and iron-tired wheels, registered accurately and plainly
the character of the roadway. The harsh rattle of granite setts, the
soft bumpiness of macadam, the smooth rumble of wood-pavement, the
jarring and swerving of crossed tram-lines; all were easily recognizable
and together sketched the general features of the neighbourhood through
which I was passing. And the sense of hearing filled in the details. Now
the hoot of a tug's whistle told of proximity to the river. A sudden
and brief hollow reverberation announced the passage under a railway
arch (which, by the way, happened several times during the journey);
and, when I heard the familiar whistle of a railway-guard followed by
the quick snorts of a skidding locomotive, I had as clear a picture of a
heavy passenger-train moving out of a station as if I had seen it in
broad daylight.

I had just finished my pipe and knocked out the ashes on the heel of my
boot, when the carriage slowed down and entered a covered way--as I
could tell by the hollow echoes. Then I distinguished the clang of heavy
wooden gates closed behind me, and a moment or two later the carriage
door was unlocked and opened. I stepped out blinking into a covered
passage paved with cobbles and apparently leading down to a mews; but it
was all in darkness, and I had no time to make any detailed
observations, as the carriage had drawn up opposite a side door which
was open and in which stood a woman holding a lighted candle.

"Is that the doctor?" she asked, speaking with a rather pronounced
German accent and shading the candle with her hand as she peered at me.

I answered in the affirmative, and she then exclaimed:

"I am glad you have come. Mr. Weiss will be so relieved. Come in,
please."

I followed her across a dark passage into a dark room, where she set the
candle down on a chest of drawers and turned to depart. At the door,
however, she paused and looked back.

"It is not a very nice room to ask you into," she said. "We are very
untidy just now, but you must excuse us. We have had so much anxiety
about poor Mr. Graves."

"He has been ill some time, then?"

"Yes. Some little time. At intervals, you know. Sometimes better,
sometimes not so well."

As she spoke, she gradually backed out into the passage but did not go
away at once. I accordingly pursued my inquiries.

"He has not been seen by any doctor, has he?"

"No," she answered, "he has always refused to see a doctor. That has
been a great trouble to us. Mr. Weiss has been very anxious about him.
He will be so glad to hear that you have come. I had better go and tell
him. Perhaps you will kindly sit down until he is able to come to you,"
and with this she departed on her mission.

It struck me as a little odd that, considering his anxiety and the
apparent urgency of the case, Mr. Weiss should not have been waiting to
receive me. And when several minutes elapsed without his appearing, the
oddness of the circumstance impressed me still more. Having no desire,
after the journey in the carriage, to sit down, I whiled away the time
by an inspection of the room. And a very curious room it was; bare,
dirty, neglected and, apparently, unused. A faded carpet had been flung
untidily on the floor. A small, shabby table stood in the middle of the
room; and beyond this, three horsehair-covered chairs and a chest of
drawers formed the entire set of furniture. No pictures hung on the
mouldy walls, no curtains covered the shuttered windows, and the dark
drapery of cobwebs that hung from the ceiling to commemorate a long and
illustrious dynasty of spiders hinted at months of neglect and disuse.

The chest of drawers--an incongruous article of furniture for what
seemed to be a dining-room--as being the nearest and best lighted object
received most of my attention. It was a fine old chest of nearly black
mahogany, very battered and in the last stage of decay, but originally a
piece of some pretensions. Regretful of its fallen estate, I looked it
over with some interest and had just observed on its lower corner a
little label bearing the printed inscription "Lot 201" when I heard
footsteps descending the stairs. A moment later the door opened and a
shadowy figure appeared standing close by the threshold.

"Good evening, doctor," said the stranger, in a deep, quiet voice and
with a distinct, though not strong, German accent. "I must apologize for
keeping you waiting."

I acknowledged the apology somewhat stiffly and asked: "You are Mr.
Weiss, I presume?"

"Yes, I am Mr. Weiss. It is very good of you to come so far and so late
at night and to make no objection to the absurd conditions that my poor
friend has imposed."

"Not at all," I replied. "It is my business to go when and where I am
wanted, and it is not my business to inquire into the private affairs of
my patients."

"That is very true, sir," he agreed cordially, "and I am much obliged
to you for taking that very proper view of the case. I pointed that out
to my friend, but he is not a very reasonable man. He is very secretive
and rather suspicious by nature."

"So I inferred. And as to his condition; is he seriously ill?"

"Ah," said Mr. Weiss, "that is what I want you to tell me. I am very
much puzzled about him."

"But what is the nature of his illness? What does he complain of?"

"He makes very few complaints of any kind although he is obviously ill.
But the fact is that he is hardly ever more than half awake. He lies in
a kind of dreamy stupor from morning to night."

This struck me as excessively strange and by no means in agreement with
the patient's energetic refusal to see a doctor.

"But," I asked, "does he never rouse completely?"

"Oh, yes," Mr. Weiss answered quickly; "he rouses from time to time and
is then quite rational, and, as you may have gathered, rather obstinate.
That is the peculiar and puzzling feature in the case; this alternation
between a state of stupor and an almost normal and healthy condition.
But perhaps you had better see him and judge for yourself. He had a
rather severe attack just now. Follow me, please. The stairs are rather
dark."

The stairs were very dark, and I noticed that they were without any
covering of carpet, or even oil-cloth, so that our footsteps resounded
dismally as if we were in an empty house. I stumbled up after my guide,
feeling my way by the hand-rail, and on the first floor followed him
into a room similar in size to the one below and very barely furnished,
though less squalid than the other. A single candle at the farther end
threw its feeble light on a figure in the bed, leaving the rest of the
room in a dim twilight.

As Mr. Weiss tiptoed into the chamber, a woman--the one who had spoken
to me below--rose from a chair by the bedside and quietly left the room
by a second door. My conductor halted, and looking fixedly at the figure
in the bed, called out:

"Philip! Philip! Here is the doctor come to see you."

He paused for a moment or two, and, receiving no answer, said: "He seems
to be dozing as usual. Will you go and see what you can make of him?"

I stepped forward to the bedside, leaving Mr. Weiss at the end of the
room near the door by which we had entered, where he remained, slowly
and noiselessly pacing backwards and forwards in the semi-obscurity. By
the light of the candle I saw an elderly man with good features and a
refined, intelligent and even attractive face, but dreadfully emaciated,
bloodless and sallow. He lay quite motionless except for the scarcely
perceptible rise and fall of his chest; his eyes were nearly closed, his
features relaxed, and, though he was not actually asleep, he seemed to
be in a dreamy, somnolent, lethargic state, as if under the influence of
some narcotic.

I watched him for a minute or so, timing his slow breathing by my
watch, and then suddenly and sharply addressed him by name; but the only
response was a slight lifting of the eyelids, which, after a brief,
drowsy glance at me, slowly subsided to their former position.

I now proceeded to make a physical examination. First, I felt his pulse,
grasping his wrist with intentional brusqueness in the hope of rousing
him from his stupor. The beats were slow, feeble and slightly irregular,
giving clear evidence, if any were needed, of his generally lowered
vitality. I listened carefully to his heart, the sounds of which were
very distinct through the thin walls of his emaciated chest, but found
nothing abnormal beyond the feebleness and uncertainty of its action.
Then I turned my attention to his eyes, which I examined closely with
the aid of the candle and my ophthalmoscope lens, raising the lids
somewhat roughly so as to expose the whole of the irises. He submitted
without resistance to my rather ungentle handling of these sensitive
structures, and showed no signs of discomfort even when I brought the
candle-flame to within a couple of inches of his eyes.

But this extraordinary tolerance of light was easily explained by closer
examination; for the pupils were contracted to such an extreme degree
that only the very minutest point of black was visible at the centre of
the grey iris. Nor was this the only abnormal peculiarity of the sick
man's eyes. As he lay on his back, the right iris sagged down slightly
towards its centre, showing a distinctly concave surface; and, when I
contrived to produce a slight but quick movement of the eyeball, a
perceptible undulatory movement could be detected. The patient had, in
fact, what is known as a tremulous iris, a condition that is seen in
cases where the crystalline lens has been extracted for the cure of
cataract, or where it has become accidentally displaced, leaving the
iris unsupported. In the present case, the complete condition of the
iris made it clear that the ordinary extraction operation had not been
performed, nor was I able, on the closest inspection with the aid of my
lens, to find any trace of the less common "needle operation." The
inference was that the patient had suffered from the accident known as
"dislocation of the lens"; and this led to the further inference that he
was almost or completely blind in the right eye.

This conclusion was, indeed, to some extent negatived by a deep
indentation on the bridge of the nose, evidently produced by spectacles,
and by marks which I looked for and found behind the ears, corresponding
to the hooks or "curl sides" of the glasses. For those spectacles which
are fitted with curl sides to hook over the ears are usually intended to
be worn habitually, and this agreed with the indentation on the nose;
which was deeper than would have been accounted for by the merely
occasional use of spectacles for reading. But if only one eye was
useful, a single eye-glass would have answered the purpose; not that
there was any weight in this objection, for a single eye-glass worn
constantly would be much less convenient than a pair of hook-sided
spectacles.

As to the nature of the patient's illness, only one opinion seemed
possible. It was a clear and typical case of opium or morphine
poisoning. To this conclusion all his symptoms seemed to point with
absolute certainty. The coated tongue, which he protruded slowly and
tremulously in response to a command bawled in his ear; his yellow skin
and ghastly expression; his contracted pupils and the stupor from which
he could hardly be roused by the roughest handling and which yet did not
amount to actual insensibility; all these formed a distinct and coherent
group of symptoms, not only pointing plainly to the nature of the drug,
but also suggesting a very formidable dose.

But this conclusion in its turn raised a very awkward and difficult
question. If a large--a poisonous--dose of the drug had been taken, how,
and by whom had that dose been administered? The closest scrutiny of
the patient's arms and legs failed to reveal a single mark such as would
be made by a hypodermic needle. This man was clearly no common
morphinomaniac; and in the absence of the usual sprinkling of
needlemarks, there was nothing to show or suggest whether the drug had
been taken voluntarily by the patient himself or administered by someone
else.

And then there remained the possibility that I might, after all, be
mistaken in my diagnosis. I felt pretty confident. But the wise man
always holds a doubt in reserve. And, in the present case, having regard
to the obviously serious condition of the patient, such a doubt was
eminently disturbing. Indeed, as I pocketed my stethoscope and took a
last look at the motionless, silent figure, I realized that my position
was one of extraordinary difficulty and perplexity. On the one hand my
suspicions--aroused, naturally enough, by the very unusual circumstances
that surrounded my visit--inclined me to extreme reticence; while, on
the other, it was evidently my duty to give any information that might
prove serviceable to the patient.

As I turned away from the bed Mr. Weiss stopped his slow pacing to and
fro and faced me. The feeble light of the candle now fell on him, and I
saw him distinctly for the first time. He did not impress me favourably.
He was a thick-set, round-shouldered man, a typical fair German with
tow-coloured hair, greased and brushed down smoothly, a large, ragged,
sandy beard and coarse, sketchy features. His nose was large and thick
with a bulbous end, and inclined to a reddish purple, a tint which
extended to the adjacent parts of his face as if the colour had run. His
eyebrows were large and beetling, overhanging deep-set eyes, and he wore
a pair of spectacles which gave him a somewhat owlish expression. His
exterior was unprepossessing, and I was in a state of mind that rendered
me easily receptive of an unfavourable impression.

"Well," he said, "what do you make of him?" I hesitated, still perplexed
by the conflicting necessities of caution and frankness, but at length
replied:

"I think rather badly of him, Mr. Weiss. He is in a very low state."

"Yes, I can see that. But have you come to any decision as to the nature
of his illness?"

There was a tone of anxiety and suppressed eagerness in the question
which, while it was natural enough in the circumstances, by no means
allayed my suspicions, but rather influenced me on the side of caution.

"I cannot give a very definite opinion at present," I replied guardedly.
"The symptoms are rather obscure and might very well indicate several
different conditions. They might be due to congestion of the brain, and,
if no other explanation were possible, I should incline to that view.
The alternative is some narcotic poison, such as opium or morphia."

"But that is quite impossible. There is no such drug in the house, and
as he never leaves his room now, he could not get any from outside."

"What about the servants?" I asked.

"There are no servants excepting my housekeeper, and she is absolutely
trustworthy."

"He might have some store of the drug that you are not aware of. Is he
left alone much?"

"Very seldom indeed. I spend as much time with him as I can, and when I
am not able to be in the room, Mrs Schallibaum, my housekeeper, sits
with him."

"Is he often as drowsy as he is now?"

"Oh, very often; in fact, I should say that is his usual condition. He
rouses up now and again, and then he is quite lucid and natural for,
perhaps, an hour or so; but presently he becomes drowsy again and doses
off, and remains asleep, or half asleep, for hours on end. Do you know
of any disease that takes people in that way?"

"No," I answered. "The symptoms are not exactly like those of any
disease that is known to me. But they are much very like those of opium
poisoning."

"But, my dear sir," Mr. Weiss retorted impatiently, "since it is clearly
impossible that it can be opium poisoning, it must be something else.
Now, what else can it be? You were speaking of congestion of the brain."

"Yes. But the objection to that is the very complete recovery that seems
to take place in the intervals."

"I would not say very complete," said Mr. Weiss. "The recovery is rather
comparative. He is lucid and fairly natural in his manner, but he is
still dull and lethargic. He does not, for instance, show any desire to
go out, or even to leave his room."

I pondered uncomfortably on these rather contradictory statements.
Clearly Mr. Weiss did not mean to entertain the theory of opium
poisoning; which was natural enough if he had no knowledge of the drug
having been used. But still--

"I suppose," said Mr. Weiss, "you have experience of sleeping sickness?"

The suggestion startled me. I had not. Very few people had. At that time
practically nothing was known about the disease. It was a mere
pathological curiosity, almost unheard of excepting by a few
practitioners in remote parts of Africa, and hardly referred to in the
text-books. Its connection with the trypanosome-bearing insects was as
yet unsuspected, and, to me, its symptoms were absolutely unknown.

"No, I have not," I replied. "The disease is nothing more than a name to
me. But why do you ask? Has Mr. Graves been abroad?"

"Yes. He has been travelling for the last three or four years, and I
know that he spent some time recently in West Africa, where this disease
occurs. In fact, it was from him that I first heard about it."

This was a new fact. It shook my confidence in my diagnosis very
considerably, and inclined me to reconsider my suspicions. If Mr. Weiss
was lying to me, he now had me at a decided disadvantage.

"What do you think?" he asked. "Is it possible that this can be sleeping
sickness?"

"I should not like to say that it is impossible," I replied. "The
disease is practically unknown to me. I have never practised out of
England and have had no occasion to study it. Until I have looked the
subject up, I should not be in a position to give an opinion. Of course,
if I could see Mr. Graves in one of what we may call his 'lucid
intervals' I should be able to form a better idea. Do you think that
could be managed?"

"It might. I see the importance of it and will certainly do my best; but
he is a difficult man; a very difficult man. I sincerely hope it is not
sleeping sickness."

"Why?"

"Because--as I understood from him--that disease is invariably fatal,
sooner or later. There seem to be no cure. Do you think you will be able
to decide when you see him again?"

"I hope so," I replied. "I shall look up the authorities and see exactly
what the symptoms are--that is, so far as they are known; but my
impression is that there is very little information available."

"And in the meantime?"

"We will give him some medicine and attend to his general condition, and
you had better let me see him again as soon as possible." I was about to
say that the effect of the medicine itself might throw some light on the
patient's condition, but, as I proposed to treat him for morphine
poisoning, I thought it wiser to keep this item of information to
myself. Accordingly, I confined myself to a few general directions as to
the care of the patient, to which Mr. Weiss listened attentively. "And,"
I concluded, "we must not lose sight of the opium question. You had
better search the room carefully and keep a close watch on the patient,
especially during his intervals of wakefulness."

"Very well, doctor," Mr. Weiss replied, "I will do all that you tell me
and I will send for you again as soon as possible, if you do not object
to poor Graves's ridiculous conditions. And now, if you will allow me to
pay your fee, I will go and order the carriage while you are writing the
prescription."

"There is no need for a prescription," I said. "I will make up some
medicine and give it to the coachman."

Mr. Weiss seemed inclined to demur to this arrangement, but I had my own
reasons for insisting on it. Modern prescriptions are not difficult to
read, and I did not wish Mr. Weiss to know what treatment the patient
was having.

As soon as I was left alone, I returned to the bedside and once more
looked down at the impassive figure. And as I looked, my suspicions
revived. It was very like morphine poisoning; and, if it was morphine,
it was no common, medicinal dose that had been given. I opened my bag
and took out my hypodermic case from which I extracted a little tube of
atropine tabloids. Shaking out into my hand a couple of the tiny discs,
I drew down the patient's under-lip and slipped the little tablets under
his tongue. Then I quickly replaced the tube and dropped the case into
my bag; and I had hardly done so when the door opened softly and the
housekeeper entered the room.

"How do you find Mr. Graves?" she asked in what I thought a very
unnecessarily low tone, considering the patient's lethargic state.

"He seems to be very ill," I answered.

"So!" she rejoined, and added: "I am sorry to hear that. We have been
anxious about him."

She seated herself on the chair by the bedside, and, shading the candle
from the patient's face--and her own, too--produced from a bag that hung
from her waist a half-finished stocking and began to knit silently and
with the skill characteristic of the German housewife. I looked at her
attentively (though she was so much in the shadow that I could see her
but indistinctly) and somehow her appearance prepossessed me as little
as did that of the other members of the household. Yet she was not an
ill-looking woman. She had an excellent figure, and the air of a person
of good social position; her features were good enough and her
colouring, although a little unusual, was not unpleasant. Like Mr.
Weiss, she had very fair hair, greased, parted in the middle and brushed
down as smoothly as the painted hair of a Dutch doll. She appeared to
have no eyebrows at all--owing, no doubt, to the light colour of the
hair--and the doll-like character was emphasized by her eyes, which were
either brown or dark grey, I could not see which. A further peculiarity
consisted in a "habit spasm," such as one often sees in nervous
children; a periodical quick jerk of the head, as if a cap-string or
dangling lock were being shaken off the cheek. Her age I judged to be
about thirty-five.

The carriage, which one might have expected to be waiting, seemed to
take some time in getting ready. I sat, with growing impatience,
listening to the sick man's soft breathing and the click of the
housekeeper's knitting-needles. I wanted to get home, not only for my
own sake; the patient's condition made it highly desirable that the
remedies should be given as quickly as possible. But the minutes dragged
on, and I was on the point of expostulating when a bell rang on the
landing.

"The carriage is ready," said Mrs. Schallibaum. "Let me light you down
the stairs."

She rose, and, taking the candle, preceded me to the head of the stairs,
where she stood holding the light over the baluster-rail as I descended
and crossed the passage to the open side door. The carriage was drawn up
in the covered way as I could see by the faint glimmer of the distant
candle; which also enabled me dimly to discern the coachman standing
close by in the shadow. I looked round, rather expecting to see Mr.
Weiss, but, as he made no appearance, I entered the carriage. The door
was immediately banged to and locked, and I then heard the heavy bolts
of the gates withdrawn and the loud creaking of hinges. The carriage
moved out slowly and stopped; the gates slammed to behind me; I felt the
lurch as the coachman climbed to his seat and we started forward.

My reflections during the return journey were the reverse of agreeable.
I could not rid myself of the conviction that I was being involved in
some very suspicious proceedings. It was possible, of course, that this
feeling was due to the strange secrecy that surrounded my connection
with this case; that, had I made my visit under ordinary conditions, I
might have found in the patient's symptoms nothing to excite suspicion
or alarm. It might be so, but that consideration did not comfort me.

Then, my diagnosis might be wrong. It might be that this was, in
reality, a case of some brain affection accompanied by compression, such
as slow haemorrhage, abscess, tumour or simple congestion. These cases
were very difficult at times. But the appearances in this one did not
consistently agree with the symptoms accompanying any of these
conditions. As to sleeping sickness, it was, perhaps a more hopeful
suggestion, but I could not decide for or against it until I had more
knowledge; and against this view was the weighty fact that the symptoms
did exactly agree with the theory of morphine poisoning.

But even so, there was no conclusive evidence of any criminal act. The
patient might be a confirmed opium-eater, and the symptoms heightened by
deliberate deception. The cunning of these unfortunates is proverbial
and is only equalled by their secretiveness and mendacity. It would be
quite possible for this man to feign profound stupor so long as he was
watched, and then, when left alone for a few minutes, to nip out of bed
and help himself from some secret store of the drug. This would be quite
in character with his objection to seeing a doctor and his desire for
secrecy. But still, I did not believe it to be the true explanation. In
spite of all the various alternative possibilities, my suspicions came
back to Mr. Weiss and the strange, taciturn woman, and refused to budge.

For all the circumstances of the case were suspicious. The elaborate
preparations implied by the state of the carriage in which I was
travelling; the make-shift appearance of the house; the absence of
ordinary domestic servants, although a coachman was kept; the evident
desire of Mr. Weiss and the woman to avoid thorough inspection of their
persons; and, above all, the fact that the former had told me a
deliberate lie. For he had lied, beyond all doubt. His statement as to
the almost continuous stupor was absolutely irreconcilable with his
other statement as to the patient's wilfulness and obstinacy and even
more irreconcilable with the deep and comparatively fresh marks of the
spectacles on the patient's nose. That man had certainly worn spectacles
within twenty-four hours, which he would hardly have done if he had been
in a state bordering on coma.

My reflections were interrupted by the stopping of the carriage. The
door was unlocked and thrown open, and I emerged from my dark and stuffy
prison opposite my own house.

"I will let you have the medicine in a minute or two," I said to the
coachman; and, as I let myself in with my latch-key, my mind came back
swiftly from the general circumstances of the case to the very critical
condition of the patient. Already I was regretting that I had not taken
more energetic measures to rouse him and restore his flagging vitality;
for it would be a terrible thing if he should take a turn for the worse
and die before the coachman returned with the remedies. Spurred on by
this alarming thought, I made up the medicines quickly and carried the
hastily wrapped bottles out to the man, whom I found standing by the
horse's head.

"Get back as quickly as you can," I said, "and tell Mr. Weiss to lose no
time in giving the patient the draught in the small bottle. The
directions are on the labels."

The coachman took the packages from me without reply, climbed to his
seat, touched the horse with his whip and drove off at a rapid pace
towards Newington Butts.

The little clock in the consulting-room showed that it was close on
eleven; time for a tired G.P. to be thinking of bed. But I was not
sleepy. Over my frugal supper I found myself taking up anew the thread
of my meditations, and afterwards, as I smoked my last pipe by the
expiring surgery fire, the strange and sinister features of the case
continued to obtrude themselves on my notice. I looked up Stillbury's
little reference library for information on the subject of sleeping
sickness, but learned no more than that it was "a rare and obscure
disease of which very little was known at present." I read up morphine
poisoning and was only further confirmed in the belief that my diagnosis
was correct; which would have been more satisfactory if the
circumstances had been different.

For the interest of the case was not merely academic. I was in a
position of great difficulty and responsibility and had to decide on a
course of action. What ought I to do? Should I maintain the professional
secrecy to which I was tacitly committed, or ought I to convey a hint to
the police?

Suddenly, and with a singular feeling of relief, I bethought myself of
my old friend and fellow-student, John Thorndyke, now an eminent
authority on Medical Jurisprudence. I had been associated with him
temporarily in one case as his assistant, and had then been deeply
impressed by his versatile learning, his acuteness and his marvellous
resourcefulness. Thorndyke was a barrister in extensive practice, and so
would be able to tell me at once what was my duty from a legal point of
view; and, as he was also a doctor of medicine, he would understand the
exigencies of medical practice. If I could find time to call at the
Temple and lay the case before him, all my doubts and difficulties would
be resolved.

Anxiously, I opened my visiting-list to see what kind of day's work was
in store for me on the morrow. It was not a heavy day, even allowing for
one or two extra calls in the morning, but yet I was doubtful whether it
would allow of my going so far from my district, until my eye caught,
near the foot of the page, the name of Burton. Now Mr. Burton lived in
one of the old houses on the east side of Bouverie Street, less than
five minutes' walk from Thorndyke's chambers in King's Bench Walk; and
he was, moreover, a "chronic" who could safely be left for the last.
When I had done with Mr. Burton I could look in on my friend with a very
good chance of catching him on his return from the hospital. I could
allow myself time for quite a long chat with him, and, by taking a
hansom, still get back in good time for the evening's work.

This was a great comfort. At the prospect of sharing my responsibilities
with a friend on whose judgment I could so entirely rely, my
embarrassments seemed to drop from me in a moment. Having entered the
engagement in my visiting-list, I rose, in greatly improved spirits, and
knocked out my pipe just as the little clock banged out impatiently the
hour of midnight.




Chapter II

Thorndyke Devises a Scheme


As I entered the Temple by the Tudor Street gate the aspect of the place
smote my senses with an air of agreeable familiarity. Here had I spent
many a delightful hour when working with Thorndyke at the remarkable
Hornby case, which the newspapers had called "The Case of the Red Thumb
Mark"; and here had I met the romance of my life, the story whereof is
told elsewhere. The place was thus endeared to me by pleasant
recollections of a happy past, and its associations suggested hopes of
happiness yet to come and in the not too far distant future.

My brisk tattoo on the little brass knocker brought to the door no less
a person than Thorndyke himself; and the warmth of his greeting made me
at once proud and ashamed. For I had not only been an absentee; I had
been a very poor correspondent.

"The prodigal has returned, Polton," he exclaimed, looking into the
room. "Here is Dr. Jervis."

I followed him into the room and found Polton--his confidential servant,
laboratory assistant, artificer and general "familiar"--setting out the
tea-tray on a small table. The little man shook hands cordially with me,
and his face crinkled up into the sort of smile that one might expect to
see on a benevolent walnut.

"We've often talked about you, sir," said he. "The doctor was wondering
only yesterday when you were coming back to us."

As I was not "coming back to them" quite in the sense intended I felt a
little guilty, but reserved my confidences for Thorndyke's ear and
replied in polite generalities. Then Polton fetched the tea-pot from the
laboratory, made up the fire and departed, and Thorndyke and I subsided,
as of old, into our respective arm-chairs.

"And whence do you spring from in this unexpected fashion?" my colleague
asked. "You look as if you had been making professional visits."

"I have. The base of operations is in Lower Kennington Lane."

"Ah! Then you are 'back once more on the old trail'?"

"Yes," I answered, with a laugh, "'the old trail, the long trail, the
trail that is always new.'"

"And leads nowhere," Thorndyke added grimly.

I laughed again; not very heartily, for there was an uncomfortable
element of truth in my friend's remark, to which my own experience bore
only too complete testimony. The medical practitioner whose lack of
means forces him to subsist by taking temporary charge of other men's
practices is apt to find that the passing years bring him little but
grey hairs and a wealth of disagreeable experience.

"You will have to drop it, Jervis; you will, indeed," Thorndyke resumed
after a pause. "This casual employment is preposterous for a man of your
class and professional attainments. Besides, are you not engaged to be
married and to a most charming girl?"

"Yes, I know. I have been a fool. But I will really amend my ways. If
necessary, I will pocket my pride and let Juliet advance the money to
buy a practice."

"That," said Thorndyke, "is a very proper resolution. Pride and reserve
between people who are going to be husband and wife, is an absurdity.
But why buy a practice? Have you forgotten my proposal?"

"I should be an ungrateful brute if I had."

"Very well. I repeat it now. Come to me as my junior, read for the Bar
and work with me, and, with your abilities, you will have a chance of
something like a career. I want you, Jervis," he added, earnestly. "I
must have a junior, with my increasing practice, and you are the junior
I want. We are old and tried friends; we have worked together; we like
and trust one another, and you are the best man for the job that I know.
Come; I am not going to take a refusal. This is an ultimatum."

"And what is the alternative?" I asked with a smile at his eagerness.

"There isn't any. You are going to say yes."

"I believe I am," I answered, not without emotion; "and I am more
rejoiced at your offer and more grateful than I can tell you. But we
must leave the final arrangements for our next meeting--in a week or so,
I hope--for I have to be back in an hour, and I want to consult you on
a matter of some importance."

"Very well," said Thorndyke; "we will leave the formal agreement for
consideration at our next meeting. What is it that you want my opinion
on?"

"The fact is," I said, "I am in a rather awkward dilemma, and I want you
to tell me what you think I ought to do."

Thorndyke paused in the act of refilling my cup and glanced at me with
unmistakable anxiety.

"Nothing of an unpleasant nature, I hope," said he.

"No, no; nothing of that kind," I answered with a smile as I interpreted
the euphemism; for "something unpleasant," in the case of a young and
reasonably presentable medical man is ordinarily the equivalent of
trouble with the female of his species. "It is nothing that concerns me
personally at all," I continued; "it is a question of professional
responsibility. But I had better give you an account of the affair in a
complete narrative, as I know that you like to have your data in a
regular and consecutive order."

Thereupon I proceeded to relate the history of my visit to the
mysterious Mr. Graves, not omitting any single circumstance or detail
that I could recollect.

Thorndyke listened from the very beginning of my story with the closest
attention. His face was the most impassive that I have ever seen;
ordinarily as inscrutable as a bronze mask; but to me, who knew him
intimately, there was a certain something--a change of colour, perhaps,
or an additional sparkle of the eye--that told me when his curious
passion for investigation was fully aroused. And now, as I told him of
that weird journey and the strange, secret house to which it had brought
me, I could see that it offered a problem after his very heart. During
the whole of my narration he sat as motionless as a statue, evidently
committing the whole story to memory, detail by detail; and even when I
had finished he remained for an appreciable time without moving or
speaking.

At length he looked up at me. "This is a very extraordinary affair,
Jervis," he said.

"Very," I agreed; "and the question that is agitating me is, what is to
be done?"

"Yes," he said, meditatively, "that is the question; and an uncommonly
difficult question it is. It really involves the settlement of the
antecedent question: What is it that is happening at that house?"

"What do you think is happening at that house?" I asked.

"We must go slow, Jervis," he replied. "We must carefully separate the
legal tissues from the medical, and avoid confusing what we know with
what we suspect. Now, with reference to the medical aspects of the case.
The first question that confronts us is that of sleeping sickness, or
negro-lethargy as it is sometimes called; and here we are in a
difficulty. We have not enough knowledge. Neither of us, I take it, has
ever seen a case, and the extant descriptions are inadequate. From what
I know of the disease, its symptoms agree with those in your case in
respect of the alleged moroseness and in the gradually increasing
periods of lethargy alternating with periods of apparent recovery. On
the other hand, the disease is said to be confined to negroes; but that
probably means only that negroes alone have hitherto been exposed to the
conditions that produce it. A more important fact is that, as far as I
know, extreme contraction of the pupils is not a symptom of sleeping
sickness. To sum up, the probabilities are against sleeping sickness,
but with our insufficient knowledge, we cannot definitely exclude it."

"You think that it may really be sleeping sickness?"

"No; personally I do not entertain that theory for a moment. But I am
considering the evidence apart from our opinions on the subject. We have
to accept it as a conceivable hypothesis that it may be sleeping
sickness because we cannot positively prove that it is not. That is all.
But when we come to the hypothesis of morphine poisoning, the case is
different. The symptoms agree with those of morphine poisoning in every
respect. There is no exception or disagreement whatever. The common
sense of the matter is therefore that we adopt morphine poisoning as our
working diagnosis; which is what you seem to have done."

"Yes. For purposes of treatment."

"Exactly. For medical purposes you adopted the more probable view and
dismissed the less probable. That was the reasonable thing to do. But
for legal purposes you must entertain both possibilities; for the
hypothesis of poisoning involves serious legal issues, whereas the
hypothesis of disease involves no legal issues at all."

"That doesn't sound very helpful," I remarked.

"It indicates the necessity for caution," he retorted.

"Yes, I see that. But what is your own opinion of the case?"

"Well," he said, "let us consider the facts in order. Here is a man who,
we assume, is under the influence of a poisonous dose of morphine. The
question is, did he take that dose himself or was it administered to him
by some other person? If he took it himself, with what object did he
take it? The history that was given to you seems completely to exclude
the idea of suicide. But the patient's condition seems equally to
exclude the idea of morphinomania. Your opium-eater does not reduce
himself to a state of coma. He usually keeps well within the limits of
the tolerance that has been established. The conclusion that emerges is,
I think, that the drug was administered by some other person; and the
most likely person seems to be Mr. Weiss."

"Isn't morphine a very unusual poison?"

"Very; and most inconvenient except in a single, fatal dose, by reason
of the rapidity with which tolerance of the drug is established. But we
must not forget that slow morphine poisoning might be eminently
suitable in certain cases. The manner in which it enfeebles the will,
confuses the judgment and debilitates the body might make it very useful
to a poisoner whose aim was to get some instrument or document executed,
such as a will, deed or assignment. And death could be produced
afterwards by other means. You see the important bearing of this?"

"You mean in respect of a death certificate?"

"Yes. Suppose Mr. Weiss to have given a large dose of morphine. He then
sends for you and throws out a suggestion of sleeping sickness. If you
accept the suggestion he is pretty safe. He can repeat the process until
he kills his victim and then get a certificate from you which will cover
the murder. It was quite an ingenious scheme--which, by the way, is
characteristic of intricate crimes; your subtle criminal often plans his
crime like a genius, but he generally executes it like a fool--as this
man seems to have done, if we are not doing him an injustice."

"How has he acted like a fool?"

"In several respects. In the first place, he should have chosen his
doctor. A good, brisk, confident man who 'knows his own mind' is the
sort of person who would have suited him; a man who would have jumped at
a diagnosis and stuck to it; or else an ignorant weakling of alcoholic
tendencies. It was shockingly bad luck to run against a cautious
scientific practitioner like my learned friend. Then, of course, all
this secrecy was sheer tomfoolery, exactly calculated to put a careful
man on his guard; as it has actually done. If Mr. Weiss is really a
criminal, he has mismanaged his affairs badly."

"And you apparently think that he is a criminal?"

"I suspect him deeply. But I should like to ask you one or two questions
about him. You say he spoke with a German accent. What command of
English had he? Was his vocabulary good? Did he use any German idioms?"

"No. I should say that his English was perfect, and I noticed that his
phrases were quite well chosen even for an Englishman."

"Did he seem to you 'made up' in any way; disguised, I mean?"

"I couldn't say. The light was so very feeble."

"You couldn't see the colour of his eyes, for instance?"

"No. I think they were grey, but I couldn't be sure."

"And as to the coachman. He wore a wig, you said. Could you see the
colour of his eyes? Or any peculiarity by which you could recognize
him?"

"He had a malformed thumb-nail on his right hand. That is all I can say
about him."

"He didn't strike you as resembling Weiss in any way; in voice or
features?"

"Not at all; and he spoke, as I told you, with a distinct Scotch
accent."

"The reason I ask is that if Weiss is attempting to poison this man, the
coachman is almost certain to be a confederate and might be a relative.
You had better examine him closely if you get another chance."

"I will. And that brings me back to the question, What am I to do? Ought
I to report the case to the police?"

"I am inclined to think not. You have hardly enough facts. Of course, if
Mr. Weiss has administered poison 'unlawfully and maliciously' he has
committed a felony, and is liable under the Consolidation Acts of 1861
to ten years' penal servitude. But I do not see how you could swear an
information. You don't know that he administered the poison--if poison
has really been administered--and you cannot give any reliable name or
any address whatever. Then there is the question of sleeping sickness.
You reject it for medical purposes, but you could not swear, in a court
of law, that this is not a case of sleeping sickness."

"No," I admitted, "I could not."

"Then I think the police would decline to move in the matter, and you
might find that you had raised a scandal in Dr. Stillbury's practice to
no purpose."

"So you think I had better do nothing in the matter?"

"For the present. It is, of course, a medical man's duty to assist
justice in any way that is possible. But a doctor is not a detective; he
should not go out of his way to assume police functions. He should keep
his eyes and ears open, and, though, in general, he should keep his own
counsel, it is his duty to note very carefully anything that seems to
him likely to bear on any important legal issues. It is not his
business officiously to initiate criminal inquiries, but it is
emphatically his business to be ready, if called upon, to assist justice
with information that his special knowledge and opportunities have
rendered accessible to him. You see the bearing of this?"

"You mean that I should note down what I have seen and heard and say
nothing about it until I am asked."

"Yes; if nothing further happens. But if you should be sent for again, I
think it is your duty to make further observations with a view, if
necessary, to informing the police. It may be, for instance, of vital
importance to identify the house, and it is your duty to secure the
means of doing so."

"But, my dear Thorndyke," I expostulated, "I have told you how I was
conveyed to the house. Now, will you kindly explain to me how a man,
boxed up in a pitch-dark carriage, is going to identify any place to
which he may be carried?"

"The problem doesn't appear to me to present any serious difficulties,"
he replied.

"Doesn't it?" said I. "To me it looks like a pretty solid impossibility.
But what do you suggest? Should I break out of the house and run away up
the street? Or should I bore a hole through the shutter of the carriage
and peep out?"

Thorndyke smiled indulgently. "The methods proposed by my learned friend
display a certain crudity inappropriate to the character of a man of
science; to say nothing of the disadvantage of letting the enemy into
our counsels. No, no, Jervis; we can do something better than that.
Just excuse me for a minute while I run up to the laboratory."

He hurried away to Polton's sanctum on the upper floor, leaving me to
speculate on the method by which he proposed that a man should be
enabled, as Sam Weller would express it, "to see through a flight of
stairs and a deal door"; or, what was equally opaque, the wooden
shutters of a closed carriage.

"Now," he said, when he returned a couple of minutes later with a small,
paper-covered notebook in his hand, "I have set Polton to work on a
little appliance that will, I think, solve our difficulty, and I will
show you how I propose that you should make your observations. First of
all, we have to rule the pages of this book into columns."

He sat down at the table and began methodically to rule the pages each
into three columns, two quite narrow and one broad. The process occupied
some time, during which I sat and watched with impatient curiosity the
unhurried, precise movements of Thorndyke's pencil, all agog to hear the
promised explanation. He was just finishing the last page when there
came a gentle tap at the door, and Polton entered with a satisfied smile
on his dry, shrewd-looking face and a small board in his hand.

"Will this do, sir?" he asked.

As he spoke he handed the little board to Thorndyke, who looked at it
and passed it to me.

"The very thing, Polton," my friend replied. "Where did you find it?
It's of no use for you to pretend that you've made it in about two
minutes and a half."

Polton smiled one of his queer crinkly smiles, and remarking that "it
didn't take much making," departed much gratified by the compliment.

"What a wonderful old fellow that is, Jervis," Thorndyke observed as his
factotum retired. "He took in the idea instantly and seems to have
produced the finished article by magic, as the conjurers bring forth
rabbits and bowls of goldfish at a moment's notice. I suppose you see
what your <i>modus operandi</i> is to be?"

I had gathered a clue from the little appliance--a plate of white
fret-wood about seven inches by five, to one corner of which a
pocket-compass had been fixed with shellac--but was not quite clear as
to the details of the method.

"You can read a compass pretty quickly, I think?" Thorndyke said.

"Of course I can. Used we not to sail a yacht together when we were
students?"

"To be sure we did; and we will again before we die. And now as to your
method of locating this house. Here is a pocket reading-lamp which you
can hook on the carriage lining. This notebook can be fixed to the board
with an india-rubber band--thus. You observe that the thoughtful Polton
has stuck a piece of thread on the glass of the compass to serve as a
lubber's line. This is how you will proceed. As soon as you are locked
in the carriage, light your lamp--better have a book with you in case
the light is noticed--take out your watch and put the board on your
knee, keeping its long side exactly in a line with the axis of the
carriage. Then enter in one narrow column of your notebook the time, in
the other the direction shown by the compass, and in the broad column
any particulars, including the number of steps the horse makes in a
minute. Like this."

He took a loose sheet of paper and made one or two sample entries on it
in pencil, thus--

  "9.40.  S.E.    Start from home.
   9.41   S.W.    Granite setts.
   9.43.  S.W.    Wood pavement. Hoofs 104.
   9.47.  W. by S Granite crossing. Macadam--

and so on. Note every change of direction, with the time; and whenever
you hear or feel anything from outside, note it, with the time and
direction; and don't forget to note any variations in the horse's pace.
You follow the process?"

"Perfectly. But do you think the method is accurate enough to fix the
position of a house? Remember, this is only a pocket-compass with no
dial, and it will jump frightfully. And the mode of estimating distance
is very rough."

"That is all perfectly true," Thorndyke answered. "But you are
overlooking certain important facts The track-chart that you will
produce can be checked by other data. The house, for instance, has a
covered way by which you could identify it if you knew approximately
where to look for it. Then you must remember that your carriage is not
travelling over a featureless plain. It is passing through streets which
have a determined position and direction and which are accurately
represented on the ordnance map. I think, Jervis, that, in spite of the
apparent roughness of the method, if you make your observations
carefully, we shall have no trouble in narrowing down the inquiry to a
quite small area. If we get the chance, that is to say."

"Yes, if we do. I am doubtful whether Mr. Weiss will require my services
again, but I sincerely hope he will. It would be rare sport to locate
his secret burrow, all unsuspected. But now I must really be off."

"Good-bye, then," said Thorndyke, slipping a well-sharpened pencil
through the rubber band that fixed the notebook to the board. "Let me
know how the adventure progresses--if it progresses at all--and
remember, I hold your promise to come and see me again quite soon in any
case."

He handed me the board and the lamp, and, when I had slipped them into
my pocket, we shook hands and I hurried away, a little uneasy at having
left my charge so long.




Chapter III

"A Chiel's Amang Ye Takin' Notes"


The attitude of the suspicious man tends to generate in others the kind
of conduct that seems to justify his suspicions. In most of us there
lurks a certain strain of mischief which trustfulness disarms but
distrust encourages. The inexperienced kitten which approaches us
confidingly with arched back and upright tail, soliciting caresses,
generally receives the gentle treatment that it expects; whereas the
worldly-wise tom-cat, who, in response to friendly advances, scampers
away and grins at us suspiciously from the fancied security of an
adjacent wall, impels us to accelerate his retreat with a well-directed
clod.

Now the proceedings of Mr. H. Weiss resembled those of the tom-cat
aforesaid and invited an analogous reply. To a responsible professional
man his extraordinary precautions were at once an affront and a
challenge. Apart from graver considerations, I found myself dwelling
with unholy pleasure on the prospect of locating the secret hiding-place
from which he seemed to grin at me with such complacent defiance; and I
lost no time and spared no trouble in preparing myself for the
adventure. The very hansom which bore me from the Temple to Kennington
Lane was utilized for a preliminary test of Thorndyke's little
apparatus. During the whole of that brief journey I watched the compass
closely, noted the feel and sound of the road-material and timed the
trotting of the horse. And the result was quite encouraging. It is true
that the compass-needle oscillated wildly to the vibration of the cab,
but still its oscillations took place around a definite point which was
the average direction, and it was evident to me that the data it
furnished were very fairly reliable. I felt very little doubt, after the
preliminary trial, as to my being able to produce a moderately
intelligible track-chart if only I should get an opportunity to exercise
my skill.

But it looked as if I should not. Mr. Weiss's promise to send for me
again soon was not fulfilled. Three days passed and still he made no
sign. I began to fear that I had been too outspoken; that the shuttered
carriage had gone forth to seek some more confiding and easy-going
practitioner, and that our elaborate preparations had been made in vain.
When the fourth day drew towards a close and still no summons had come,
I was disposed reluctantly to write the case off as a lost opportunity.

And at that moment, in the midst of my regrets, the bottle-boy thrust an
uncomely head in at the door. His voice was coarse, his accent was
hideous, and his grammatical construction beneath contempt; but I
forgave him all when I gathered the import of his message.

"Mr. Weiss's carriage is waiting, and he says will you come as quickly
as you can because he's took very bad to-night."

I sprang from my chair and hastily collected the necessaries for the
journey. The little board and the lamp I put in my overcoat pocket; I
overhauled the emergency bag and added to its usual contents a bottle of
permanganate of potassium which I thought I might require. Then I tucked
the evening paper under my arm and went out.

The coachman, who was standing at the horse's head as I emerged, touched
his hat and came forward to open the door.

"I have fortified myself for the long drive, you see," I remarked,
exhibiting the newspaper as I stepped into the carriage.

"But you can't read in the dark," said he.

"No, but I have provided myself with a lamp," I replied, producing it
and striking a match.

He watched me as I lit the lamp and hooked it on the back cushion, and
observed:

"I suppose you found it rather a dull ride last time. It's a longish
way. They might have fitted the carriage with an inside lamp. But we
shall have to make it a quicker passage to-night. Governor says Mr.
Graves is uncommon bad."

With this he slammed the door and locked it. I drew the board from my
pocket, laid it on my knee, glanced at my watch, and, as the coachman
climbed to his seat, I made the first entry in the little book.

"8.58. W. by S. Start from home. Horse 13 hands."

The first move of the carriage on starting was to turn round as if
heading for Newington Butts, and the second entry accordingly read:

"8.58.30. E. by N."

But this direction was not maintained long. Very soon we turned south
and then west and then south again. I sat with my eyes riveted on the
compass, following with some difficulty its rapid changes. The needle
swung to and fro incessantly but always within a definite arc, the
centre of which was the true direction. But this direction varied from
minute to minute in the most astonishing manner. West, south, east,
north, the carriage turned, "boxing" the compass until I lost all count
of direction. It was an amazing performance. Considering that the man
was driving against time on a mission of life and death urgency, his
carelessness as to direction was astounding. The tortuousness of the
route must have made the journey twice as long as it need have been
with a little more careful selection. At least so it appeared to me,
though, naturally, I was not in a position to offer an authoritative
criticism.

As far as I could judge, we followed the same route as before. Once I
heard a tug's whistle and knew that we were near the river, and we
passed the railway station, apparently at the same time as on the
previous occasion, for I heard a passenger train start and assumed that
it was the same train. We crossed quite a number of thoroughfares with
tram-lines--I had no idea there were so many--and it was a revelation to
me to find how numerous the railway arches were in this part of London
and how continually the nature of the road-metal varied.

It was by no means a dull journey this time. The incessant changes of
direction and variations in the character of the road kept me most
uncommonly busy; for I had hardly time to scribble down one entry before
the compass-needle would swing round sharply, showing that we had once
more turned a corner; and I was quite taken by surprise when the
carriage slowed down and turned into the covered way. Very hastily I
scribbled down the final entry ("9.24. S.E. In covered way"), and having
closed the book and slipped it and the board into my pocket, had just
opened out the newspaper when the carriage door was unlocked and opened,
whereupon I unhooked and blew out the lamp and pocketed that too,
reflecting that it might be useful later.

As on the last occasion, Mrs. Schallibaum stood in the open doorway with
a lighted candle. But she was a good deal less self-possessed this time.
In fact she looked rather wild and terrified. Even by the candle-light
I could see that she was very pale and she seemed unable to keep still.
As she gave me the few necessary words of explanation, she fidgeted
incessantly and her hands and feet were in constant movement.

"You had better come up with me at once," she said. "Mr. Graves is much
worse to-night. We will wait not for Mr. Weiss."

Without waiting for a reply she quickly ascended the stairs and I
followed. The room was in much the same condition as before. But the
patient was not. As soon as I entered the room, a soft, rhythmical
gurgle from the bed gave me a very clear warning of danger. I stepped
forward quickly and looked down at the prostrate figure, and the warning
gathered emphasis. The sick man's ghastly face was yet more ghastly; his
eyes were more sunken, his skin more livid; "his nose was as sharp as a
pen," and if he did not "babble of green fields" it was because he
seemed to be beyond even that. If it had been a case of disease, I
should have said at once that he was dying. He had all the appearance of
a man <i>in articulo mortis</i>. Even as it was, feeling convinced that the
case was one of morphine poisoning, I was far from confident that I
should be able to draw him back from the extreme edge of vitality on
which he trembled so insecurely.

"He is very ill? He is dying?"

It was Mrs. Schallibaum's voice; very low, but eager and intense. I
turned, with my finger on the patient's wrist, and looked into the face
of the most thoroughly scared woman I have ever seen. She made no
attempt now to avoid the light, but looked me squarely in the face, and
I noticed, half-unconsciously, that her eyes were brown and had a
curious strained expression.

"Yes," I answered, "he is very ill. He is in great danger."

She still stared at me fixedly for some seconds. And then a very odd
thing occurred. Suddenly she squinted--squinted horribly; not with the
familiar convergent squint which burlesque artists imitate, but with
external or divergent squint of extreme near sight or unequal vision.
The effect was quite startling. One moment both her eyes were looking
straight into mine; the next, one of them rolled round until it looked
out of the uttermost corner, leaving the other gazing steadily forward.

She was evidently conscious of the change, for she turned her head away
quickly and reddened somewhat. But it was no time for thoughts of
personal appearance.

"You can save him, doctor! You will not let him die! He must not be
allowed to die!"

She spoke with as much passion as if he had been the dearest friend that
she had in the world, which I suspected was far from being the case. But
her manifest terror had its uses.

"If anything is to be done to save him," I said, "it must be done
quickly. I will give him some medicine at once, and meanwhile you must
make some strong coffee."

"Coffee!" she exclaimed. "But we have none in the house. Will not tea
do, if I make it very strong?"

"No, it will not. I must have coffee; and I must have it quickly."

"Then I suppose I must go and get some. But it is late. The shops will
be shut. And I don't like leaving Mr. Graves."

"Can't you send the coachman?" I asked.

She shook her head impatiently. "No, that is no use. I must wait until
Mr. Weiss comes."

"That won't do," I said, sharply. "He will slip through our fingers
while you are waiting. You must go and get that coffee at once and bring
it to me as soon as it is ready. And I want a tumbler and some water."

She brought me a water-bottle and glass from the wash-stand and then,
with a groan of despair, hurried from the room.

I lost no time in applying the remedies that I had to hand. Shaking out
into the tumbler a few crystals of potassium permanganate, I filled it
up with water and approached the patient. His stupor was profound. I
shook him as roughly as was safe in his depressed condition, but
elicited no resistance or responsive movement. As it seemed very
doubtful whether he was capable of swallowing, I dared not take the risk
of pouring the liquid into his mouth for fear of suffocating him. A
stomach-tube would have solved the difficulty, but, of course, I had not
one with me. I had, however, a mouth-speculum which also acted as a gag,
and, having propped the patient's mouth open with this, I hastily
slipped off one of the rubber tubes from my stethoscope and inserted
into one end of it a vulcanite ear-speculum to serve as a funnel. Then,
introducing the other end of the tube into the gullet as far as its
length would permit, I cautiously poured a small quantity of the
permanganate solution into the extemporized funnel. To my great relief a
movement of the throat showed that the swallowing reflex still existed,
and, thus encouraged, I poured down the tube as much of the fluid as I
thought it wise to administer at one time.

The dose of permanganate that I had given was enough to neutralize any
reasonable quantity of the poison that might yet remain in the stomach.
I had next to deal with that portion of the drug which had already been
absorbed and was exercising its poisonous effects. Taking my hypodermic
case from my bag, I prepared in the syringe a full dose of atropine
sulphate, which I injected forthwith into the unconscious man's arm. And
that was all that I could do, so far as remedies were concerned, until
the coffee arrived.

I cleaned and put away the syringe, washed the tube, and then, returning
to the bedside, endeavoured to rouse the patient from his profound
lethargy. But great care was necessary. A little injudicious roughness
of handling, and that thready, flickering pulse might stop for ever; and
yet it was almost certain that if he were not speedily aroused, his
stupor would gradually deepen until it shaded off imperceptibly into
death. I went to work very cautiously, moving his limbs about, flicking
his face and chest with the corner of a wet towel, tickling the soles
of his feet, and otherwise applying stimuli that were strong without
being violent.

So occupied was I with my efforts to resuscitate my mysterious patient
that I did not notice the opening of the door, and it was with something
of a start that, happening to glance round, I perceived at the farther
end of the room the shadowy figure of a man relieved by two spots of
light reflected from his spectacles. How long he had been watching me I
cannot say, but, when he saw that I had observed him, he came
forward--though not very far--and I saw that he was Mr. Weiss.

"I am afraid," he said, "that you do not find my friend so well
to-night?"

"So well!" I exclaimed. "I don't find him well at all. I am exceedingly
anxious about him."

"You don't--er--anticipate anything of a--er--anything serious, I hope?"

"There is no need to anticipate," said I. "It is already about as
serious as it can be. I think he might die at any moment."

"Good God!" he gasped. "You horrify me!"

He was not exaggerating. In his agitation, he stepped forward into the
lighter part of the room, and I could see that his face was pale to
ghastliness--except his nose and the adjacent red patches on his cheeks,
which stood out in grotesquely hideous contrast. Presently, however, he
recovered a little and said:

"I really think--at least I hope--that you take an unnecessarily serious
view of his condition. He has been like this before, you know."

I felt pretty certain that he had not, but there was no use in
discussing the question. I therefore replied, as I continued my efforts
to rouse the patient:

"That may or may not be. But in any case there comes a last time; and it
may have come now."

"I hope not," he said; "although I understand that these cases always
end fatally sooner or later."

"What cases?" I asked.

"I was referring to sleeping sickness; but perhaps you have formed some
other opinion as to the nature of this dreadful complaint."

I hesitated for a moment, and he continued: "As to your suggestion that
his symptoms might be due to drugs, I think we may consider that as
disposed of. He has been watched, practically without cessation since
you came last, and, moreover, I have myself turned out the room and
examined the bed and have not found a trace of any drug. Have you gone
into the question of sleeping sickness?"

I looked at the man narrowly before answering, and distrusted him more
than ever. But this was no time for reticence. My concern was with the
patient and his present needs. After all, I was, as Thorndyke had said,
a doctor, not a detective, and the circumstances called for
straightforward speech and action on my part.

"I have considered that question," I said, "and have come to a perfectly
definite conclusion. His symptoms are not those of sleeping sickness.
They are in my opinion undoubtedly due to morphine poisoning."

"But my dear sir!" he exclaimed, "the thing is impossible! Haven't I
just told you that he has been watched continuously?"

"I can only judge by the appearances that I find," I answered; and,
seeing that he was about to offer fresh objections, I continued: "Don't
let us waste precious time in discussion, or Mr. Graves may be dead
before we have reached a conclusion. If you will hurry them up about the
coffee that I asked for some time ago, I will take the other necessary
measures, and perhaps we may manage to pull him round."

The rather brutal decision of my manner evidently daunted him. It must
have been plain to him that I was not prepared to accept any explanation
of the unconscious man's condition other than that of morphine
poisoning; whence the inference was pretty plain that the alternatives
were recovery or an inquest. Replying stiffly that I "must do as I
thought best," he hurried from the room, leaving me to continue my
efforts without further interruption.

For some time these efforts seemed to make no impression. The man lay as
still and impassive as a corpse excepting for the slow, shallow and
rather irregular breathing with its ominous accompanying rattle. But
presently, by imperceptible degrees, signs of returning life began to
make their appearance. A sharp slap on the cheek with the wet towel
produced a sensible flicker of the eyelids; a similar slap on the chest
was followed by a slight gasp. A pencil, drawn over the sole of the
foot, occasioned a visible shrinking movement, and, on looking once
more at the eyes, I detected a slight change that told me that the
atropine was beginning to take effect.

This was very encouraging, and, so far, quite satisfactory, though it
would have been premature to rejoice. I kept the patient carefully
covered and maintained the process of gentle irritation, moving his
limbs and shoulders, brushing his hair and generally bombarding his
deadened senses with small but repeated stimuli. And under this
treatment, the improvement continued so far that on my bawling a
question into his ear he actually opened his eyes for an instant, though
in another moment, the lids had sunk back into their former position.

Soon after this, Mr. Weiss re-entered the room, followed by Mrs.
Schallibaum, who carried a small tray, on which were a jug of coffee, a
jug of milk, a cup and saucer and a sugar basin.

"How do you find him now?" Mr. Weiss asked anxiously.

"I am glad to say that there is a distinct improvement," I replied. "But
we must persevere. He is by no means out of the wood yet."

I examined the coffee, which looked black and strong and had a very
reassuring smell, and, pouring out half a cupful, approached the bed.

"Now, Mr. Graves," I shouted, "we want you to drink some of this."

The flaccid eyelids lifted for an instant but there was no other
response. I gently opened the unresisting mouth and ladled in a couple
of spoonfuls of coffee, which were immediately swallowed; whereupon I
repeated the proceeding and continued at short intervals until the cup
was empty. The effect of the new remedy soon became apparent. He began
to mumble and mutter obscurely in response to the questions that I
bellowed at him, and once or twice he opened his eyes and looked
dreamily into my face. Then I sat him up and made him drink some coffee
from the cup, and, all the time, kept up a running fire of questions,
which made up in volume of sound for what they lacked of relevancy.

Of these proceedings Mr. Weiss and his housekeeper were highly
interested spectators, and the former, contrary to his usual practice,
came quite close up to the bed, to get a better view.

"It is really a most remarkable thing," he said, "but it almost looks as
if you were right, after all. He is certainly much better. But tell me,
would this treatment produce a similar improvement if the symptoms were
due to disease?"

"No," I answered, "it certainly would not."

"Then that seems to settle it. But it is a most mysterious affair. Can
you suggest any way in which he can have concealed a store of the drug?"

I stood up and looked him straight in the face; it was the first chance
I had had of inspecting him by any but the feeblest light, and I looked
at him very attentively. Now, it is a curious fact--though one that most
persons must have observed--that there sometimes occurs a considerable
interval between the reception of a visual impression and its complete
transfer to the consciousness. A thing may be seen, as it were,
unconsciously, and the impression consigned, apparently, to instant
oblivion; and yet the picture may be subsequently revived by memory with
such completeness that its details can be studied as though the object
were still actually visible.

Something of this kind must have happened to me now. Preoccupied as I
was, by the condition of the patient, the professional habit of rapid
and close observation caused me to direct a searching glance at the man
before me. It was only a brief glance--for Mr. Weiss, perhaps
embarrassed by my keen regard of him, almost immediately withdrew into
the shadow--and my attention seemed principally to be occupied by the
odd contrast between the pallor of his face and the redness of his nose
and by the peculiar stiff, bristly character of his eyebrows. But there
was another fact, and a very curious one, that was observed by me
subconsciously and instantly forgotten, to be revived later when I
reflected on the events of the night. It was this:

As Mr. Weiss stood, with his head slightly turned, I was able to look
through one glass of his spectacles at the wall beyond. On the wall was
a framed print; and the edge of the frame, seen through the
spectacle-glass, appeared quite unaltered and free from distortion,
magnification or reduction, as if seen through plain window-glass; and
yet the reflections of the candle-flame in the spectacles showed the
flame upside down, proving conclusively that the glasses were concave on
one surface at least. The strange phenomenon was visible only for a
moment or two, and as it passed out of my sight it passed also out of my
mind.

"No," I said, replying to the last question; "I can think of no way in
which he could have effectually hidden a store of morphine. Judging by
the symptoms, he has taken a large dose, and, if he has been in the
habit of consuming large quantities, his stock would be pretty bulky. I
can offer no suggestion whatever."

"I suppose you consider him quite out of danger now?"

"Oh, not at all. I think we can pull him round if we persevere, but he
must not be allowed to sink back into a state of coma. We must keep him
on the move until the effects of the drug have really passed off. If you
will put him into his dressing-gown we will walk him up and down the
room for a while."

"But is that safe?" Mr. Weiss asked anxiously.

"Quite safe," I answered. "I will watch his pulse carefully. The danger
is in the possibility, or rather certainty, of a relapse if he is not
kept moving."

With obvious unwillingness and disapproval, Mr. Weiss produced a
dressing-gown and together we invested the patient in it. Then we
dragged him, very limp, but not entirely unresisting, out of bed and
stood him on his feet. He opened his eyes and blinked owlishly first at
one and then at the other of us, and mumbled a few unintelligible words
of protest; regardless of which, we thrust his feet into slippers and
endeavoured to make him walk. At first he seemed unable to stand, and we
had to support him by his arms as we urged him forward; but presently
his trailing legs began to make definite walking movements, and, after
one or two turns up and down the room, he was not only able partly to
support his weight, but showed evidence of reviving consciousness in
more energetic protests.

At this point Mr. Weiss astonished me by transferring the arm that he
held to the housekeeper.

"If you will excuse me, doctor," said he, "I will go now and attend to
some rather important business that I have had to leave unfinished. Mrs.
Schallibaum will be able to give you all the assistance that you
require, and will order the carriage when you think it safe to leave the
patient. In case I should not see you again I will say 'good night.' I
hope you won't think me very unceremonious."

He shook hands with me and went out of the room, leaving me, as I have
said, profoundly astonished that he should consider any business of more
moment than the condition of his friend, whose life, even now, was but
hanging by a thread. However, it was really no concern of mine. I could
do without him, and the resuscitation of this unfortunate half-dead man
gave me occupation enough to engross my whole attention.

The melancholy progress up and down the room re-commenced, and with it
the mumbled protests from the patient. As we walked, and especially as
we turned, I caught frequent glimpses of the housekeeper's face. But it
was nearly always in profile. She appeared to avoid looking me in the
face, though she did so once or twice; and on each of these occasions
her eyes were directed at me in a normal manner without any sign of a
squint. Nevertheless, I had the impression that when her face was turned
away from me she squinted. The "swivel eye"--the left--was towards me as
she held the patient's right arm, and it was almost continuously turned
in my direction, whereas I felt convinced that she was really looking
straight before her, though, of course, her right eye was invisible to
me. It struck me, even at the time, as an odd affair, but I was too much
concerned about my charge to give it much consideration.

Meanwhile the patient continued to revive apace. And the more he
revived, the more energetically did he protest against this wearisome
perambulation. But he was evidently a polite gentleman, for, muddled as
his faculties were, he managed to clothe his objections in courteous and
even gracious forms of speech singularly out of agreement with the
character that Mr. Weiss had given him.

"I thangyou," he mumbled thickly. "Ver' good take s'much trouble. Think
I will lie down now." He looked wistfully at the bed, but I wheeled him
about and marched him once more down the room. He submitted
unresistingly, but as we again approached the bed he reopened the
matter.

"S'quite s'fficient, thang you. Gebback to bed now. Much 'bliged frall
your kindness"--here I turned him round--"no, really; m'feeling rather
tired. Sh'like to lie down now, f'you'd be s'good."

"You must walk about a little longer, Mr. Graves," I said. "It would be
very bad for you to go to sleep again."

He looked at me with a curious, dull surprise, and reflected awhile as
if in some perplexity. Then he looked at me again and said:

"Thing, sir, you are mistake--mistaken me--mist--"

Here Mrs. Schallibaum interrupted sharply:

"The doctor thinks it's good for you to walk about. You've been sleeping
too much. He doesn't want you to sleep any more just now."

"Don't wanter sleep; wanter lie down," said the patient.

"But you mustn't lie down for a little while. You must walk about for a
few minutes more. And you'd better not talk. Just walk up and down."

"There's no harm in his talking," said I; "in fact it's good for him. It
will help to keep him awake."

"I should think it would tire him," said Mrs. Schallibaum; "and it
worries me to hear him asking to lie down when we can't let him."

She spoke sharply and in an unnecessarily high tone so that the patient
could not fail to hear. Apparently he took in the very broad hint
contained in the concluding sentence, for he trudged wearily and
unsteadily up and down the room for some time without speaking, though
he continued to look at me from time to time as if something in my
appearance puzzled him exceedingly. At length his intolerable longing
for repose overcame his politeness and he returned to the attack.

"Surely v' walked enough now. Feeling very tired. Am really. Would you
be s'kind 's t'let me lie down few minutes?"

"Don't you think he might lie down for a little while?" Mrs. Schallibaum
asked.

I felt his pulse, and decided that he was really becoming fatigued, and
that it would be wiser not to overdo the exercise while he was so weak.
Accordingly, I consented to his returning to bed, and turned him round
in that direction; whereupon he tottered gleefully towards his
resting-place like a tired horse heading for its stable.

As soon as he was tucked in, I gave him a full cup of coffee, which he
drank with some avidity as if thirsty. Then I sat down by the bedside,
and, with a view to keeping him awake, began once more to ply him with
questions.

"Does your head ache, Mr. Graves?" I asked.

"The doctor says 'does your head ache?'" Mrs. Schallibaum squalled, so
loudly that the patient started perceptibly.

"I heard him, m'dear girl," he answered with a faint smile. "Not deaf
you know. Yes. Head aches a good deal. But I thing this gennleman
mistakes--"

"He says you are to keep awake. You mustn't go to sleep again, and you
are not to close your eyes."

"All ri' Pol'n. Keep'm open," and he proceeded forthwith to shut them
with an air of infinite peacefulness. I grasped his hand and shook it
gently, on which he opened his eyes and looked at me sleepily. The
housekeeper stroked his head, keeping her face half-turned from me--as
she had done almost constantly, to conceal the squinting eye, as I
assumed--and said:

"Need we keep you any longer, doctor? It is getting very late and you
have a long way to go."

I looked doubtfully at the patient. I was loath to leave him,
distrusting these people as I did. But I had my work to do on the
morrow, with, perhaps, a night call or two in the interval, and the
endurance even of a general practitioner has its limits.

"I think I heard the carriage some time ago," Mrs. Schallibaum added.

I rose hesitatingly and looked at my watch. It had turned half-past
eleven.

"You understand," I said in a low voice, "that the danger is not over?
If he is left now he will fall asleep, and in all human probability will
never wake. You clearly understand that?"

"Yes, quite clearly. I promise you he shall not be allowed to fall
asleep again."

As she spoke, she looked me full in the face for a few moments, and I
noted that her eyes had a perfectly normal appearance, without any trace
whatever of a squint.

"Very well," I said. "On that understanding I will go now; and I shall
hope to find our friend quite recovered at my next visit."

I turned to the patient, who was already dozing, and shook his hand
heartily.

"Good-bye, Mr. Graves!" I said. "I am sorry to have to disturb your
repose so much; but you must keep awake, you know. Won't do to go to
sleep."

"Ver' well," he replied drowsily. "Sorry t' give you all this trouble.
L' keep awake. But I think you're mistak'n--"

"He says it's very important that you shouldn't go to sleep, and that I
am to see that you don't. Do you understand?"

"Yes, I un'stan'. But why does this gennlem'n--?"

"Now it's of no use for you to ask a lot of questions," Mrs. Schallibaum
said playfully; "we'll talk to you to-morrow. Good night, doctor. I'll
light you down the stairs, but I won't come down with you, or the
patient will be falling asleep again."

Taking this definite dismissal, I retired, followed by a dreamily
surprised glance from the sick man. The housekeeper held the candle over
the balusters until I reached the bottom of the stairs, when I perceived
through the open door along the passage a glimmer of light from the
carriage lamps. The coachman was standing just outside, faintly
illuminated by the very dim lamplight, and as I stepped into the
carriage he remarked in his Scotch dialect that I "seemed to have been
makin' a nicht of it." He did not wait for any reply--none being in fact
needed--but shut the door and locked it.

I lit my little pocket-lamp and hung it on the back cushion. I even drew
the board and notebook from my pocket. But it seemed rather unnecessary
to take a fresh set of notes, and, to tell the truth, I rather shirked
the labour, tired as I was after my late exertions; besides, I wanted
to think over the events of the evening, while they were fresh in my
memory. Accordingly I put away the notebook, filled and lighted my pipe,
and settled myself to review the incidents attending my second visit to
this rather uncanny house.

Considered in leisurely retrospect, that visit offered quite a number of
problems that called for elucidation. There was the patient's condition,
for instance. Any doubt as to the cause of his symptoms was set at rest
by the effect of the antidotes. Mr. Graves was certainly under the
influence of morphine, and the only doubtful question was how he had
become so. That he had taken the poison himself was incredible. No
morphinomaniac would take such a knock-down dose. It was practically
certain that the poison had been administered by someone else, and, on
Mr. Weiss's own showing, there was no one but himself and the
housekeeper who could have administered it. And to this conclusion all
the other very queer circumstances pointed.

What were these circumstances? They were, as I have said, numerous,
though many of them seemed trivial. To begin with, Mr. Weiss's habit of
appearing some time after my arrival and disappearing some time before
my departure was decidedly odd. But still more odd was his sudden
departure this evening on what looked like a mere pretext. That
departure coincided in time with the sick man's recovery of the power of
speech. Could it be that Mr. Weiss was afraid that the half-conscious
man might say something compromising to him in my presence? It looked
rather like it. And yet he had gone away and left me with the patient
and the housekeeper.

But when I came to think about it I remembered that Mrs. Schallibaum had
shown some anxiety to prevent the patient from talking. She had
interrupted him more than once, and had on two occasions broken in when
he seemed to be about to ask me some question. I was "mistaken" about
something. What was that something that he wanted to tell me?

It had struck me as singular that there should be no coffee in the
house, but a sufficiency of tea. Germans are not usually tea-drinkers
and they do take coffee. But perhaps there was nothing in this. Rather
more remarkable was the invisibility of the coachman. Why could he not
be sent to fetch the coffee, and why did not he, rather than the
housekeeper, come to take the place of Mr. Weiss when the latter had to
go away.

There were other points, too. I recalled the word that sounded like
"Pol'n," which Mr. Graves had used in speaking to the housekeeper.
Apparently it was a Christian name of some kind; but why did Mr. Graves
call the woman by her Christian name when Mr. Weiss addressed her
formally as Mrs. Schallibaum? And, as to the woman herself: what was the
meaning of that curious disappearing squint? Physically it presented no
mystery. The woman had an ordinary divergent squint, and, like many
people, who suffer from this displacement, could, by a strong muscular
effort, bring the eyes temporarily into their normal parallel position.
I had detected the displacement when she had tried to maintain the
effort too long, and the muscular control had given way. But why had she
done it? Was it only feminine vanity--mere sensitiveness respecting a
slight personal disfigurement? It might be so; or there might be some
further motive. It was impossible to say.

Turning this question over, I suddenly remembered the peculiarity of Mr.
Weiss's spectacles. And here I met with a real poser. I had certainly
seen through those spectacles as clearly as if they had been plain
window-glass; and they had certainly given an inverted reflection of the
candle-flame like that thrown from the surface of a concave lens. Now
they obviously could not be both flat and concave; but yet they had the
properties peculiar to both flatness and concavity. And there was a
further difficulty. If I could see objects unaltered through them, so
could Mr. Weiss. But the function of spectacles is to alter the
appearances of objects, by magnification, reduction or compensating
distortion. If they leave the appearances unchanged they are useless. I
could make nothing of it. After puzzling over it for quite a long time,
I had to give it up; which I did the less unwillingly inasmuch as the
construction of Mr. Weiss's spectacles had no apparent bearing on the
case.

On arriving home, I looked anxiously at the message-book, and was
relieved to find that there were no further visits to be made. Having
made up a mixture for Mr. Graves and handed it to the coachman, I raked
the ashes of the surgery fire together and sat down to smoke a final
pipe while I reflected once more on the singular and suspicious case in
which I had become involved. But fatigue soon put an end to my
meditations; and having come to the conclusion that the circumstances
demanded a further consultation with Thorndyke, I turned down the gas to
a microscopic blue spark and betook myself to bed.




Chapter IV

The Official View


I rose on the following morning still possessed by the determination to
make some oportunity during the day to call on Thorndyke and take his
advice on the now urgent question as to what I was to do. I use the word
"urgent" advisedly; for the incidents of the preceding evening had left
me with the firm conviction that poison was being administered for some
purpose to my mysterious patient, and that no time must be lost if his
life was to be saved. Last night he had escaped only by the narrowest
margin--assuming him to be still alive--and it was only my unexpectedly
firm attitude that had compelled Mr. Weiss to agree to restorative
measures.

That I should be sent for again I had not the slightest expectation. If
what I so strongly suspected was true, Weiss would call in some other
doctor, in the hope of better luck, and it was imperative that he
should be stopped before it was too late. This was my view, but I meant
to have Thorndyke's opinion, and act under his direction, but


  "The best laid plans of mice and men
   Gang aft agley."

When I came downstairs and took a preliminary glance at the rough
memorandum-book, kept by the bottle-boy, or, in his absence, by the
housemaid, I stood aghast. The morning's entries looked already like a
sample page of the Post Office directory. The new calls alone were more
than equal to an ordinary day's work, and the routine visits remained to
be added. Gloomily wondering whether the Black Death had made a sudden
reappearance in England, I hurried to the dining-room and made a hasty
breakfast, interrupted at intervals by the apparition of the bottle-boy
to announce new messages.

The first two or three visits solved the mystery. An epidemic of
influenza had descended on the neighbourhood, and I was getting not only
our own normal work but a certain amount of overflow from other
practices. Further, it appeared that a strike in the building trade had
been followed immediately by a widespread failure of health among the
bricklayers who were members of a certain benefit club; which accounted
for the remarkable suddenness of the outbreak.

Of course, my contemplated visit to Thorndyke was out of the question. I
should have to act on my own responsibility. But in the hurry and rush
and anxiety of the work--for some of the cases were severe and even
critical--I had no opportunity to consider any course of action, nor
time to carry it out. Even with the aid of a hansom which I chartered,
as Stillbury kept no carriage, I had not finished my last visit until
near on midnight, and was then so spent with fatigue that I fell asleep
over my postponed supper.

As the next day opened with a further increase of work, I sent a
telegram to Dr. Stillbury at Hastings, whither he had gone, like a wise
man, to recruit after a slight illness. I asked for authority to engage
an assistant, but the reply informed me that Stillbury himself was on
his way to town; and to my relief, when I dropped in at the surgery for
a cup of tea, I found him rubbing his hands over the open day-book.

"It's an ill wind that blows nobody good," he remarked cheerfully as we
shook hands. "This will pay the expenses of my holiday, including you.
By the way, you are not anxious to be off, I suppose?"

As a matter of fact, I was; for I had decided to accept Thorndyke's
offer, and was now eager to take up my duties with him. But it would
have been shabby to leave Stillbury to battle alone with this rush of
work or to seek the services of a strange assistant.

"I should like to get off as soon as you can spare me," I replied, "but
I'm not going to leave you in the lurch."

"That's a good fellow," said Stillbury. "I knew you wouldn't. Let us
have some tea and divide up the work. Anything of interest going?"

There were one or two unusual cases on the list, and, as we marked off
our respective patients, I gave him the histories in brief synopsis. And
then I opened the subject of my mysterious experiences at the house of
Mr. Weiss.

"There's another affair that I want to tell you about; rather an
unpleasant business."

"Oh, dear!" exclaimed Stillbury. He put down his cup and regarded me
with quite painful anxiety.

"It looks to me like an undoubted case of criminal poisoning," I
continued.

Stillbury's face cleared instantly. "Oh, I'm glad it's nothing more than
that," he said with an air of relief. "I was afraid, it was some
confounded woman. There's always that danger, you know, when a locum is
young and happens--if I may say so, Jervis--to be a good-looking fellow.
Let us hear about this case."

I gave him a condensed narrative of my connection with the mysterious
patient, omitting any reference to Thorndyke, and passing lightly over
my efforts to fix the position of the house, and wound up with the
remark that the facts ought certainly to be communicated to the police.

"Yes," he admitted reluctantly, "I suppose you're right. Deuced
unpleasant though. Police cases don't do a practice any good. They waste
a lot of time, too; keep you hanging about to give evidence. Still, you
are quite right. We can't stand by and see the poor devil poisoned
without making some effort. But I don't believe the police will do
anything in the matter."

"Don't you really?"

"No, I don't. They like to have things pretty well cut and dried before
they act. A prosecution is an expensive affair, so they don't care to
prosecute unless they are fairly sure of a conviction. If they fail they
get hauled over the coals."

"But don't you think they would get a conviction in this case?"

"Not on your evidence, Jervis. They might pick up something fresh, but,
if they didn't they would fail. You haven't got enough hard-baked facts
to upset a capable defence. Still, that isn't our affair. You want to
put the responsibility on the police and I entirely agree with you."

"There ought not to be any delay," said I.

"There needn't be. I shall look in on Mrs. Wackford and you have to see
the Rummel children; we shall pass the station on our way. Why shouldn't
we drop in and see the inspector or superintendent?"

The suggestion met my views exactly. As soon as we had finished tea, we
set forth, and in about ten minutes found ourselves in the bare and
forbidding office attached to the station.

The presiding officer descended from a high stool, and, carefully laying
down his pen, shook hands cordially.

"And what can I do for you gentlemen?" he asked, with an affable smile.

Stillbury proceeded to open our business.

"My friend here, Dr. Jervis, who has very kindly been looking after my
work for a week or two, has had a most remarkable experience, and he
wants to tell you about it."

"Something in my line of business?" the officer inquired.

"That," said I, "is for you to judge. I think it is, but you may think
otherwise"; and hereupon, without further preamble, I plunged into the
history of the case, giving him a condensed statement similar to that
which I had already made to Stillbury.

He listened with close attention, jotting down from time to time a brief
note on a sheet of paper; and, when I had finished, he wrote out in a
black-covered notebook a short précis of my statement.

"I have written down here," he said, "the substance of what you have
told me. I will read the deposition over to you, and, if it is correct,
I will ask you to sign it."

He did so, and, when I had signed the document, I asked him what was
likely to be done in the matter.

"I am afraid," he replied, "that we can't take any active measures. You
have put us on our guard and we shall keep our eyes open. But I think
that is all we can do, unless we hear something further."

"But," I exclaimed, "don't you think that it is a very suspicious
affair?"

"I do," he replied. "A very fishy business indeed, and you were quite
right to come and tell us about it."

"It seems a pity not to take some measures," I said. "While you are
waiting to hear something further, they may give the poor wretch a fresh
dose and kill him."

"In which case we should hear something further, unless some fool of a
doctor were to give a death certificate."

"But that is very unsatisfactory. The man ought not to be allowed to
die."

"I quite agree with you, sir. But we've no evidence that he is going to
die. His friends sent for you, and you treated him skilfully and left
him in a fair way to recovery. That's all that we really know about it.
Yes, I know," the officer continued as I made signs of disagreement,
"you think that a crime is possibly going to be committed and that we
ought to prevent it. But you overrate our powers. We can only act on
evidence that a crime has actually been committed or is actually being
attempted. Now we have no such evidence. Look at your statement, and
tell me what you can swear to."

"I think I could swear that Mr. Graves had taken a poisonous dose of
morphine."

"And who gave him that poisonous dose?"

"I very strongly suspect--"

"That's no good, sir," interrupted the officer. "Suspicion isn't
evidence. We should want you to swear an information and give us enough
facts to make out a <i>primâ facie</i> case against some definite person. And
you couldn't do it. Your information amounts to this: that a certain
person has taken a poisonous dose of morphine and apparently recovered.
That's all. You can't swear that the names given to you are real names,
and you can't give us any address or even any locality."

"I took some compass bearings in the carriage," I said. "You could
locate the house, I think, without much difficulty."

The officer smiled faintly and fixed an abstracted gaze on the clock.

"<i>You</i> could, sir," he replied. "I have no doubt whatever that <i>you</i>
could. <i>I</i> couldn't. But, in any case, we haven't enough to go upon. If
you learn anything fresh, I hope you will let me know; and I am very
much obliged to you for taking so much trouble in the matter. Good
evening sir. Good evening, Dr. Stillbury."

He shook hands with us both genially, and, accepting perforce this very
polite but unmistakable dismissal, we took our departure.

Outside the station, Stillbury heaved a comfortable sigh. He was
evidently relieved to find that no upheavals were to take place in his
domain.

"I thought that would be their attitude," he said, "and they are quite
right, you know. The function of law is to prevent crime, it is true;
but prophylaxis in the sense in which we understand it is not possible
in legal practice."

I assented without enthusiasm. It was disappointing to find that no
precautionary measures were to be taken. However, I had done all that I
could in the matter. No further responsibility lay upon me, and, as it
was practically certain that I had seen and heard the last of Mr. Graves
and his mysterious household, I dismissed the case from my mind. At the
next corner Stillbury and I parted to go our respective ways; and my
attention was soon transferred from the romance of crime to the
realities of epidemic influenza.

The plethora of work in Dr. Stillbury's practice continued longer than I
had bargained for. Day after day went by and still found me tramping the
dingy streets of Kennington or scrambling up and down narrow stairways;
turning in at night dead tired, or turning out half awake to the hideous
jangle of the night bell.

It was very provoking. For months I had resisted Thorndyke's persuasion
to give up general practice and join him. Not from lack of inclination,
but from a deep suspicion that he was thinking of my wants rather than
his own; that his was a charitable rather than a business proposal. Now
that I knew this not to be the case, I was impatient to join him; and,
as I trudged through the dreary thoroughfares of this superannuated
suburb, with its once rustic villas and its faded gardens, my thoughts
would turn enviously to the quiet dignity of the Temple and my friend's
chambers in King's Bench Walk.

The closed carriage appeared no more; nor did any whisper either of good
or evil reach me in connection with the mysterious house from which it
had come. Mr. Graves had apparently gone out of my life for ever.

But if he had gone out of my life, he had not gone out of my memory.
Often, as I walked my rounds, would the picture of that dimly-lit room
rise unbidden. Often would I find myself looking once more into that
ghastly face, so worn, so wasted and haggard, and yet so far from
repellent. All the incidents of that last night would reconstitute
themselves with a vividness that showed the intensity of the impression
that they had made at the time. I would have gladly forgotten the whole
affair, for every incident of it was fraught with discomfort. But it
clung to my memory; it haunted me; and ever as it returned it bore with
it the disquieting questions: Was Mr. Graves still alive? And, if he was
not, was there really nothing which could have been done to save him?

Nearly a month passed before the practice began to show signs of
returning to its normal condition. Then the daily lists became more and
more contracted and the day's work proportionately shorter. And thus the
term of my servitude came to an end. One evening, as we were writing up
the day-book, Stillbury remarked:

"I almost think, Jervis, I could manage by myself now. I know you are
only staying on for my sake."

"I am staying on to finish my engagement, but I shan't be sorry to clear
out if you can do without me."

"I think I can. When would you like to be off?"

"As soon as possible. Say to-morrow morning, after I have made a few
visits and transferred the patients to you."

"Very well," said Stillbury. "Then I will give you your cheque and
settle up everything to-night, so that you shall be free to go off when
you like to-morrow morning."

Thus ended my connection with Kennington Lane. On the following day at
about noon, I found myself strolling across Waterloo Bridge with the
sensations of a newly liberated convict and a cheque for twenty-five
guineas in my pocket. My luggage was to follow when I sent for it. Now,
unhampered even by a hand-bag, I joyfully descended the steps at the
north end of the bridge and headed for King's Bench Walk by way of the
Embankment and Middle Temple Lane.




Chapter V

Jeffrey Blackmore's Will


My arrival at Thorndyke's chambers was not unexpected, having been
heralded by a premonitory post-card. The "oak" was open and an
application of the little brass knocker of the inner door immediately
produced my colleague himself and a very hearty welcome.

"At last," said Thorndyke, "you have come forth from the house of
bondage. I began to think that you had taken up your abode in Kennington
for good."

"I was beginning, myself, to wonder when I should escape. But here I am;
and I may say at once that I am ready to shake the dust of general
practice off my feet for ever--that is, if you are still willing to have
me as your assistant."

"Willing!" exclaimed Thorndyke, "Barkis himself was not more willing
than I. You will be invaluable to me. Let us settle the terms of our
comradeship forthwith, and to-morrow we will take measures to enter you
as a student of the Inner Temple. Shall we have our talk in the open air
and the spring sunshine?"

I agreed readily to this proposal, for it was a bright, sunny day and
warm for the time of year--the beginning of April. We descended to the
Walk and thence slowly made our way to the quiet court behind the
church, where poor old Oliver Goldsmith lies, as he would surely have
wished to lie, in the midst of all that had been dear to him in his
chequered life. I need not record the matter of our conversation. To
Thorndyke's proposals I had no objections to offer but my own
unworthiness and his excessive liberality. A few minutes saw our
covenants fully agreed upon, and when Thorndyke had noted the points on
a slip of paper, signed and dated it and handed it to me, the business
was at an end.

"There," my colleague said with a smile as he put away his pocket-book,
"if people would only settle their affairs in that way, a good part of
the occupation of lawyers would be gone. Brevity is the soul of wit; and
the fear of simplicity is the beginning of litigation."

"And now," I said, "I propose that we go and feed. I will invite you to
lunch to celebrate our contract."

"My learned junior is premature," he replied. "I had already arranged a
little festivity--or rather had modified one that was already arranged.
You remember Mr. Marchmont, the solicitor?"

"Yes."

"He called this morning to ask me to lunch with him and a new client at
the 'Cheshire Cheese.' I accepted and notified him that I should bring
you."

"Why the 'Cheshire Cheese'?" I asked.

"Why not? Marchmont's reasons for the selection were, first, that his
client has never seen an old-fashioned London tavern, and second, that
this is Wednesday and he, Marchmont, has a gluttonous affection for a
really fine beef-steak pudding. You don't object, I hope?"

"Oh, not at all. In fact, now that you mention it, my own sensations
incline me to sympathize with Marchmont. I breakfasted rather early."

"Then come," said Thorndyke. "The assignation is for one o'clock, and,
if we walk slowly, we shall just hit it off."

We sauntered up Inner Temple Lane, and, crossing Fleet Street, headed
sedately for the tavern. As we entered the quaint old-world dining-room,
Thorndyke looked round and a gentleman, who was seated with a companion
at a table in one of the little boxes or compartments, rose and saluted
us.

"Let me introduce you to my friend Mr. Stephen Blackmore," he said as we
approached. Then, turning to his companion, he introduced us by our
respective names.

"I engaged this box," he continued, "so that we might be private if we
wished to have a little preliminary chat; not that beef-steak pudding is
a great help to conversation. But when people have a certain business
in view, their talk is sure to drift towards it, sooner or later."

Thorndyke and I sat down opposite the lawyer and his client, and we
mutually inspected one another. Marchmont I already knew; an elderly,
professional-looking man, a typical solicitor of the old school;
fresh-faced, precise, rather irascible, and conveying a not unpleasant
impression of taking a reasonable interest in his diet. The other man
was quite young, not more than five-and-twenty, and was a fine
athletic-looking fellow with a healthy, out-of-door complexion and an
intelligent and highly prepossessing face. I took a liking to him at the
first glance, and so, I saw, did Thorndyke.

"You two gentlemen," said Blackmore, addressing us, "seem to be quite
old acquaintances. I have heard so much about you from my friend, Reuben
Hornby."

"Ah!" exclaimed Marchmont, "that was a queer case--'The Case of the Red
Thumb Mark,' as the papers called it. It was an eye-opener to
old-fashioned lawyers like myself. We've had scientific witnesses
before--and bullied 'em properly, by Jove! when they wouldn't give the
evidence that we wanted. But the scientific lawyer is something new. His
appearance in court made us all sit up, I can assure you."

"I hope we shall make you sit up again," said Thorndyke.

"You won't this time," said Marchmont. "The issues in this case of my
friend Blackmore's are purely legal; or rather, there are no issues at
all. There is nothing in dispute. I tried to prevent Blackmore from
consulting you, but he wouldn't listen to reason. Here! Waiter! How much
longer are we to be waiters? We shall die of old age before we get our
victuals!"

The waiter smiled apologetically. "Yessir!" said he. "Coming now, sir."
And at this very moment there was borne into the room a Gargantuan
pudding in a great bucket of a basin, which being placed on a
three-legged stool was forthwith attacked ferociously by the
white-clothed, white-capped carver. We watched the process--as did every
one present--with an interest not entirely gluttonous, for it added a
pleasant touch to the picturesque old room, with its sanded floor, its
homely, pew-like boxes, its high-backed settles and the friendly
portrait of the "great lexicographer" that beamed down on us from the
wall.

"This is a very different affair from your great, glittering modern
restaurant," Mr. Marchmont remarked.

"It is indeed," said Blackmore, "and if this is the way in which our
ancestors lived, it would seem that they had a better idea of comfort
than we have."

There was a short pause, during which Mr. Marchmont glared hungrily at
the pudding; then Thorndyke said:

"So you refused to listen to reason, Mr. Blackmore?"

"Yes. You see, Mr. Marchmont and his partner had gone into the matter
and decided that there was nothing to be done. Then I happened to
mention the affair to Reuben Hornby, and he urged me to ask your advice
on the case."

"Like his impudence," growled Marchmont, "to meddle with my client."

"On which," continued Blackmore, "I spoke to Mr. Marchmont and he agreed
that it was worth while to take your opinion on the case, though he
warned me to cherish no hopes, as the affair was not really within your
specialty."

"So you understand," said Marchmont, "that we expect nothing. This is
quite a forlorn hope. We are taking your opinion as a mere formality, to
be able to say that we have left nothing untried."

"That is an encouraging start," Thorndyke remarked. "It leaves me
unembarrassed by the possibility of failure. But meanwhile you are
arousing in me a devouring curiosity as to the nature of the case. Is it
highly confidential? Because if not, I would mention that Jervis has now
joined me as my permanent colleague."

"It isn't confidential at all," said Marchmont. "The public are in full
possession of the facts, and we should be only too happy to put them in
still fuller possession, through the medium of the Probate Court, if we
could find a reasonable pretext. But we can't."

Here the waiter charged our table with the fussy rapidity of the
overdue.

"Sorry to keep you waiting, sir. Rather early, sir. Wouldn't like it
underdone, sir."

Marchmont inspected his plate critically and remarked:

"I sometimes suspect these oysters of being mussels; and I'll swear the
larks are sparrows."

"Let us hope so," said Thorndyke. "The lark is better employed 'at
Heaven's gate singing' than garnishing a beef-steak pudding. But you
were telling us about your case."

"So I was. Well it's just a matter of--ale or claret? Oh, claret, I
know. You despise the good old British John Barleycorn."

"He that drinks beer thinks beer," retorted Thorndyke. "But you were
saying that it is just a matter of--?"

"A matter of a perverse testator and an ill-drawn will. A peculiarly
irritating case, too, because the defective will replaces a perfectly
sound one, and the intentions of the testator were--er--were--excellent
ale, this. A little heady, perhaps, but sound. Better than your sour
French wine, Thorndyke--were--er--were quite obvious. What he evidently
desired was--mustard? Better have some mustard. No? Well, well! Even a
Frenchman would take mustard. You can have no appreciation of flavour,
Thorndyke, if you take your victuals in that crude, unseasoned state.
And, talking of flavour, do you suppose that there is really any
difference between that of a lark and that of a sparrow?"

Thorndyke smiled grimly. "I should suppose," said he, "that they were
indistinguishable; but the question could easily be put to the test of
experiment."

"That is true," agreed Marchmont, "and it would really be worth trying,
for, as you say, sparrows are more easily obtainable than larks. But,
about this will. I was saying--er--now, what was I saying?"

"I understood you to say," replied Thorndyke, "that the intentions of
the testator were in some way connected with mustard. Isn't that so,
Jervis?"

"That was what I gathered," said I.

Marchmont gazed at us for a moment with a surprised expression and then,
laughing good-humouredly, fortified himself with a draught of ale.

"The moral of which is," Thorndyke added, "that testamentary
dispositions should not be mixed up with beef-steak pudding."

"I believe you're right, Thorndyke," said the unabashed solicitor.
"Business is business and eating is eating. We had better talk over our
case in my office or your chambers after lunch."

"Yes," said Thorndyke, "come over to the Temple with me and I will give
you a cup of coffee to clear your brain. Are there any documents?"

"I have all the papers here in my bag," replied Marchmont; and the
conversation--such conversation as is possible "when beards wag all"
over the festive board--drifted into other channels.

As soon as the meal was finished and the reckoning paid, we trooped out
of Wine Office Court, and, insinuating ourselves through the line of
empty hansoms that, in those days, crawled in a continuous procession
on either side of Fleet Street, betook ourselves by way of Mitre Court
to King's Bench Walk. There, when the coffee had been requisitioned and
our chairs drawn up around the fire, Mr. Marchmont unloaded from his bag
a portentous bundle of papers, and we addressed ourselves to the
business in hand.

"Now," said Marchmont, "let me repeat what I said before. Legally
speaking, we have no case--not the ghost of one. But my client wished to
take your opinion, and I agreed on the bare chance that you might detect
some point that we had overlooked. I don't think you will, for we have
gone into the case very thoroughly, but still, there is the
infinitesimal chance and we may as well take it. Would you like to read
the two wills, or shall I first explain the circumstances?"

"I think," replied Thorndyke, "a narrative of the events in the order of
their occurrence would be most helpful. I should like to know as much as
possible about the testator before I examine the documents."

"Very well," said Marchmont. "Then I will begin with a recital of the
circumstances, which, briefly stated, are these: My client, Stephen
Blackmore, is the son of Mr. Edward Blackmore, deceased. Edward
Blackmore had two brothers who survived him, John, the elder, and
Jeffrey, the younger. Jeffrey is the testator in this case.

"Some two years ago, Jeffrey Blackmore executed a will by which he made
his nephew Stephen his executor and sole legatee; and a few months later
he added a codicil giving two hundred and fifty pounds to his brother
John."

"What was the value of the estate?" Thorndyke asked.

"About three thousand five hundred pounds, all invested in Consols. The
testator had a pension from the Foreign Office, on which he lived,
leaving his capital untouched. Soon after having made his will, he left
the rooms in Jermyn Street, where he had lived for some years, stored
his furniture and went to Florence. From thence he moved on to Rome and
then to Venice and other places in Italy, and so continued to travel
about until the end of last September, when it appears that he returned
to England, for at the beginning of October he took a set of chambers in
New Inn, which he furnished with some of the things from his old rooms.
As far as we can make out, he never communicated with any of his
friends, excepting his brother, and the fact of his being in residence
at New Inn or of his being in England at all became known to them only
when he died."

"Was this quite in accordance with his ordinary habits?" Thorndyke
asked.

"I should say not quite," Blackmore answered. "My uncle was a studious,
solitary man, but he was not formerly a recluse. He was not much of a
correspondent but he kept up some sort of communication with his
friends. He used, for instance, to write to me sometimes, and, when I
came down from Cambridge for the vacations, he had me to stay with him
at his rooms."

"Is there anything known that accounts for the change in his habits?"

"Yes, there is," replied Marchmont. "We shall come to that presently. To
proceed with the narrative: On the fifteenth of last March he was found
dead in his chambers, and a more recent will was then discovered, dated
the twelfth of November of last year. Now no change had taken place in
the circumstances of the testator to account for the new will, nor was
there any appreciable alteration in the disposition of the property. As
far as we can make out, the new will was drawn with the idea of stating
the intentions of the testator with greater exactness and for the sake
of doing away with the codicil. The entire property, with the exception
of two hundred and fifty pounds, was, as before, bequeathed to Stephen,
but the separate items were specified, and the testator's brother, John
Blackmore, was named as the executor and residuary legatee."

"I see," said Thorndyke. "So that your client's interest in the will
would appear to be practically unaffected by the change."

"Yes. There it is," exclaimed the lawyer, slapping the table to add
emphasis to his words. "That is the pity of it! If people who have no
knowledge of law would only refrain from tinkering at their wills, what
a world of trouble would be saved!"

"Oh, come!" said Thorndyke. "It is not for a lawyer to say that."

"No, I suppose not," Marchmont agreed. "Only, you see, we like the
muddle to be made by the other side. But, in this case, the muddle is on
our side. The change, as you say, seems to leave our friend Stephen's
interests unaffected. That is, of course, what poor Jeffrey Blackmore
thought. But he was mistaken. The effect of the change is absolutely
disastrous."

"Indeed!"

"Yes. As I have said, no alteration in the testator's circumstances had
taken place at the time the new will was executed. <i>But</i> only two days
before his death, his sister, Mrs. Edmund Wilson, died; and on her will
being proved it appeared that she had bequeathed to him her entire
personalty, estimated at about thirty thousand pounds."

"Heigho!" exclaimed Thorndyke. "What an unfortunate affair!"

"You are right," said Mr. Marchmont; "it was a disaster. By the original
will this great sum would have accrued to our friend Mr. Stephen,
whereas now, of course, it goes to the residuary legatee, Mr. John
Blackmore. And what makes it even more exasperating is the fact that
this is obviously not in accordance with the wishes and intentions of
Mr. Jeffrey, who clearly desired his nephew to inherit his property."

"Yes," said Thorndyke; "I think you are justified in assuming that. But
do you know whether Mr. Jeffrey was aware of his sister's intentions?"

"We think not. Her will was executed as recently as the third of
September last, and it seems that there had been no communication
between her and Mr. Jeffrey since that date. Besides, if you consider
Mr. Jeffrey's actions, you will see that they suggest no knowledge or
expectation of this very important bequest. A man does not make
elaborate dispositions in regard to three thousand pounds and then leave
a sum of thirty thousand to be disposed of casually as the residue of
the estate."

"No," Thorndyke agreed. "And, as you have said, the manifest intention
of the testator was to leave the bulk of his property to Mr. Stephen. So
we may take it as virtually certain that Mr. Jeffrey had no knowledge of
the fact that he was a beneficiary under his sister's will."

"Yes," said Mr. Marchmont, "I think we may take that as nearly certain."

"With reference to the second will," said Thorndyke, "I suppose there is
no need to ask whether the document itself has been examined; I mean as
to its being a genuine document and perfectly regular?"

Mr. Marchmont shook his head sadly.

"No," he said, "I am sorry to say that there can be no possible doubt as
to the authenticity and regularity of the document. The circumstances
under which it was executed establish its genuineness beyond any
question."

"What were those circumstances?" Thorndyke asked.

"They were these: On the morning of the twelfth of November last, Mr.
Jeffrey came to the porter's lodge with a document in his hand. 'This,'
he said, 'is my will. I want you to witness my signature. Would you mind
doing so, and can you find another respectable person to act as the
second witness?' Now it happened that a nephew of the porter's, a
painter by trade, was at work in the Inn. The porter went out and
fetched him into the lodge and the two men agreed to witness the
signature. 'You had better read the will,' said Mr. Jeffrey. 'It is not
actually necessary, but it is an additional safeguard and there is
nothing of a private nature in the document.' The two men accordingly
read the document, and, when Mr. Jeffrey had signed it in their
presence, they affixed their signatures; and I may add that the painter
left the recognizable impressions of three greasy fingers."

"And these witnesses have been examined?"

"Yes. They have both sworn to the document and to their own signatures,
and the painter recognized his finger-marks."

"That," said Thorndyke, "seems to dispose pretty effectually of any
question as to the genuineness of the will; and if, as I gather, Mr.
Jeffrey came to the lodge alone, the question of undue influence is
disposed of too."

"Yes," said Mr. Marchmont. "I think we must pass the will as absolutely
flawless."

"It strikes me as rather odd," said Thorndyke, "that Jeffrey should have
known so little about his sister's intentions. Can you explain it, Mr.
Blackmore?"

"I don't think that it is very remarkable," Stephen replied. "I knew
very little of my aunt's affairs and I don't think my uncle Jeffrey knew
much more, for he was under the impression that she had only a life
interest in her husband's property. And he may have been right. It is
not clear what money this was that she left to my uncle. She was a very
taciturn woman and made few confidences to anyone."

"So that it is possible," said Thorndyke, "that she, herself, may have
acquired this money recently by some bequest?"

"It is quite possible," Stephen answered.

"She died, I understand," said Thorndyke, glancing at the notes that he
had jotted down, "two days before Mr. Jeffrey. What date would that be?"

"Jeffrey died on the fourteenth of March," said Marchmont.

"So that Mrs. Wilson died on the twelfth of March?"

"That is so," Marchmont replied; and Thorndyke then asked:

"Did she die suddenly?"

"No," replied Stephen; "she died of cancer. I understand that it was
cancer of the stomach."

"Do you happen to know," Thorndyke asked, "what sort of relations
existed between Jeffrey and his brother John?"

"At one time," said Stephen, "I know they were not very cordial; but the
breach may have been made up later, though I don't know that it actually
was."

"I ask the question," said Thorndyke, "because, as I dare say you have
noticed, there is, in the first will, some hint of improved relations.
As it was originally drawn that will makes Mr. Stephen the sole legatee.
Then, a little later, a codicil is added in favour of John, showing that
Jeffrey had felt the necessity of making some recognition of his
brother. This seems to point to some change in the relations, and the
question arises: if such a change did actually occur, was it the
beginning of a new and further improving state of feeling between the
two brothers? Have you any facts bearing on that question?"

Marchmont pursed up his lips with the air of a man considering an
unwelcome suggestion, and, after a few moments of reflection, answered:

"I think we must say 'yes' to that. There is the undeniable fact that,
of all Jeffrey's friends, John Blackmore was the only one who knew that
he was living in New Inn."

"Oh, John knew that, did he?"

"Yes, he certainly did; for it came out in the evidence that he had
called on Jeffrey at his chambers more than once. There is no denying
that. But, mark you!" Mr. Marchmont added emphatically, "that does not
cover the inconsistency of the will. There is nothing in the second will
to suggest that Jeffrey intended materially to increase the bequest to
his brother."

"I quite agree with you, Marchmont. I think that is a perfectly sound
position. You have, I suppose, fully considered the question as to
whether it would be possible to set aside the second will on the ground
that it fails to carry out the evident wishes and intentions of the
testator?"

"Yes. My partner, Winwood, and I went into that question very carefully,
and we also took counsel's opinion--Sir Horace Barnaby--and he was of
the same opinion as ourselves; that the court would certainly uphold the
will."

"I think that would be my own view," said Thorndyke, "especially after
what you have told me. Do I understand that John Blackmore was the only
person who knew that Jeffrey was in residence at New Inn?"

"The only one of his private friends. His bankers knew and so did the
officials from whom he drew his pension."

"Of course he would have to notify his bankers of his change of
address."

"Yes, of course. And à propos of the bank, I may mention that the
manager tells me that, of late, they had noticed a slight change in the
character of Jeffrey's signature--I think you will see the reason of the
change when you hear the rest of his story. It was very trifling; not
more than commonly occurs when a man begins to grow old, especially if
there is some failure of eyesight."

"Was Mr. Jeffrey's eyesight failing?" asked Thorndyke.

"Yes, it was, undoubtedly," said Stephen. "He was practically blind in
one eye and, in the very last letter that I ever had from him, he
mentioned that there were signs of commencing cataract in the other."

"You spoke of his pension. He continued to draw that regularly?"

"Yes; he drew his allowance every month, or rather, his bankers drew it
for him. They had been accustomed to do so when he was abroad, and the
authorities seem to have allowed the practice to continue."

Thorndyke reflected a while, running his eye over the notes on the slips
of paper in his hand, and Marchmont surveyed him with a malicious smile.
Presently the latter remarked:

"Methinks the learned counsel is floored."

Thorndyke laughed. "It seems to me," he retorted, "that your proceedings
are rather like those of the amiable individual who offered the bear a
flint pebble, that he might crack it and extract the kernel. Your
confounded will seems to offer no soft spot on which one could commence
an attack. But we won't give up. We seem to have sucked the will dry.
Let us now have a few facts respecting the parties concerned in it; and,
as Jeffrey is the central figure, let us begin with him and the tragedy
at New Inn that formed the starting-point of all this trouble."




Chapter VI

Jeffrey Blackmore, Deceased


Having made the above proposition, Thorndyke placed a fresh slip of
paper on the blotting pad on his knee and looked inquiringly at Mr.
Marchmont; who, in his turn, sighed and looked at the bundle of
documents on the table.

"What do you want to know?" he asked a little wearily.

"Everything," replied Thorndyke. "You have hinted at circumstances that
would account for a change in Jeffrey's habits and that would explain an
alteration in the character of his signature. Let us have those
circumstances. And, if I might venture on a suggestion, it would be that
we take the events in the order in which they occurred or in which they
became known."

"That's the worst of you, Thorndyke," Marchmont grumbled. "When a case
has been squeezed out to the last drop, in a legal sense, you want to
begin all over again with the family history of every one concerned and
a list of his effects and household furniture. But I suppose you will
have to be humoured; and I imagine that the best way in which to give
you the information you want will be to recite the circumstances
surrounding the death of Jeffrey Blackmore. Will that suit you?"

"Perfectly," replied Thorndyke; and thereupon Marchmont began:

"The death of Jeffrey Blackmore was discovered at about eleven o'clock
in the morning of the fifteenth of March. It seems that a builder's man
was ascending a ladder to examine a gutter on number 31, New Inn, when,
on passing a second-floor window that was open at the top, he looked in
and perceived a gentleman lying on a bed. The gentleman was fully
clothed and had apparently lain down on the bed to rest; at least so the
builder thought at the time, for he was merely passing the window on
his way up, and, very properly, did not make a minute examination. But
when, some ten minutes later, he came down and saw that the gentleman
was still in the same position, he looked at him more attentively; and
this is what he noticed--but perhaps we had better have it in his own
words as he told the story at the inquest.

"'When I came to look at the gentleman a bit more closely, it struck me
that he looked rather queer. His face looked very white, or rather pale
yellow, like parchment, and his mouth was open. He did not seem to be
breathing. On the bed by his side was a brass object of some kind--I
could not make out what it was--and he seemed to be holding some small
metal object in his hand. I thought it rather a queer affair, so, when I
came down I went across to the lodge and told the porter about it. The
porter came out across the square with me and I showed him the window.
Then he told me to go up the stairs to Mr. Blackmore's chambers on the
second pair and knock and keep on knocking until I got an answer. I went
up and knocked and kept on knocking as loud as I could, but, though I
fetched everybody out of all the other chambers in the house, I couldn't
get any answer from Mr. Blackmore. So I went downstairs again and then
Mr. Walker, the porter, sent me for a policeman.

"'I went out and met a policeman just by Dane's Inn and told him about
the affair, and he came back with me. He and the porter consulted
together, and then they told me to go up the ladder and get in at the
window and open the door of the chambers from the inside. So I went up;
and as soon as I got in at the window I saw that the gentleman was dead.
I went through the other room and opened the outer door and let in the
porter and the policeman.'

"That," said Mr. Marchmont, laying down the paper containing the
depositions, "is the way in which poor Jeffrey Blackmore's death came to
be discovered.

"The constable reported to his inspector and the inspector sent for the
divisional surgeon, whom he accompanied to New Inn. I need not go into
the evidence given by the police officers, as the surgeon saw all that
they saw and his statement covers everything that is known about
Jeffrey's death. This is what he says, after describing how he was sent
for and arrived at the Inn:

"'In the bedroom I found the body of a man between fifty and sixty years
of age, which has since been identified in my presence as that of Mr.
Jeffrey Blackmore. It was fully dressed and wore boots on which was a
moderate amount of dry mud. It was lying on its back on the bed, which
did not appear to have been slept in, and showed no sign of any struggle
or disturbance. The right hand loosely grasped a hypodermic syringe
containing a few drops of clear liquid which I have since analysed and
found to be a concentrated solution of strophanthin.

"'On the bed, close to the left side of the body, was a brass opium-pipe
of a pattern which I believe is made in China. The bowl of the pipe
contained a small quantity of charcoal, and a fragment of opium
together with some ash, and there was on the bed a little ash which
appeared to have dropped from the bowl when the pipe fell or was laid
down. On the mantelshelf in the bedroom I found a small glass-stoppered
jar containing about an ounce of solid opium, and another, larger jar
containing wood charcoal broken up into small fragments. Also a bowl
containing a quantity of ash with fragments of half-burned charcoal and
a few minute particles of charred opium. By the side of the bowl were a
knife, a kind of awl or pricker and a very small pair of tongs, which I
believe to have been used for carrying a piece of lighted charcoal to
the pipe.

"'On the dressing-table were two glass tubes labelled "Hypodermic
Tabloids: Strophanthin 1/500 grain," and a minute glass mortar and
pestle, of which the former contained a few crystals which have since
been analysed by me and found to be strophanthin.

"'On examining the body, I found that it had been dead about twelve
hours. There were no marks of violence or any abnormal condition
excepting a single puncture in the right thigh, apparently made by the
needle of the hypodermic syringe. The puncture was deep and vertical in
direction as if the needle had been driven in through the clothing.

"'I made a post-mortem examination of the body and found that death was
due to poisoning by strophanthin, which appeared to have been injected
into the thigh. The two tubes which I found on the dressing-table would
each have contained, if full, twenty tabloids, each tabloid
representing one five-hundredth of a grain of strophanthin. Assuming
that the whole of this quantity was injected the amount taken would be
forty five-hundredths, or about one twelfth of a grain. The ordinary
medicinal dose of strophanthin is one five-hundredth of a grain.

"'I also found in the body appreciable traces of morphine--the principal
alkaloid of opium--from which I infer that the deceased was a confirmed
opium-smoker. This inference was supported by the general condition of
the body, which was ill-nourished and emaciated and presented all the
appearances usually met with in the bodies of persons addicted to the
habitual use of opium.'

"That is the evidence of the surgeon. He was recalled later, as we shall
see, but, meanwhile, I think you will agree with me that the facts
testified to by him fully account, not only for the change in Jeffrey's
habits--his solitary and secretive mode of life--but also for the
alteration in his handwriting."

"Yes," agreed Thorndyke, "that seems to be so. By the way, what did the
change in the handwriting amount to?"

"Very little," replied Marchmont. "It was hardly perceptible. Just a
slight loss of firmness and distinctness; such a trifling change as you
would expect to find in the handwriting of a man who had taken to drink
or drugs, or anything that might impair the steadiness of his hand. I
should not have noticed it, myself, but, of course, the people at the
bank are experts, constantly scrutinizing signatures and scrutinizing
them with a very critical eye."

"Is there any other evidence that bears on the case?" Thorndyke asked.

Marchmont turned over the bundle of papers and smiled grimly.

"My dear Thorndyke," he said, "none of this evidence has the slightest
bearing on the case. It is all perfectly irrelevant as far as the will
is concerned. But I know your little peculiarities and I am indulging
you, as you see, to the top of your bent. The next evidence is that of
the chief porter, a very worthy and intelligent man named Walker. This
is what he says, after the usual preliminaries.

"'I have viewed the body which forms the subject of this inquiry. It is
that of Mr. Jeffrey Blackmore, the tenant of a set of chambers on the
second floor of number thirty-one, New Inn. I have known the deceased
nearly six months, and during that time have seen and conversed with him
frequently. He took the chambers on the second of last October and came
into residence at once. Tenants at New Inn have to furnish two
references. The references that the deceased gave were his bankers and
his brother, Mr. John Blackmore. I may say that the deceased was very
well known to me. He was a quiet, pleasant-mannered gentleman, and it
was his habit to drop in occasionally at the lodge and have a chat with
me. I went into his chambers with him once or twice on some small
matters of business and I noticed that there were always a number of
books and papers on the table. I understood from him that he spent most
of his time indoors engaged in study and writing. I know very little
about his way of living. He had no laundress to look after his rooms, so
I suppose he did his own house-work and cooking; but he told me that he
took most of his meals outside, at restaurants or his club.

"'Deceased impressed me as a rather melancholy, low-spirited gentleman.
He was very much troubled about his eyesight and mentioned the matter to
me on several occasions. He told me that he was practically blind in one
eye and that the sight of the other was failing rapidly. He said that
this afflicted him greatly, because his only pleasure in life was in the
reading of books, and that if he could not read he should not wish to
live. On another occasion he said that "to a blind man life was not
worth living."

"'On the twelfth of last November he came to the lodge with a paper in
his hand which he said was his will'--But I needn't read that," said
Marchmont, turning over the leaf, "I've told you how the will was signed
and witnessed. We will pass on to the day of poor Jeffrey's death.

"'On the fourteenth of March,' the porter says, 'at about half-past six
in the evening, the deceased came to the Inn in a four-wheeled cab. That
was the day of the great fog. I do not know if there was anyone in the
cab with the deceased, but I think not, because he came to the lodge
just before eight o'clock and had a little talk with me. He said that
he had been overtaken by the fog and could not see at all. He was quite
blind and had been obliged to ask a stranger to call a cab for him as he
could not find his way through the streets. He then gave me a cheque for
the rent. I reminded him that the rent was not due until the
twenty-fifth, but he said he wished to pay it now. He also gave me some
money to pay one or two small bills that were owing to some of the
tradespeople--a milk-man, a baker and a stationer.

"'This struck me as very strange, because he had always managed his
business and paid the tradespeople himself. He told me that the fog had
irritated his eye so that he could hardly read, and he was afraid he
should soon be quite blind. He was very depressed; so much so that I
felt quite uneasy about him. When he left the lodge, he went back across
the square as if returning to his chambers. There was then no gate open
excepting the main gate where the lodge is situated. That was the last
time that I saw the deceased alive.'"

Mr. Marchmont laid the paper on the table. "That is the porter's
evidence. The remaining depositions are those of Noble, the night
porter, John Blackmore and our friend here, Mr. Stephen. The night
porter had not much to tell. This is the substance of his evidence:

"'I have viewed the body of the deceased and identify it as that of Mr.
Jeffrey Blackmore. I knew the deceased well by sight and occasionally
had a few words with him. I know nothing of his habits excepting that he
used to sit up rather late. It is one of my duties to go round the Inn
at night and call out the hours until one o'clock in the morning. When
calling out "one o'clock" I often saw a light in the sitting-room of the
deceased's chambers. On the night of the fourteenth instant, the light
was burning until past one o'clock, but it was in the bedroom. The light
in the sitting-room was out by ten o'clock.'

"We now come to John Blackmore's evidence. He says:

"'I have viewed the body of the deceased and recognize it as that of my
brother Jeffrey. I last saw him alive on the twenty-third of February,
when I called at his chambers. He then seemed in a very despondent state
of mind and told me that his eyesight was fast failing. I was aware that
he occasionally smoked opium, but I did not know that it was a confirmed
habit. I urged him, on several occasions, to abandon the practice. I
have no reason to believe that his affairs were in any way embarrassed
or that he had any reason for making away with himself other than his
failing eyesight; but, having regard to his state of mind when I last
saw him, I am not surprised at what has happened.'

"That is the substance of John Blackmore's evidence, and, as to Mr.
Stephen, his statement merely sets forth the fact that he had identified
the body as that of his uncle Jeffrey. And now I think you have all the
facts. Is there anything more that you want to ask me before I go, for I
must really run away now?"

"I should like," said Thorndyke, "to know a little more about the
parties concerned in this affair. But perhaps Mr. Stephen can give me
the information."

"I expect he can," said Marchmont; "at any rate, he knows more about
them than I do; so I will be off. If you should happen to think of any
way," he continued, with a sly smile, "of upsetting that will, just let
me know, and I will lose no time in entering a caveat. Good-bye! Don't
trouble to let me out."

As soon as he was gone, Thorndyke turned to Stephen Blackmore.

"I am going," he said, "to ask you a few questions which may appear
rather trifling, but you must remember that my methods of inquiry
concern themselves with persons and things rather than with documents.
For instance, I have not gathered very completely what sort of person
your uncle Jeffrey was. Could you tell me a little more about him?"

"What shall I tell you?" Stephen asked with a slightly embarrassed air.

"Well, begin with his personal appearance."

"That is rather difficult to describe," said Stephen. "He was a
medium-sized man and about five feet seven--fair, slightly grey,
clean-shaved, rather spare and slight, had grey eyes, wore spectacles
and stooped a little as he walked. He was quiet and gentle in manner,
rather yielding and irresolute in character, and his health was not at
all robust though he had no infirmity or disease excepting his bad
eyesight. His age was about fifty-five."

"How came he to be a civil-service pensioner at fifty-five?" asked
Thorndyke.

"Oh, that was through an accident. He had a nasty fall from a horse,
and, being a rather nervous man, the shock was very severe. For some
time after he was a complete wreck. But the failure of his eyesight was
the actual cause of his retirement. It seems that the fall damaged his
eyes in some way; in fact he practically lost the sight of one--the
right--from that moment; and, as that had been his good eye, the
accident left his vision very much impaired. So that he was at first
given sick leave and then allowed to retire on a pension."

Thorndyke noted these particulars and then said:

"Your uncle has been more than once referred to as a man of studious
habits. Does that mean that he pursued any particular branch of
learning?"

"Yes. He was an enthusiastic Oriental scholar. His official duties had
taken him at one time to Yokohama and Tokio and at another to Bagdad,
and while at those places he gave a good deal of attention to the
languages, literature and arts of the countries. He was also greatly
interested in Babylonian and Assyrian archaeology, and I believe he
assisted for some time in the excavations at Birs Nimroud."

"Indeed!" said Thorndyke. "This is very interesting. I had no idea that
he was a man of such considerable attainments. The facts mentioned by
Mr. Marchmont would hardly have led one to think of him as what he seems
to have been: a scholar of some distinction."

"I don't know that Mr. Marchmont realized the fact himself," said
Stephen; "or that he would have considered it of any moment if he had.
Nor, as far as that goes, do I. But, of course, I have no experience of
legal matters."

"You can never tell beforehand," said Thorndyke, "what facts may turn
out to be of moment, so that it is best to collect all you can get. By
the way, were you aware that your uncle was an opium-smoker?"

"No, I was not. I knew that he had an opium-pipe which he brought with
him when he came home from Japan; but I thought it was only a curio. I
remember him telling me that he once tried a few puffs at an opium-pipe
and found it rather pleasant, though it gave him a headache. But I had
no idea he had contracted the habit; in fact, I may say that I was
utterly astonished when the fact came out at the inquest."

Thorndyke made a note of this answer, too, and said:

"I think that is all I have to ask you about your uncle Jeffrey. And now
as to Mr. John Blackmore. What sort of man is he?"

"I am afraid I can't tell you very much about him. Until I saw him at
the inquest, I had not met him since I was a boy. But he is a very
different kind of man from Uncle Jeffrey; different in appearance and
different in character."

"You would say that the two brothers were physically quite unlike,
then?"

"Well," said Stephen, "I don't know that I ought to say that. Perhaps I
am exaggerating the difference. I am thinking of Uncle Jeffrey as he was
when I saw him last and of uncle John as he appeared at the inquest.
They were very different then. Jeffrey was thin, pale, clean shaven,
wore spectacles and walked with a stoop. John is a shade taller, a shade
greyer, has good eyesight, a healthy, florid complexion, a brisk,
upright carriage, is distinctly stout and wears a beard and moustache
which are black and only very slightly streaked with grey. To me they
looked as unlike as two men could, though their features were really of
the same type; indeed, I have heard it said that, as young men, they
were rather alike, and they both resembled their mother. But there is no
doubt as to their difference in character. Jeffrey was quiet, serious
and studious, whereas John rather inclined to what is called a fast
life; he used to frequent race meetings, and, I think, gambled a good
deal at times."

"What is his profession?"

"That would be difficult to tell; he has so many; he is so very
versatile. I believe he began life as an articled pupil in the
laboratory of a large brewery, but he soon left that and went on the
stage. He seems to have remained in 'the profession' for some years,
touring about this country and making occasional visits to America. The
life seemed to suit him and I believe he was decidedly successful as an
actor. But suddenly he left the stage and blossomed out in connection
with a bucket-shop in London."

"And what is he doing now?"

"At the inquest he described himself as a stockbroker, so I presume he
is still connected with the bucket-shop."

Thorndyke rose, and taking down from the reference shelves a list of
members of the Stock Exchange, turned over the leaves.

"Yes," he said, replacing the volume, "he must be an outside broker. His
name is not in the list of members of 'the House.' From what you tell
me, it is easy to understand that there should have been no great
intimacy between the two brothers, without assuming any kind of
ill-feeling. They simply had very little in common. Do you know of
anything more?"

"No. I have never heard of any actual quarrel or disagreement. My
impression that they did not get on very well may have been, I think,
due to the terms of the will, especially the first will. And they
certainly did not seek one another's society."

"That is not very conclusive," said Thorndyke. "As to the will, a
thrifty man is not usually much inclined to bequeath his savings to a
gentleman who may probably employ them in a merry little flutter on the
turf or the Stock Exchange. And then there was yourself; clearly a more
suitable subject for a legacy, as your life is all before you. But this
is mere speculation and the matter is not of much importance, as far as
we can see. And now, tell me what John Blackmore's relations were with
Mrs. Wilson. I gather that she left the bulk of her property to Jeffrey,
her younger brother. Is that so?"

"Yes. She left nothing to John. The fact is that they were hardly on
speaking terms. I believe John had treated her rather badly, or, at any
rate, she thought he had. Mr. Wilson, her late husband, dropped some
money over an investment in connection with the bucket-shop that I spoke
of, and I think she suspected John of having let him in. She may have
been mistaken, but you know what ladies are when they get an idea into
their heads."

"Did you know your aunt well?"

"No; very slightly. She lived down in Devonshire and saw very little of
any of us. She was a taciturn, strong-minded woman; quite unlike her
brothers. She seems to have resembled her father's family."

"You might give me her full name."

"Julia Elizabeth Wilson. Her husband's name was Edmund Wilson."

"Thank you. There is just one more point. What has happened to your
uncle's chambers in New Inn since his death?"

"They have remained shut up. As all his effects were left to me, I have
taken over the tenancy for the present to avoid having them disturbed. I
thought of keeping them for my own use, but I don't think I could live
in them after what I have seen."

"You have inspected them, then?"

"Yes; I have just looked through them. I went there on the day of the
inquest."

"Now tell me: as you looked through those rooms, what kind of impression
did they convey to you as to your uncle's habits and mode of life?"

Stephen smiled apologetically. "I am afraid," said he, "that they did
not convey any particular impression in that respect. I looked into the
sitting-room and saw all his old familiar household gods, and then I
went into the bedroom and saw the impression on the bed where his corpse
had lain; and that gave me such a sensation of horror that I came away
at once."

"But the appearance of the rooms must have conveyed something to your
mind," Thorndyke urged.

"I am afraid it did not. You see, I have not your analytical eye. But
perhaps you would like to look through them yourself? If you would, pray
do so. They are my chambers now."

"I think I should like to glance round them," Thorndyke replied.

"Very well," said Stephen. "I will give you my card now, and I will look
in at the lodge presently and tell the porter to hand you the key
whenever you like to look over the rooms."

He took a card from his case, and, having written a few lines on it,
handed it to Thorndyke.

"It is very good of you," he said, "to take so much trouble. Like Mr.
Marchmont, I have no expectation of any result from your efforts, but I
am very grateful to you, all the same, for going into the case so
thoroughly. I suppose you don't see any possibility of upsetting that
will--if I may ask the question?"

"At present," replied Thorndyke, "I do not. But until I have carefully
weighed every fact connected with the case--whether it seems to have any
bearing or not--I shall refrain from expressing, or even entertaining,
an opinion either way."

Stephen Blackmore now took his leave; and Thorndyke, having collected
the papers containing his notes, neatly punched a couple of holes in
their margins and inserted them into a small file, which he slipped into
his pocket.

"That," said he, "is the nucleus of the body of data on which our
investigations must be based; and I very much fear that it will not
receive any great additions. What do you think, Jervis?"

"The case looks about as hopeless as a case could look," I replied.

"That is what I think," said he; "and for that reason I am more than
ordinarily keen on making something of it. I have not much more hope
than Marchmont has; but I shall squeeze the case as dry as a bone before
I let go. What are you going to do? I have to attend a meeting of the
board of directors of the Griffin Life Office."

"Shall I walk down with you?"

"It is very good of you to offer, Jervis, but I think I will go alone. I
want to run over these notes and get the facts of the case arranged in
my mind. When I have done that, I shall be ready to pick up new matter.
Knowledge is of no use unless it is actually in your mind, so that it
can be produced at a moment's notice. So you had better get a book and
your pipe and spend a quiet hour by the fire while I assimilate the
miscellaneous mental feast that we have just enjoyed. And you might do a
little rumination yourself."

With this, Thorndyke took his departure; and I, adopting his advice,
drew my chair closer to the fire and filled my pipe. But I did not
discover any inclination to read. The curious history that I had just
heard, and Thorndyke's evident determination to elucidate it further,
disposed me to meditation. Moreover, as his subordinate, it was my
business to occupy myself with his affairs. Wherefore, having stirred
the fire and got my pipe well alight, I abandoned myself to the renewed
consideration of the facts relating to Jeffrey Blackmore's will.




Chapter VII

The Cuneiform Inscription


The surprise which Thorndyke's proceedings usually occasioned,
especially to lawyers, was principally due, I think, to my friend's
habit of viewing occurrences from an unusual standpoint. He did not look
at things quite as other men looked at them. He had no prejudices and he
knew no conventions. When other men were cocksure, Thorndyke was
doubtful. When other men despaired, he entertained hopes; and thus it
happened that he would often undertake cases that had been rejected
contemptuously by experienced lawyers, and, what is more, would bring
them to a successful issue.

Thus it had been in the only other case in which I had been personally
associated with him--the so-called "Red Thumb Mark" case. There he was
presented with an apparent impossibility; but he had given it careful
consideration. Then, from the category of the impossible he had brought
it to that of the possible; from the merely possible to the actually
probable; from the probable to the certain; and in the end had won the
case triumphantly.

Was it conceivable that he could make anything of the present case? He
had not declined it. He had certainly entertained it and was probably
thinking it over at this moment. Yet could anything be more impossible?
Here was the case of a man making his own will, probably writing it out
himself, bringing it voluntarily to a certain place and executing it in
the presence of competent witnesses. There was no suggestion of any
compulsion or even influence or persuasion. The testator was admittedly
sane and responsible; and if the will did not give effect to his
wishes--which, however, could not be proved--that was due to his own
carelessness in drafting the will and not to any unusual circumstances.
And the problem--which Thorndyke seemed to be considering--was how to
set aside that will.

I reviewed the statements that I had heard, but turn them about as I
would, I could get nothing out of them but confirmation of Mr.
Marchmont's estimate of the case. One fact that I had noted with some
curiosity I again considered; that was Thorndyke's evident desire to
inspect Jeffrey Blackmore's chambers. He had, it is true, shown no
eagerness, but I had seen at the time that the questions which he put to
Stephen were put, not with any expectation of eliciting information but
for the purpose of getting an opportunity to look over the rooms
himself.

I was still cogitating on the subject when my colleague returned,
followed by the watchful Polton with the tea-tray, and I attacked him
forthwith.

"Well, Thorndyke," I said, "I have been thinking about this Blackmore
case while you have been gadding about."

"And may I take it that the problem is solved?"

"No, I'm hanged if you may. I can make nothing of it."

"Then you are in much the same position as I am."

"But, if you can make nothing of it, why did you undertake it?"

"I only undertook to think about it," said Thorndyke. "I never reject a
case off-hand unless it is obviously fishy. It is surprising how
difficulties, and even impossibilities, dwindle if you look at them
attentively. My experience has taught me that the most unlikely case is,
at least, worth thinking over."

"By the way, why do you want to look over Jeffrey's chambers? What do
you expect to find there?"

"I have no expectations at all. I am simply looking for stray facts."

"And all those questions that you asked Stephen Blackmore; had you
nothing in your mind--no definite purpose?"

"No purpose beyond getting to know as much about the case as I can."

"But," I exclaimed, "do you mean that you are going to examine those
rooms without any definite object at all?"

"I wouldn't say that," replied Thorndyke. "This is a legal case. Let me
put an analogous medical case as being more within your present sphere.
Supposing that a man should consult you, say, about a progressive loss
of weight. He can give no explanation. He has no pain, no discomfort, no
symptoms of any kind; in short, he feels perfectly well in every
respect; <i>but</i> he is losing weight continuously. What would you do?"

"I should overhaul him thoroughly," I answered.

"Why? What would you expect to find?"

"I don't know that I should start by expecting to find anything in
particular. But I should overhaul him organ by organ and function by
function, and if I could find nothing abnormal I should have to give it
up."

"Exactly," said Thorndyke. "And that is just my position and my line of
action. Here is a case which is perfectly regular and straightforward
excepting in one respect. It has a single abnormal feature. And for that
abnormality there is nothing to account.

"Jeffrey Blackmore made a will. It was a well-drawn will and it
apparently gave full effect to his intentions. Then he revoked that will
and made another. No change had occurred in his circumstances or in his
intentions. The provisions of the new will were believed by him to be
identical with those of the old one. The new will differed from the old
one only in having a defect in the drafting from which the first will
was free, and of which he must have been unaware. Now why did he revoke
the first will and replace it with another which he believed to be
identical in its provisions? There is no answer to that question. It is
an abnormal feature in the case. There must be some explanation of that
abnormality and it is my business to discover it. But the facts in my
possession yield no such explanation. Therefore it is my purpose to
search for new facts which may give me a starting-point for an
investigation."

This exposition of Thorndyke's proposed conduct of the case, reasonable
as it was, did not impress me as very convincing. I found myself coming
back to Marchmont's position, that there was really nothing in dispute.
But other matters claimed our attention at the moment, and it was not
until after dinner that my colleague reverted to the subject.

"How should you like to take a turn round to New Inn this evening?" he
asked.

"I should have thought," said I, "that it would be better to go by
daylight. Those old chambers are not usually very well illuminated."

"That is well thought of," said Thorndyke. "We had better take a lamp
with us. Let us go up to the laboratory and get one from Polton."

"There is no need to do that," said I. "The pocket-lamp that you lent me
is in my overcoat pocket. I put it there to return it to you."

"Did you have occasion to use it?" he asked.

"Yes. I paid another visit to the mysterious house and carried out your
plan. I must tell you about it later."

"Do. I shall be keenly interested to hear all about your adventures. Is
there plenty of candle left in the lamp?"

"Oh yes. I only used it for about an hour."

"Then let us be off," said Thorndyke; and we accordingly set forth on
our quest; and, as we went, I reflected once more on the apparent
vagueness of our proceedings. Presently I reopened the subject with
Thorndyke.

"I can't imagine," said I, "that you have absolutely nothing in view.
That you are going to this place with no defined purpose whatever."

"I did not say exactly that," replied Thorndyke. "I said that I was not
going to look for any particular thing or fact. I am going in the hope
that I may observe something that may start a new train of speculation.
But that is not all. You know that an investigation follows a certain
logical course. It begins with the observation of the conspicuous facts.
We have done that. The facts were supplied by Marchmont. The next stage
is to propose to oneself one or more provisional explanations or
hypotheses. We have done that, too--or, at least I have, and I suppose
you have."

"I haven't," said I. "There is Jeffrey's will, but why he should have
made the change I cannot form the foggiest idea. But I should like to
hear your provisional theories on the subject."

"You won't hear them at present. They are mere wild conjectures. But to
resume: what do we do next?"

"Go to New Inn and rake over the deceased gentleman's apartments."

Thorndyke smilingly ignored my answer and continued--

"We examine each explanation in turn and see what follows from it;
whether it agrees with all the facts and leads to the discovery of new
ones, or, on the other hand, disagrees with some facts or leads us to an
absurdity. Let us take a simple example.

"Suppose we find scattered over a field a number of largish masses of
stone, which are entirely different in character from the rocks found in
the neighbourhood. The question arises, how did those stones get into
that field? Three explanations are proposed. One: that they are the
products of former volcanic action; two: that they were brought from a
distance by human agency; three: that they were carried thither from
some distant country by icebergs. Now each of those explanations
involves certain consequences. If the stones are volcanic, then they
were once in a state of fusion. But we find that they are unaltered
limestone and contain fossils. Then they are not volcanic. If they were
borne by icebergs, then they were once part of a glacier and some of
them will probably show the flat surfaces with parallel scratches which
are found on glacier-borne stones. We examine them and find the
characteristic scratched surfaces. Then they have probably been brought
to this place by icebergs. But this does not exclude human agency, for
they might have been brought by men to this place from some other where
the icebergs had deposited them. A further comparison with other facts
would be needed.

"So we proceed in cases like this present one. Of the facts that are
known to us we invent certain explanations. From each of those
explanations we deduce consequences; and if those consequences agree
with new facts, they confirm the explanation, whereas if they disagree
they tend to disprove it. But here we are at our destination."

We turned out of Wych Street into the arched passage leading into New
Inn, and, halting at the half-door of the lodge, perceived a stout,
purple-faced man crouching over the fire, coughing violently. He held up
his hand to intimate that he was fully occupied for the moment, and we
accordingly waited for his paroxysm to subside. At length he turned
towards us, wiping his eyes, and inquired our business.

"Mr. Stephen Blackmore," said Thorndyke, "has given me permission to
look over his chambers. He said that he would mention the matter to
you."

"So he has, sir," said the porter; "but he has just taken the key
himself to go to the chambers. If you walk across the Inn you'll find
him there; it's on the farther side; number thirty-one, second floor."

We made our way across to the house indicated, the ground floor of which
was occupied by a solicitor's offices and was distinguished by a
good-sized brass plate. Although it had now been dark some time there
was no light on the lower stairs, but we encountered on the first-floor
landing a man who had just lit the lamp there. Thorndyke halted to
address him.

"Can you tell me who occupies the chambers on the third floor?"

"The third floor has been empty about three months," was the reply.

"We are going up to look at the chambers on the second floor," said
Thorndyke. "Are they pretty quiet?"

"Quiet!" exclaimed the man. "Lord bless you the place is like a cemetery
for the deaf and dumb. There's the solicitors on the ground floor and
the architects on the first floor. They both clear out about six, and
when they're gone the house is as empty as a blown hegg. I don't wonder
poor Mr. Blackmore made away with his-self. Livin' up there all alone,
it must have been like Robinson Crusoe without no man Friday and not
even a blooming goat to talk to. Quiet! It's quiet enough, if that's
what you want. Wouldn't be no good to <i>me</i>."

With a contemptuous shake of the head, he turned and retired down the
next flight, and, as the echoes of his footsteps died away we resumed
our ascent.

"So it would appear," Thorndyke commented, "that when Jeffrey Blackmore
came home that last evening, the house was empty."

Arrived on the second-floor landing, we were confronted by a
solid-looking door on the lintel of which the deceased man's name was
painted in white lettering which still looked new and fresh. Thorndyke
knocked at the door, which was at once opened by Stephen Blackmore.

"I haven't wasted any time before taking advantage of your permission,
you see," my colleague said as we entered.

"No, indeed," said Stephen; "you are very prompt. I have been rather
wondering what kind of information you expect to gather from an
inspection of these rooms."

Thorndyke smiled genially, amused, no doubt, by the similarity of
Stephen's remarks to those of mine which he had so recently criticized.

"A man of science, Mr. Blackmore," he said, "expects nothing. He
collects facts and keeps an open mind. As to me, I am a mere legal
Autolycus, a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles of evidence. When I have
accumulated a few facts, I arrange them, compare them and think about
them. Sometimes the comparison yields new matter and sometimes it
doesn't; but in any case, believe me, it is a capital error to decide
beforehand what data are to be sought for."

"Yes, I suppose that is so," said Stephen; "though, to me, it almost
looks as if Mr. Marchmont was right; that there is nothing to
investigate."

"You should have thought of that before you consulted me," laughed
Thorndyke. "As it is, I am engaged to look into the case and I shall do
so; and, as I have said, I shall keep an open mind until I have all the
facts in my possession."

He glanced round the sitting-room, which we had now entered, and
continued:

"These are fine, dignified old rooms. It seems a sin to have covered up
all this oak panelling and that carved cornice and mantel with paint.
Think what it must have been like when the beautiful figured wood was
exposed."

"It would be very dark," Stephen observed.

"Yes," Thorndyke agreed, "and I suppose we care more for light and less
for beauty than our ancestors did. But now, tell me; looking round these
rooms, do they convey to you a similar impression to that which the old
rooms did? Have they the same general character?"

"Not quite, I think. Of course the rooms in Jermyn Street were in a
different kind of house, but beyond that, I seem to feel a certain
difference; which is rather odd, seeing that the furniture is the same.
But the old rooms were more cosy, more homelike. I find something rather
bare and cheerless, I was almost going to say squalid, in the look of
these chambers."

"That is rather what I should have expected," said Thorndyke. "The opium
habit alters a man's character profoundly; and, somehow, apart from the
mere furnishing, a room reflects in some subtle way, but very
distinctly, the personality of its occupant, especially when that
occupant lives a solitary life. Do you see any evidences of the
activities that used to occupy your uncle?"

"Not very much," replied Stephen. "But the place may not be quite as he
left it. I found one or two of his books on the table and put them back
in the shelves, but I found no manuscript or notes such as he used to
make. I noticed, too, that his ink-slab which he used to keep so
scrupulously clean is covered with dry smears and that the stick of ink
is all cracked at the end, as if he had not used it for months. It seems
to point to a great change in his habits."

"What used he to do with Chinese ink?" Thorndyke asked.

"He corresponded with some of his native friends in Japan, and he used
to write in the Japanese character even if they understood English. That
was what he chiefly used the Chinese ink for. But he also used to copy
the inscriptions from these things." Here Stephen lifted from the
mantelpiece what looked like a fossil Bath bun, but was actually a clay
tablet covered with minute indented writing.

"Your uncle could read the cuneiform character, then?"

"Yes; he was something of an expert. These tablets are, I believe,
leases and other legal documents from Eridu and other Babylonian cities.
He used to copy the inscriptions in the cuneiform writing and then
translate them into English. But I mustn't stay here any longer as I
have an engagement for this evening. I just dropped in to get these two
volumes--<i>Thornton's History of Babylonia</i>, which he once advised me to
read. Shall I give you the key? You'd better have it and leave it with
the porter as you go out."

He shook hands with us and we walked out with him to the landing and
stood watching him as he ran down the stairs. Glancing at Thorndyke by
the light of the gas lamp on the landing, I thought I detected in his
impassive face that almost imperceptible change of expression to which I
have already alluded as indicating pleasure or satisfaction.

"You are looking quite pleased with yourself," I remarked.

"I am not displeased," he replied calmly. "Autolycus has picked up a few
crumbs; very small ones, but still crumbs. No doubt his learned junior
has picked up a few likewise?"

I shook my head--and inwardly suspected it of being rather a thick head.

"I did not perceive anything in the least degree significant in what
Stephen was telling you," said I. "It was all very interesting, but it
did not seem to have any bearing on his uncle's will."

"I was not referring only to what Stephen has told us, although that
was, as you say, very interesting. While he was talking I was looking
about the room, and I have seen a very strange thing. Let me show it to
you."

He linked his arm in mine and, walking me back into the room, halted
opposite the fire-place.

"There," said he, "look at that. It is a most remarkable object."

[Illustration: THE INVERTED INSCRIPTION.]

I followed the direction of his gaze and saw an oblong frame enclosing a
large photograph of an inscription in the weird and cabalistic
arrow-head character. I looked at it in silence for some seconds and
then, somewhat disappointed, remarked:

"I don't see anything very remarkable in it, under the circumstances. In
any ordinary room it would be, I admit; but Stephen has just told us
that his uncle was something of an expert in cuneiform writing."

"Exactly," said Thorndyke. "That is my point. That is what makes it so
remarkable."

"I don't follow you at all," said I. "That a man should hang upon his
wall an inscription that is legible to him does not seem to me at all
out of the way. It would be much more singular if he should hang up an
inscription that he could <i>not</i> read."

"No doubt," replied Thorndyke. "But you will agree with me that it would
be still more singular if a man should hang upon his wall an inscription
that he <i>could</i> read--and hang it upside down."

I stared at Thorndyke in amazement.

"Do you mean to tell me," I exclaimed, "that that photograph is really
upside down?"

"I do indeed," he replied.

"But how do you know? Have we here yet another Oriental scholar?"

Thorndyke chuckled. "Some fool," he replied, "has said that 'a little
knowledge is a dangerous thing.' Compared with much knowledge, it may
be; but it is a vast deal better than no knowledge. Here is a case in
point. I have read with very keen interest the wonderful history of the
decipherment of the cuneiform writing, and I happen to recollect one or
two of the main facts that seemed to me to be worth remembering. This
particular inscription is in the Persian cuneiform, a much more simple
and open form of the script than the Babylonian or Assyrian; in fact, I
suspect that this is the famous inscription from the gateway at
Persepolis--the first to be deciphered; which would account for its
presence here in a frame. Now this script consists, as you see, of two
kinds of characters; the small, solid, acutely pointed characters which
are known as wedges, and the larger, more obtuse characters, somewhat
like our government broad arrows, and called arrow-heads. The names are
rather unfortunate, as both forms are wedge-like and both resemble
arrow-heads. The script reads from left to right, like our own writing,
and unlike that of the Semitic peoples and the primitive Greeks; and the
rule for the placing of the characters is that all the 'wedges' point to
the right or downwards and the arrow-head forms are open towards the
right. But if you look at this photograph you will see that all the
wedges point upwards to the left and that the arrow-head characters are
open towards the left. Obviously the photograph is upside down."

"But," I exclaimed, "this is really most mysterious. What do you suppose
can be the explanation?"

"I think," replied Thorndyke, "that we may perhaps get a suggestion from
the back of the frame. Let us see."

He disengaged the frame from the two nails on which it hung, and,
turning it round, glanced at the back; which he then presented for my
inspection. A label on the backing paper bore the words, "J. Budge,
Frame-maker and Gilder, 16, Gt. Anne Street, W.C."

"Well?" I said, when I had read the label without gathering from it
anything fresh.

"The label, you observe, is the right way up as it hangs on the wall."

"So it is," I rejoined hastily, a little annoyed that I had not been
quicker to observe so obvious a fact. "I see your point. You mean that
the frame-maker hung the thing upside down and Jeffrey never noticed the
mistake?"

"That is a perfectly sound explanation," said Thorndyke. "But I think
there is something more. You will notice that the label is an old one;
it must have been on some years, to judge by its dingy appearance,
whereas the two mirror-plates look to me comparatively new. But we can
soon put that matter to the test, for the label was evidently stuck on
when the frame was new, and if the plates were screwed on at the same
time, the wood that they cover will be clean and new-looking."

He drew from his pocket a "combination" knife containing, among other
implements, a screw-driver, with which he carefully extracted the screws
from one of the little brass plates by which the frame had been
suspended from the nails.

"You see," he said, when he had removed the plate and carried the
photograph over to the gasjet, "the wood covered by the plate is as
dirty and time-stained as the rest of the frame. The plates have been
put on recently."

"And what are we to infer from that?"

"Well, since there are no other marks of plates or rings upon the
frame, we may safely infer that the photograph was never hung up until
it came to these rooms."

"Yes, I suppose we may. But what then? What inference does that lead
to?"

Thorndyke reflected for a few moments and I continued:

"It is evident that this photograph suggests more to you than it does to
me. I should like to hear your exposition of its bearing on the case, if
it has any."

"Whether or no it has any real bearing on the case," Thorndyke answered,
"it is impossible for me to say at this stage. I told you that I had
proposed to myself one or two hypotheses to account for and explain
Jeffrey Blackmore's will, and I may say that the curious misplacement of
this photograph fits more than one of them. I won't say more than that,
because I think it would be profitable to you to work at this case
independently. You have all the facts that I have and you shall have a
copy of my notes of Marchmont's statement of the case. With this
material you ought to be able to reach some conclusion. Of course
neither of us may be able to make anything of the case--it doesn't look
very hopeful at present--but whatever happens, we can compare notes
after the event and you will be the richer by so much experience of
actual investigation. But I will start you off with one hint, which is
this: that neither you nor Marchmont seem to appreciate in the least the
very extraordinary nature of the facts that he communicated to us."

"I thought Marchmont seemed pretty much alive to the fact that it was a
very queer will."

"So he did," agreed Thorndyke. "But that is not quite what I mean. The
whole set of circumstances, taken together and in relation to one
another, impressed me as most remarkable; and that is why I am giving so
much attention to what looks at first sight like such a very unpromising
case. Copy out my notes, Jervis, and examine the facts critically. I
think you will see what I mean. And now let us proceed."

He replaced the brass plate and having reinserted the screws, hung up
the frame, and proceeded to browse slowly round the room, stopping now
and again to inspect the Japanese colour-prints and framed photographs
of buildings and other objects of archaeological interest that formed
the only attempts at wall-decoration. To one of the former he drew my
attention.

"These things are of some value," he remarked. "Here is one by
Utamaro--that little circle with the mark over it is his signature--and
you notice that the paper is becoming spotted in places with mildew. The
fact is worth noting in more than one connection."

I accordingly made a mental note and the perambulation continued.

"You observe that Jeffrey used a gas-stove, instead of a coal fire, no
doubt to economize work, but perhaps for other reasons. Presumably he
cooked by gas, too; let us see."

We wandered into the little cupboard-like kitchen and glanced round. A
ring-burner on a shelf, a kettle, a frying-pan and a few pieces of
crockery were its sole appointments. Apparently the porter was correct
in his statement as to Jeffrey's habits.

Returning to the sitting-room, Thorndyke resumed his inspection, pulling
out the table drawers, peering inquisitively into cupboards and
bestowing a passing glance on each of the comparatively few objects that
the comfortless room contained.

"I have never seen a more characterless apartment," was his final
comment. "There is nothing that seems to suggest any kind of habitual
activity on the part of the occupant. Let us look at the bedroom."

We passed through into the chamber of tragic memories, and, when
Thorndyke had lit the gas, we stood awhile looking about us in silence.
It was a bare, comfortless room, dirty, neglected and squalid. The bed
appeared not to have been remade since the catastrophe, for an
indentation still marked the place where the corpse had lain, and even a
slight powdering of ash could still be seen on the shabby counterpane.
It looked to me a typical opium-smoker's bedroom.

"Well," Thorndyke remarked at length, "there is character enough
here--of a kind. Jeffrey Blackmore would seem to have been a man of few
needs. One could hardly imagine a bedroom in which less attention seemed
to have been given to the comfort of the occupant."

He looked about him keenly and continued: "The syringe and the rest of
the lethal appliances and material have been taken away, I see.
Probably the analyst did not return them. But there are the opium-pipe
and the jar and the ash-bowl, and I presume those are the clothes that
the undertakers removed from the body. Shall we look them over?"

He took up the clothes which lay, roughly folded, on a chair and held
them up, garment by garment.

"These are evidently the trousers," he remarked, spreading them out on
the bed. "Here is a little white spot on the middle of the thigh which
looks like a patch of small crystals from a drop of the solution. Just
light the lamp, Jervis, and let us examine it with a lens."

I lit the lamp, and when we had examined the spot minutely and
identified it as a mass of minute crystals, Thorndyke asked:

"What do you make of those creases? You see there is one on each leg."

"It looks as if the trousers had been turned up. But if they have been
they must have been turned up about seven inches. Poor Jeffrey couldn't
have had much regard for appearances, for they would have been right
above his socks. But perhaps the creases were made in undressing the
body."

"That is possible," said Thorndyke: "though I don't quite see how it
would have happened. I notice that his pockets seem to have been
emptied--no, wait; here is something in the waistcoat pocket."

He drew out a shabby, pigskin card-case and a stump of lead pencil, at
which latter he looked with what seemed to me much more interest than
was deserved by so commonplace an object.

"The cards, you observe," said he, "are printed from type, not from a
plate. I would note that fact. And tell me what you make of that."

He handed me the pencil, which I examined with concentrated attention,
helping myself even with the lamp and my pocket lens. But even with
these aids I failed to discover anything unusual in its appearance.
Thorndyke watched me with a mischievous smile, and, when I had finished,
inquired:

"Well; what is it?"

"Confound you!" I exclaimed. "It's a pencil. Any fool can see that, and
this particular fool can't see any more. It's a wretched stump of a
pencil, villainously cut to an abominably bad point. It is coloured dark
red on the outside and was stamped with some name that began with
C--O--Co-operative Stores, perhaps."

"Now, my dear Jervis," Thorndyke protested, "don't begin by confusing
speculation with fact. The letters which remain are C--O. Note that fact
and find out what pencils there are which have inscriptions beginning
with those letters. I am not going to help you, because you can easily
do this for yourself. And it will be good discipline even if the fact
turns out to mean nothing."

At this moment he stepped back suddenly, and, looking down at the floor,
said:

"Give me the lamp, Jervis, I've trodden on something that felt like
glass."

I brought the lamp to the place where he had been standing, close by
the bed, and we both knelt on the floor, throwing the light of the lamp
on the bare and dusty boards. Under the bed, just within reach of the
foot of a person standing close by, was a little patch of fragments of
glass. Thorndyke produced a piece of paper from his pocket and
delicately swept the little fragments on to it, remarking:

"By the look of things, I am not the first person who has trodden on
that object, whatever it is. Do you mind holding the lamp while I
inspect the remains?"

I took the lamp and held it over the paper while he examined the little
heap of glass through his lens.

"Well," I asked. "What have you found?"

"That is what I am asking myself," he replied. "As far as I can judge by
the appearance of these fragments, they appear to be portions of a small
watch-glass. I wish there were some larger pieces."

"Perhaps there are," said I. "Let us look about the floor under the
bed."

We resumed our groping about the dirty floor, throwing the light of the
lamp on one spot after another. Presently, as we moved the lamp about,
its light fell on a small glass bead, which I instantly picked up and
exhibited to Thorndyke.

"Is this of any interest to you?" I asked.

Thorndyke took the bead and examined it curiously.

"It is certainly," he said, "a very odd thing to find in the bedroom of
an old bachelor like Jeffrey, especially as we know that he employed no
woman to look after his rooms. Of course, it may be a relic of the last
tenant. Let us see if there are any more."

We renewed our search, crawling under the bed and throwing the light of
the lamp in all directions over the floor. The result was the discovery
of three more beads, one entire bugle and the crushed remains of
another, which had apparently been trodden on. All of these, including
the fragments of the bugle that had been crushed, Thorndyke placed
carefully on the paper, which he laid on the dressing-table the more
conveniently to examine our find.

"I am sorry," said he, "that there are no more fragments of the
watch-glass, or whatever it was. The broken pieces were evidently picked
up, with the exception of the one that I trod on, which was an isolated
fragment that had been overlooked. As to the beads, judging by their
number and the position in which we found some of them--that crushed
bugle, for instance--they must have been dropped during Jeffrey's
tenancy and probably quite recently."

"What sort of garment do you suppose they came from?" I asked.

"They may have been part of a beaded veil or the trimming of a dress,
but the grouping rather suggests to me a tag of bead fringe. The colour
is rather unusual."

"I thought they looked like black beads."

"So they do by this light, but I think that by daylight we shall find
them to be a dark, reddish-brown. You can see the colour now if you look
at the smaller fragments of the one that is crushed."

He handed me his lens, and, when I had verified his statement, he
produced from his pocket a small tin box with a closely-fitting lid in
which he deposited the paper, having first folded it up into a small
parcel.

"We will put the pencil in too," said he; and, as he returned the box to
his pocket he added: "you had better get one of these little boxes from
Polton. It is often useful to have a safe receptacle for small and
fragile articles."

He folded up and replaced the dead man's clothes as we had found them.
Then, observing a pair of shoes standing by the wall, he picked them up
and looked them over thoughtfully, paying special attention to the backs
of the soles and the fronts of the heels.

"I suppose we may take it," said he, "that these are the shoes that poor
Jeffrey wore on the night of his death. At any rate there seem to be no
others. He seems to have been a fairly clean walker. The streets were
shockingly dirty that day, as I remember most distinctly. Do you see any
slippers? I haven't noticed any."

He opened and peeped into a cupboard in which an overcoat surmounted by
a felt hat hung from a peg like an attenuated suicide; he looked in all
the corners and into the sitting-room, but no slippers were to be seen.

"Our friend seems to have had surprisingly little regard for comfort,"
Thorndyke remarked. "Think of spending the winter evenings in damp boots
by a gas fire!"

"Perhaps the opium-pipe compensated," said I; "or he may have gone to
bed early."

"But he did not. The night porter used to see the light in his rooms at
one o'clock in the morning. In the sitting-room, too, you remember. But
he seems to have been in the habit of reading in bed--or perhaps
smoking--for here is a candlestick with the remains of a whole dynasty
of candles in it. As there is gas in the room, he couldn't have wanted
the candle to undress by. He used stearine candles, too; not the common
paraffin variety. I wonder why he went to that expense."

"Perhaps the smell of the paraffin candle spoiled the aroma of the
opium," I suggested; to which Thorndyke made no reply but continued his
inspection of the room, pulling out the drawer of the washstand--which
contained a single, worn-out nail-brush--and even picking up and
examining the dry and cracked cake of soap in the dish.

"He seems to have had a fair amount of clothing," said Thorndyke, who
was now going through the chest of drawers, "though, by the look of it,
he didn't change very often, and the shirts have a rather yellow and
faded appearance. I wonder how he managed about his washing. Why, here
are a couple of pairs of boots in the drawer with his clothes! And here
is his stock of candles. Quite a large box--though nearly empty now--of
stearine candles, six to the pound."

He closed the drawer and cast another inquiring look round the room.

"I think we have seen all now, Jervis," he said, "unless there is
anything more that you would like to look into?"

"No," I replied. "I have seen all that I wanted to see and more than I
am able to attach any meaning to. So we may as well go."

I blew out the lamp and put it in my overcoat pocket, and, when we had
turned out the gas in both rooms, we took our departure.

As we approached the lodge, we found our stout friend in the act of
retiring in favour of the night porter. Thorndyke handed him the key of
the chambers, and, after a few sympathetic inquiries, about his
health--which was obviously very indifferent--said:

"Let me see; you were one of the witnesses to Mr. Blackmore's will, I
think?"

"I was, sir," replied the porter.

"And I believe you read the document through before you witnessed the
signature?"

"I did, sir."

"Did you read it aloud?"

"Aloud, sir! Lor' bless you, no, sir! Why should I? The other witness
read it, and, of course, Mr. Blackmore knew what was in it, seeing that
it was in his own handwriting. What should I want to read it aloud for?"

"No, of course you wouldn't want to. By the way, I have been wondering
how Mr. Blackmore managed about his washing."

The porter evidently regarded this question with some disfavour, for he
replied only with an interrogative grunt. It was, in fact, rather an odd
question.

"Did you get it done for him," Thorndyke pursued.

"No, certainly not, sir. He got it done for himself. The laundry people
used to deliver the basket here at the lodge, and Mr. Blackmore used to
take it in with him when he happened to be passing."

"It was not delivered at his chambers, then?"

"No, sir. Mr. Blackmore was a very studious gentleman and he didn't like
to be disturbed. A studious gentleman would naturally not like to be
disturbed."

Thorndyke cordially agreed with these very proper sentiments and finally
wished the porter "good night." We passed out through the gateway into
Wych Street, and, turning our faces eastward towards the Temple, set
forth in silence, each thinking his own thoughts. What Thorndyke's were
I cannot tell, though I have no doubt that he was busily engaged in
piecing together all that he had seen and heard and considering its
possible application to the case in hand.

As to me, my mind was in a whirl of confusion. All this searching and
examining seemed to be the mere flogging of a dead horse. The will was
obviously a perfectly valid and regular will and there was an end of the
matter. At least, so it seemed to me. But clearly that was not
Thorndyke's view. His investigations were certainly not purposeless;
and, as I walked by his side trying to conceive some purpose in his
actions, I only became more and more mystified as I recalled them one
by one, and perhaps most of all by the cryptic questions that I had just
heard him address to the equally mystified porter.




Chapter VIII

The Track Chart


As Thorndyke and I arrived at the main gateway of the Temple and he
swung round into the narrow lane, it was suddenly borne in on me that I
had made no arrangements for the night. Events had followed one another
so continuously and each had been so engrossing that I had lost sight of
what I may call my domestic affairs.

"We seem to be heading for your chambers, Thorndyke," I ventured to
remark. "It is a little late to think of it, but I have not yet settled
where I am to put up to-night."

"My dear fellow," he replied, "you are going to put up in your own
bedroom which has been waiting in readiness for you ever since you left
it. Polton went up and inspected it as soon as you arrived. I take it
that you will consider my chambers yours until such time as you may join
the benedictine majority and set up a home for yourself."

"That is very handsome of you," said I. "You didn't mention that the
billet you offered was a resident appointment."

"Rooms and commons included," said Thorndyke; and when I protested that
I should at least contribute to the costs of living he impatiently
waved the suggestion away. We were still arguing the question when we
reached our chambers--as I will now call them--and a diversion was
occasioned by my taking the lamp from my pocket and placing it on the
table.

"Ah," my colleague remarked, "that is a little reminder. We will put it
on the mantelpiece for Polton to collect and you shall give me a full
account of your further adventures in the wilds of Kennington. That was
a very odd affair. I have often wondered how it ended."

He drew our two arm-chairs up to the fire, put on some more coal, placed
the tobacco jar on the table exactly equidistant from the two chairs,
and settled himself with the air of a man who is anticipating an
agreeable entertainment.

I filled my pipe, and, taking up the thread of the story where I had
broken off on the last occasion, began to outline my later experiences.
But he brought me up short.

"Don't be sketchy, Jervis. To be sketchy is to be vague. Detail, my
child, detail is the soul of induction. Let us have all the facts. We
can sort them out afterwards."

I began afresh in a vein of the extremest circumstantiality. With
deliberate malice I loaded a prolix narrative with every triviality that
a fairly retentive memory could rake out of the half-forgotten past. I
cudgelled my brains for irrelevant incidents. I described with the
minutest accuracy things that had not the faintest significance. I drew
a vivid picture of the carriage inside and out; I painted a lifelike
portrait of the horse, even going into particulars of the harness--which
I was surprised to find that I had noticed. I described the furniture of
the dining-room and the cobwebs that had hung from the ceiling; the
auction-ticket on the chest of drawers, the rickety table and the
melancholy chairs. I gave the number per minute of the patient's
respirations and the exact quantity of coffee consumed on each occasion,
with an exhaustive description of the cup from which it was taken; and I
left no personal details unconsidered, from the patient's finger-nails
to the roseate pimples on Mr. Weiss's nose.

But my tactics of studied prolixity were a complete failure. The attempt
to fatigue Thorndyke's brain with superabundant detail was like trying
to surfeit a pelican with whitebait. He consumed it all with calm
enjoyment and asked for more; and when, at last, I did really begin to
think that I had bored him a little, he staggered me by reading over his
notes and starting a brisk cross-examination to elicit fresh facts! And
the most surprising thing of all was that when I had finished I seemed
to know a great deal more about the case than I had ever known before.

"It was a very remarkable affair," he observed, when the
cross-examination was over--leaving me somewhat in the condition of a
cider-apple that has just been removed from a hydraulic press--"a very
suspicious affair with a highly unsatisfactory end. I am not sure that I
entirely agree with your police officer. Nor do I fancy that some of my
acquaintances at Scotland Yard would have agreed with him."

"Do you think I ought to have taken any further measures?" I asked
uneasily.

"No; I don't see how you could. You did all that was possible under the
circumstances. You gave information, which is all that a private
individual can do, especially if he is an overworked general
practitioner. But still, an actual crime is the affair of every good
citizen. I think we ought to take some action."

"You think there really was a crime, then?"

"What else can one think? What do you think about it yourself?"

"I don't like to think about it at all. The recollection of that
corpse-like figure in that gloomy bedroom has haunted me ever since I
left the house. What do you suppose has happened?"

Thorndyke did not answer for a few seconds. At length he said gravely:

"I am afraid, Jervis, that the answer to that question can be given in
one word."

"Murder?" I asked with a slight shudder.

He nodded, and we were both silent for a while.

"The probability," he resumed after a pause, "that Mr. Graves is alive
at this moment seems to me infinitesimal. There was evidently a
conspiracy to murder him, and the deliberate, persistent manner in which
that object was being pursued points to a very strong and definite
motive. Then the tactics adopted point to considerable forethought and
judgment. They are not the tactics of a fool or an ignoramus. We may
criticize the closed carriage as a tactical mistake, calculated to
arouse suspicion, but we have to weigh it against its alternative."

"What is that?"

"Well, consider the circumstances. Suppose Weiss had called you in in
the ordinary way. You would still have detected the use of poison. But
now you could have located your man and made inquiries about him in the
neighbourhood. You would probably have given the police a hint and they
would almost certainly have taken action, as they would have had the
means of identifying the parties. The result would have been fatal to
Weiss. The closed carriage invited suspicion, but it was a great
safeguard. Weiss's method's were not so unsound after all. He is a
cautious man, but cunning and very persistent. And he could be bold on
occasion. The use of the blinded carriage was a decidedly audacious
proceeding. I should put him down as a gambler of a very discreet,
courageous and resourceful type."

"Which all leads to the probability that he has pursued his scheme and
brought it to a successful issue."

"I am afraid it does. But--have you got your notes of the
compass-bearings?"

"The book is in my overcoat pocket with the board. I will fetch them."

I went into the office, where our coats hung, and brought back the
notebook with the little board to which it was still attached by the
rubber band. Thorndyke took them from me, and, opening the book, ran
his eye quickly down one page after another. Suddenly he glanced at the
clock.

"It is a little late to begin," said he, "but these notes look rather
alluring. I am inclined to plot them out at once. I fancy, from their
appearance, that they will enable us to locate the house without much
difficulty. But don't let me keep you up if you are tired. I can work
them out by myself."

"You won't do anything of the kind," I exclaimed. "I am as keen on
plotting them as you are, and, besides, I want to see how it is done. It
seems to be a rather useful accomplishment."

"It is," said Thorndyke. "In our work, the ability to make a rough but
reliable sketch survey is often of great value. Have you ever looked
over these notes?"

"No. I put the book away when I came in and have never looked at it
since."

"It is a quaint document. You seem to be rich in railway bridges in
those parts, and the route was certainly none of the most direct, as you
noticed at the time. However, we will plot it out and then we shall see
exactly what it looks like and whither it leads us."

He retired to the laboratory and presently returned with a T-square, a
military protractor, a pair of dividers and a large drawing-board on
which was pinned a sheet of cartridge paper.

"Now," said he, seating himself at the table with the board before him,
"as to the method. You started from a known position and you arrived at
a place the position of which is at present unknown. We shall fix the
position of that spot by applying two factors, the distance that you
travelled and the direction in which you were moving. The direction is
given by the compass; and, as the horse seems to have kept up a
remarkably even pace, we can take time as representing distance. You
seem to have been travelling at about eight miles an hour, that is,
roughly, a seventh of a mile in one minute. So if, on our chart, we take
one inch as representing one minute, we shall be working with a scale of
about seven inches to the mile."

"That doesn't sound very exact as to distance," I objected.

"It isn't. But that doesn't matter much. We have certain landmarks, such
as these railway arches that you have noted, by which the actual
distance can be settled after the route is plotted. You had better read
out the entries, and, opposite each, write a number for reference, so
that we need not confuse the chart by writing details on it. I shall
start near the middle of the board, as neither you nor I seem to have
the slightest notion what your general direction was."

I laid the open notebook before me and read out the first entry:

"'Eight fifty-eight. West by South. Start from home. Horse thirteen
hands.'"

"You turned round at once, I understand," said Thorndyke, "so we draw no
line in that direction. The next is--?"

"'Eight fifty-eight minutes, thirty seconds, East by North'; and the
next is 'Eight fifty-nine, North-east.'"

"Then you travelled east by north about a fifteenth of a mile and we
shall put down half an inch on the chart. Then you turned north-east.
How long did you go on?"

"Exactly a minute. The next entry is 'Nine. West north-west.'"

"Then you travelled about the seventh of a mile in a north-easterly
direction and we draw a line an inch long at an angle of forty-five
degrees to the right of the north and south line. From the end of that
we carry a line at an angle of fifty-six and a quarter degrees to the
left of the north and south line, and so on. The method is perfectly
simple, you see."

"Perfectly; I quite understand it now."

I went back to my chair and continued to read out the entries from the
notebook while Thorndyke laid off the lines of direction with the
protractor, taking out the distances with the dividers from a scale of
equal parts on the back of the instrument. As the work proceeded, I
noticed, from time to time, a smile of quiet amusement spread over my
colleague's keen, attentive face, and at each new reference to a railway
bridge he chuckled softly.

"What, again!" he laughed, as I recorded the passage of the fifth or
sixth bridge. "It's like a game of croquet. Go on. What is the next?"

I went on reading out the notes until I came to the final one:

"'Nine twenty-four. South-east. In covered way. Stop. Wooden gates
closed.'"

Thorndyke ruled off the last line, remarking: "Then your covered way is
on the south side of a street which bears north-east. So we complete our
chart. Just look at your route, Jervis."

He held up the board with a quizzical smile and I stared in astonishment
at the chart. The single line, which represented the route of the
carriage, zigzagged in the most amazing manner, turning, re-turning and
crossing itself repeatedly, evidently passing more than once down the
same thoroughfares and terminating at a comparatively short distance
from its commencement.

"Why!" I exclaimed, the "rascal must have lived quite near to
Stillbury's house!"

Thorndyke measured with the dividers the distance between the starting
and arriving points of the route and took it off from the scale.

"Five-eighths of a mile, roughly," he said. "You could have walked it in
less than ten minutes. And now let us get out the ordnance map and see
if we can give to each of those marvellously erratic lines 'a local
habitation and a name.'"

He spread the map out on the table and placed our chart by its side.

"I think," said he, "you started from Lower Kennington Lane?"

"Yes, from this point," I replied, indicating the spot with a pencil.

"Then," said Thorndyke, "if we swing the chart round twenty degrees to
correct the deviation of the compass, we can compare it with the
ordnance map."

He set off with the protractor an angle of twenty degrees from the
north and south line and turned the chart round to that extent. After
closely scrutinizing the map and the chart and comparing the one with
the other, he said:

"By mere inspection it seems fairly easy to identify the thoroughfares
that correspond to the lines of the chart. Take the part that is near
your destination. At nine twenty-one you passed under a bridge, going
westward. That would seem to be Glasshouse Street. Then you turned
south, apparently along the Albert Embankment, where you heard the tug's
whistle. Then you heard a passenger train start on your left; that would
be Vauxhall Station. Next you turned round due east and passed under a
large railway bridge, which suggests the bridge that carries the Station
over Upper Kennington Lane. If that is so, your house should be on the
south side of Upper Kennington Lane, some three hundred yards from the
bridge. But we may as well test our inferences by one or two
measurements."

"How can you do that if you don't know the exact scale of the chart?"

"I will show you," said Thorndyke. "We shall establish the true scale
and that will form part of the proof."

He rapidly constructed on the upper blank part of the paper, a
proportional diagram consisting of two intersecting lines with a single
cross-line.

"This long line," he explained, "is the distance from Stillbury's house
to the Vauxhall railway bridge as it appears on the chart; the shorter
cross-line is the same distance taken from the ordnance map. If our
inference is correct and the chart is reasonably accurate, all the other
distances will show a similar proportion. Let us try some of them. Take
the distance from Vauxhall bridge to the Glasshouse Street bridge."

[Illustration: The Track Chart, showing the route followed by Weiss's
carriage.

A.--Starting-point in Lower Kennington Lane.

B.--Position of Mr. Weiss's house. The dotted lines connecting the
bridges indicate probable railway lines.]

He made the two measurements carefully, and, as the point of the
dividers came down almost precisely in the correct place on the diagram,
he looked up at me.

"Considering the roughness of the method by which the chart was made, I
think that is pretty conclusive, though, if you look at the various
arches that you passed under and see how nearly they appear to follow
the position of the South-Western Railway line, you hardly need further
proof. But I will take a few more proportional measurements for the
satisfaction of proving the case by scientific methods before we proceed
to verify our conclusions by a visit to the spot."

He took off one or two more distances, and on comparing them with the
proportional distances on the ordnance map, found them in every case as
nearly correct as could be expected.

"Yes," said Thorndyke, laying down the dividers, "I think we have
narrowed down the locality of Mr. Weiss's house to a few yards in a
known street. We shall get further help from your note of nine
twenty-three thirty, which records a patch of newly laid macadam
extending up to the house."

"That new macadam will be pretty well smoothed down by now," I objected.

"Not so very completely," answered Thorndyke. "It is only a little over
a month ago, and there has been very little wet weather since. It may be
smooth, but it will be easily distinguishable from the old."

"And do I understand that you propose to go and explore the
neighbourhood?"

"Undoubtedly I do. That is to say, I intend to convert the locality of
this house into a definite address; which, I think, will now be
perfectly easy, unless we should have the bad luck to find more than one
covered way. Even then, the difficulty would be trifling."

"And when you have ascertained where Mr. Weiss lives? What then?"

"That will depend on circumstances. I think we shall probably call at
Scotland Yard and have a little talk with our friend Mr. Superintendent
Miller; unless, for any reason, it seems better to look into the case
ourselves."

"When is this voyage of exploration to take place?"

Thorndyke considered this question, and, taking out his pocket-book,
glanced through his engagements.

"It seems to me," he said, "that to-morrow is a fairly free day. We
could take the morning without neglecting other business. I suggest that
we start immediately after breakfast. How will that suit my learned
friend?"

"My time is yours," I replied; "and if you choose to waste it on matters
that don't concern you, that's your affair."

"Then we will consider the arrangement to stand for to-morrow morning,
or rather, for this morning, as I see that it is past twelve."

With this Thorndyke gathered up the chart and instruments and we
separated for the night.




Chapter IX

The House of Mystery


Half-past nine on the following morning found us spinning along the
Albert Embankment in a hansom to the pleasant tinkle of the horse's
bell. Thorndyke appeared to be in high spirits, though the full
enjoyment of the matutinal pipe precluded fluent conversation. As a
precaution, he had put my notebook in his pocket before starting, and
once or twice he took it out and looked over its pages; but he made no
reference to the object of our quest, and the few remarks that he
uttered would have indicated that his thoughts were occupied with other
matters.

Arrived at Vauxhall Station, we alighted and forthwith made our way to
the bridge that spans Upper Kennington Lane near its junction with
Harleyford Road.

"Here is our starting point," said Thorndyke. "From this place to the
house is about three hundred yards--say four hundred and twenty
paces--and at about two hundred paces we ought to reach our patch of new
road-metal. Now, are you ready? If we keep step we shall average our
stride."

We started together at a good pace, stepping out with military
regularity and counting aloud as we went. As we told out the hundred and
ninety-fourth pace I observed Thorndyke nod towards the roadway a little
ahead, and, looking at it attentively as we approached, it was easy to
see by the regularity of surface and lighter colour, that it had
recently been re-metalled.

Having counted out the four hundred and twenty paces, we halted, and
Thorndyke turned to me with a smile of triumph.

"Not a bad estimate, Jervis," said he. "That will be your house if I am
not much mistaken. There is no other mews or private roadway in sight."

He pointed to a narrow turning some dozen yards ahead, apparently the
entrance to a mews or yard and closed by a pair of massive wooden gates.

"Yes," I answered, "there can be no doubt that this is the place; but,
by Jove!" I added, as we drew nearer, "the nest is empty! Do you see?"

I pointed to a bill that was stuck on the gate, bearing, as I could see
at this distance, the inscription "To Let."

"Here is a new and startling, if not altogether unexpected,
development," said Thorndyke, as we stood gazing at the bill; which set
forth that "these premises, including stabling and workshops," were "to
be let on lease or otherwise," and referred inquiries to Messrs. Ryebody
Brothers, house-agents and valuers, Upper Kennington Lane. "The question
is, should we make a few inquiries of the agent, or should we get the
keys and have a look at the inside of the house? I am inclined to do
both, and the latter first, if Messrs. Ryebody Brothers will trust us
with the keys."

We proceeded up the lane to the address given, and, entering the
office, Thorndyke made his request--somewhat to the surprise of the
clerk; for Thorndyke was not quite the kind of person whom one naturally
associates with stabling and workshops. However, there was no
difficulty, but as the clerk sorted out the keys from a bunch hanging
from a hook, he remarked:

"I expect you will find the place in a rather dirty and neglected
condition. The house has not been cleaned yet; it is just as it was left
when the brokers took away the furniture."

"Was the last tenant sold up, then?" Thorndyke asked.

"Oh, no. He had to leave rather unexpectedly to take up some business in
Germany."

"I hope he paid his rent," said Thorndyke.

"Oh, yes. Trust us for that. But I should say that Mr. Weiss--that was
his name--was a man of some means. He seemed to have plenty of money,
though he always paid in notes. I don't fancy he had a banking account
in this country. He hadn't been here more than about six or seven months
and I imagine he didn't know many people in England, as he paid us a
cash deposit in lieu of references when he first came."

"I think you said his name was Weiss. It wouldn't be H. Weiss by any
chance?"

"I believe it was. But I can soon tell you." He opened a drawer and
consulted what looked like a book of receipt forms. "Yes; H Weiss. Do
you know him, sir?"

"I knew a Mr. H. Weiss some years ago. He came from Bremen, I
remember."

"This Mr. Weiss has gone back to Hamburg," the clerk observed.

"Ah," said Thorndyke, "then it would seem not to be the same. My
acquaintance was a fair man with a beard and a decidedly red nose and he
wore spectacles."

"That's the man. You've described him exactly," said the clerk, who was
apparently rather easily satisfied in the matter of description.

"Dear me," said Thorndyke; "what a small world it is. Do you happen to
have a note of his address in Hamburg?"

"I haven't," the clerk replied. "You see we've done with him, having got
the rent, though the house is not actually surrendered yet. Mr Weiss's
housekeeper still has the front-door key. She doesn't start for Hamburg
for a week or so, and meanwhile she keeps the key so that she can call
every day and see if there are any letters."

"Indeed," said Thorndyke. "I wonder if he still has the same
housekeeper."

"This lady is a German," replied the clerk, "with a regular jaw-twisting
name. Sounded like Shallybang."

"Schallibaum. That is the lady. A fair woman with hardly any eyebrows
and a pronounced cast in the left eye."

"Now that's very curious, sir," said the clerk. "It's the same name, and
this is a fair woman with remarkably thin eyebrows, I remember, now that
you mention it. But it can't be the same person. I have only seen her a
few times and then only just for a minute or so; but I'm quite certain
she had no cast in her eye. So, you see, sir, she can't be the same
person. You can dye your hair or you can wear a wig or you can paint
your face; but a squint is a squint. There's no faking a swivel eye."

Thorndyke laughed softly. "I suppose not; unless, perhaps, some one
might invent an adjustable glass eye. Are these the keys?"

"Yes, sir. The large one belongs to the wicket in the front gate. The
other is the latch-key belonging to the side door. Mrs. Shallybang has
the key of the front door."

"Thank you," said Thorndyke. He took the keys, to which a wooden label
was attached, and we made our way back towards the house of mystery,
discussing the clerk's statements as we went.

"A very communicable young gentleman, that," Thorndyke remarked. "He
seemed quite pleased to relieve the monotony of office work with a
little conversation. And I am sure I was very delighted to indulge him."

"He hadn't much to tell, all the same," said I.

Thorndyke looked at me in surprise. "I don't know what you would have,
Jervis, unless you expect casual strangers to present you with a
ready-made body of evidence, fully classified, with all the inferences
and implications stated. It seemed to me that he was a highly
instructive young man."

"What did you learn from him?" I asked.

"Oh, come, Jervis," he protested; "is that a fair question, under our
present arrangement? However, I will mention a few points. We learn that
about six or seven months ago, Mr. H. Weiss dropped from the clouds into
Kennington Lane and that he has now ascended from Kennington Lane into
the clouds. That is a useful piece of information. Then we learn that
Mrs. Schallibaum has remained in England; which might be of little
importance if it were not for a very interesting corollary that it
suggests."

"What is that?"

"I must leave you to consider the facts at your leisure; but you will
have noticed the ostensible reason for her remaining behind. She is
engaged in puttying up the one gaping joint in their armour. One of them
has been indiscreet enough to give this address to some
correspondent--probably a foreign correspondent. Now, as they obviously
wish to leave no tracks, they cannot give their new address to the Post
Office to have their letters forwarded, and, on the other hand, a letter
left in the box might establish such a connection as would enable them
to be traced. Moreover, the letter might be of a kind that they would
not wish to fall into the wrong hands. They would not have given this
address excepting under some peculiar circumstances."

"No, I should think not, if they took this house for the express purpose
of committing a crime in it."

"Exactly. And then there is one other fact that you may have gathered
from our young friend's remarks."

"What is that?"

"That a controllable squint is a very valuable asset to a person who
wishes to avoid identification."

"Yes, I did note that. The fellow seemed to think that it was absolutely
conclusive."

"And so would most people; especially in the case of a squint of that
kind. We can all squint towards our noses, but no normal person can turn
his eyes away from one another. My impression is that the presence or
absence, as the case might be, of a divergent squint would be accepted
as absolute disproof of identity. But here we are."

He inserted the key into the wicket of the large gate, and, when we had
stepped through into the covered way, he locked it from the inside.

"Why have you locked us in?" I asked, seeing that the wicket had a
latch.

"Because," he replied, "if we now hear any one on the premises we shall
know who it is. Only one person besides ourselves has a key."

His reply startled me somewhat. I stopped and looked at him.

"That is a quaint situation, Thorndyke. I hadn't thought of it. Why she
may actually come to the house while we are here; in fact, she may be in
the house at this moment."

"I hope not," said he. "We don't particularly want Mr. Weiss to be put
on his guard, for I take it, he is a pretty wide-awake gentleman under
any circumstances. If she does come, we had better keep out of sight. I
think we will look over the house first. That is of the most interest to
us. If the lady does happen to come while we are here, she may stay to
show us over the place and keep an eye on us. So we will leave the
stables to the last."

We walked down the entry to the side door at which I had been admitted
by Mrs. Schallibaum on the occasion of my previous visits. Thorndyke
inserted the latch-key, and, as soon as we were inside, shut the door
and walked quickly through into the hall, whither I followed him. He
made straight for the front door, where, having slipped up the catch of
the lock, he began very attentively to examine the letter-box. It was a
somewhat massive wooden box, fitted with a lock of good quality and
furnished with a wire grille through which one could inspect the
interior.

"We are in luck, Jervis," Thorndyke remarked. "Our visit has been most
happily timed. There is a letter in the box."

"Well," I said, "we can't get it out; and if we could, it would be
hardly justifiable."

"I don't know," he replied, "that I am prepared to assent off-hand to
either of those propositions; but I would rather not tamper with another
person's letter, even if that person should happen to be a murderer.
Perhaps we can get the information we want from the outside of the
envelope."

He produced from his pocket a little electric lamp fitted with a
bull's-eye, and, pressing the button, threw a beam of light in through
the grille. The letter was lying on the bottom of the box face upwards,
so that the address could easily be read.

"Herrn Dr. H. Weiss," Thorndyke read aloud. "German stamp, postmark
apparently Darmstadt. You notice that the 'Herrn Dr.' is printed and the
rest written. What do you make of that?"

"I don't quite know. Do you think he is really a medical man?"

"Perhaps we had better finish our investigation, in case we are
disturbed, and discuss the bearings of the facts afterwards. The name of
the sender may be on the flap of the envelope. If it is not, I shall
pick the lock and take out the letter. Have you got a probe about you?"

"Yes; by force of habit I am still carrying my pocket case."

I took the little case from my pocket and extracting from it a jointed
probe of thickish silver wire, screwed the two halves together and
handed the completed instrument to Thorndyke; who passed the slender rod
through the grille and adroitly turned the letter over.

"Ha!" he exclaimed with deep satisfaction, as the light fell on the
reverse of the envelope, "we are saved from the necessity of theft--or
rather, unauthorized borrowing--'Johann Schnitzler, Darmstadt.' That is
all that we actually want. The German police can do the rest if
necessary."

He handed me back my probe, pocketed his lamp, released the catch of the
lock on the door, and turned away along the dark, musty-smelling hall.

"Do you happen to know the name of Johann Schnitzler?" he asked.

I replied that I had no recollection of ever having heard the name
before.

"Neither have I," said he; "but I think we may form a pretty shrewd
guess as to his avocation. As you saw, the words 'Herrn Dr.' were
printed on the envelope, leaving the rest of the address to be written
by hand. The plain inference is that he is a person who habitually
addresses letters to medical men, and as the style of the envelope and
the lettering--which is printed, not embossed--is commercial, we may
assume that he is engaged in some sort of trade. Now, what is a likely
trade?"

"He might be an instrument maker or a drug manufacturer; more probably
the latter, as there is an extensive drug and chemical industry in
Germany, and as Mr. Weiss seemed to have more use for drugs than
instruments."

"Yes, I think you are right; but we will look him up when we get home.
And now we had better take a glance at the bedroom; that is, if you can
remember which room it was."

"It was on the first floor," said I, "and the door by which I entered
was just at the head of the stairs."

We ascended the two flights, and, as we reached the landing, I halted.

"This was the door," I said, and was about to turn the handle when
Thorndyke caught me by the arm.

"One moment, Jervis," said he. "What do you make of this?"

He pointed to a spot near the bottom of the door where, on close
inspection, four good-sized screw-holes were distinguishable. They had
been neatly stopped with putty and covered with knotting, and were so
nearly the colour of the grained and varnished woodwork as to be hardly
visible.

"Evidently," I answered, "there has been a bolt there, though it seems a
queer place to fix one."

"Not at all," replied Thorndyke. "If you look up you will see that there
was another at the top of the door, and, as the lock is in the middle,
they must have been highly effective. But there are one or two other
points that strike one. First, you will notice that the bolts have been
fixed on quite recently, for the paint that they covered is of the same
grimy tint as that on the rest of the door. Next, they have been taken
off, which, seeing that they could hardly have been worth the trouble of
removal, seems to suggest that the person who fixed them considered that
their presence might appear remarkable, while the screw-holes, which
have been so skilfully and carefully stopped, would be less conspicuous.

"Then, they are on the outside of the door--an unusual situation for
bedroom bolts--and were of considerable size. They were long and thick."

"I can see, by the position of the screw-holes, that they were long; but
how do you arrive at their thickness?"

"By the size of the counter-holes in the jamb of the door. These holes
have been very carefully filled with wooden plugs covered with knotting;
but you can make out their diameter, which is that of the bolts, and
which is decidedly out of proportion for an ordinary bedroom door. Let
me show you a light."

He flashed his lamp into the dark corner, and I was able to see
distinctly the portentously large holes into which the bolts had fitted,
and also to note the remarkable neatness with which they had been
plugged.

"There was a second door, I remember," said I. "Let us see if that was
guarded in a similar manner."

We strode through the empty room, awakening dismal echoes as we trod the
bare boards, and flung open the other door. At top and bottom, similar
groups of screw-holes showed that this also had been made secure, and
that these bolts had been of the same very substantial character as the
others.

Thorndyke turned away from the door with a slight frown.

"If we had any doubts," said he, "as to what has been going on in this
house, these traces of massive fastenings would be almost enough to
settle them."

"They might have been there before Weiss came," I suggested. "He only
came about seven months ago and there is no date on the screw-holes."

"That is quite true. But when, with their recent fixture, you couple the
facts that they have been removed, that very careful measures have been
taken to obliterate the traces of their presence, and that they would
have been indispensable for the commission of the crime that we are
almost certain was being committed here, it looks like an excess of
caution to seek other explanations."

"But," I objected, "if the man, Graves, was really imprisoned, could not
he have smashed the window and called for help?"

"The window looks out on the yard, as you see; but I expect it was
secured too."

He drew the massive, old-fashioned shutters out of their recess and
closed them.

"Yes, here we are." He pointed to four groups of screw-holes at the
corners of the shutters, and, once more producing his lamp, narrowly
examined the insides of the recesses into which the shutters folded.

"The nature of the fastening is quite evident," said he. "An iron bar
passed right across at the top and bottom and was secured by a staple
and padlock. You can see the mark the bar made in the recess when the
shutters were folded. When these bars were fixed and padlocked and the
bolts were shot, this room was as secure, for a prisoner unprovided with
tools, as a cell in Newgate."

We looked at one another for awhile without speaking; and I fancy that
if Mr. H. Weiss could have seen our faces he might have thought it
desirable to seek some retreat even more remote than Hamburg.

"It was a diabolical affair, Jervis," Thorndyke said at length, in an
ominously quiet and even gentle tone. "A sordid, callous, cold-blooded
crime of a type that is to me utterly unforgivable and incapable of
extenuation. Of course, it may have failed. Mr. Graves may even now be
alive. I shall make it my very especial business to ascertain whether he
is or not. And if he is not, I shall take it to myself as a sacred duty
to lay my hand on the man who has compassed his death."

I looked at Thorndyke with something akin to awe. In the quiet
unemotional tone of his voice, in his unruffled manner and the stony
calm of his face, there was something much more impressive, more
fateful, than there could have been in the fiercest threats or the most
passionate denunciations. I felt that in those softly spoken words he
had pronounced the doom of the fugitive villain.

He turned away from the window and glanced round the empty room. It
seemed that our discovery of the fastenings had exhausted the
information that it had to offer.

"It is a thousand pities," I remarked, "that we were unable to look
round before they moved out the furniture. We might have found some clue
to the scoundrel's identity."

"Yes," replied Thorndyke; "there isn't much information to be gathered
here, I am afraid. I see they have swept up the small litter from the
floor and poked it under the grate. We will turn that over, as there
seems to be nothing else, and then look at the other rooms."

He raked out the little heap of rubbish with his stick and spread it out
on the hearth. It certainly looked unpromising enough, being just such a
rubbish heap as may be swept up in any untidy room during a move. But
Thorndyke went through it systematically, examining each item
attentively, even to the local tradesmen's bills and empty paper bags,
before laying them aside. Another rake of his stick scattered the bulky
masses of crumpled paper and brought into view an object which he picked
up with some eagerness. It was a portion of a pair of spectacles, which
had apparently been trodden on, for the side-bar was twisted and bent
and the glass was shattered into fragments.

"This ought to give us a hint," said he. "It will probably have belonged
either to Weiss or Graves, as Mrs. Schallibaum apparently did not wear
glasses. Let us see if we can find the remainder."

We both groped carefully with our sticks amongst the rubbish, spreading
it out on the hearth and removing the numerous pieces of crumpled paper.
Our search was rewarded by the discovery of the second eye-piece of the
spectacles, of which the glass was badly cracked but less shattered than
the other. I also picked up two tiny sticks at which Thorndyke looked
with deep interest before laying them on the mantelshelf.

"We will consider them presently," said he. "Let us finish with the
spectacles first. You see that the left eye-glass is a concave
cylindrical lens of some sort. We can make out that much from the
fragments that remain, and we can measure the curvature when we get them
home, although that will be easier if we can collect some more fragments
and stick them together. The right eye is plain glass; that is quite
evident. Then these will have belonged to your patient, Jervis. You said
that the tremulous iris was in the right eye, I think?"

"Yes," I replied. "These will be his spectacles, without doubt."

"They are peculiar frames," he continued. "If they were made in this
country, we might be able to discover the maker. But we must collect as
many fragments of glass as we can."

Once more we searched amongst the rubbish and succeeded, eventually, in
recovering some seven or eight small fragments of the broken
spectacle-glasses, which Thorndyke laid on the mantelshelf beside the
little sticks.

"By the way, Thorndyke," I said, taking up the latter to examine them
afresh, "what are these things? Can you make anything of them?"

He looked at them thoughtfully for a few moments and then replied:

"I don't think I will tell you what they are. You should find that out
for yourself, and it will be well worth your while to do so. They are
rather suggestive objects under the circumstances. But notice their
peculiarities carefully. Both are portions of some smooth, stout reed.
There is a long, thin stick--about six inches long--and a thicker piece
only three inches in length. The longer piece has a little scrap of red
paper stuck on at the end; apparently a portion of a label of some kind
with an ornamental border. The other end of the stick has been broken
off. The shorter, stouter stick has had its central cavity artificially
enlarged so that it fits over the other to form a cap or sheath. Make a
careful note of those facts and try to think what they probably mean;
what would be the most likely use for an object of this kind. When you
have ascertained that, you will have learned something new about this
case. And now, to resume our investigations. Here is a very suggestive
thing." He picked up a small, wide-mouthed bottle and, holding it up for
my inspection, continued: "Observe the fly sticking to the inside, and
the name on the label, 'Fox, Russell Street, Covent Garden.'"

"I don't know Mr. Fox."

"Then I will inform you that he is a dealer in the materials for
'make-up,' theatrical or otherwise, and will leave you to consider the
bearing of this bottle on our present investigation. There doesn't seem
to be anything else of interest in this El Dorado excepting that screw,
which you notice is about the size of those with which the bolts were
fastened on the doors. I don't think it is worth while to unstop any of
the holes to try it; we should learn nothing fresh."

He rose, and, having kicked the discarded rubbish back under the grate,
gathered up his gleanings from the mantelpiece, carefully bestowing the
spectacles and the fragments of glass in the tin box that he appeared
always to carry in his pocket, and wrapping the larger objects in his
handkerchief.

"A poor collection," was his comment, as he returned the box and
handkerchief to his pocket, "and yet not so poor as I had feared.
Perhaps, if we question them closely enough, these unconsidered trifles
may be made to tell us something worth learning after all. Shall we go
into the other room?"

We passed out on to the landing and into the front room, where, guided
by experience, we made straight for the fire-place. But the little heap
of rubbish there contained nothing that even Thorndyke's inquisitive eye
could view with interest. We wandered disconsolately round the room,
peering into the empty cupboards and scanning the floor and the corners
by the skirting, without discovering a single object or relic of the
late occupants. In the course of my perambulations I halted by the
window and was looking down into the street when Thorndyke called to me
sharply:

"Come away from the window, Jervis! Have you forgotten that Mrs.
Schallibaum may be in the neighbourhood at this moment?"

As a matter of fact I had entirely forgotten the matter, nor did it now
strike me as anything but the remotest of possibilities. I replied to
that effect.

"I don't agree with you," Thorndyke rejoined. "We have heard that she
comes here to look for letters. Probably she comes every day, or even
oftener. There is a good deal at stake, remember, and they cannot feel
quite as secure as they would wish. Weiss must have seen what view you
took of the case and must have had some uneasy moments thinking of what
you might do. In fact, we may take it that the fear of you drove them
out of the neighbourhood, and that they are mighty anxious to get that
letter and cut the last link that binds them to this house."

"I suppose that is so," I agreed; "and if the lady should happen to pass
this way and should see me at the window and recognize me, she would
certainly smell a rat."

"A rat!" exclaimed Thorndyke. "She would smell a whole pack of foxes,
and Mr. H. Weiss would be more on his guard than ever. Let us have a
look at the other rooms; there is nothing here."

We went up to the next floor and found traces of recent occupation in
one room only. The garrets had evidently been unused, and the kitchen
and ground-floor rooms offered nothing that appeared to Thorndyke worth
noting. Then we went out by the side door and down the covered way into
the yard at the back. The workshops were fastened with rusty padlocks
that looked as if they had not been disturbed for months. The stables
were empty and had been tentatively cleaned out, the coach-house was
vacant, and presented no traces of recent use excepting a half-bald
spoke-brush. We returned up the covered way and I was about to close the
side door, which Thorndyke had left ajar, when he stopped me.

"We'll have another look at the hall before we go," said he; and,
walking softly before me, he made his way to the front door, where,
producing his lamp, he threw a beam of light into the letter-box.

"Any more letters?" I asked.

"Any more!" he repeated. "Look for yourself."

I stooped and peered through the grille into the lighted interior; and
then I uttered an exclamation.

The box was empty.

Thorndyke regarded me with a grim smile. "We have been caught on the
hop, Jervis, I suspect," said he.

"It is queer," I replied. "I didn't hear any sound of the opening or
closing of the door; did you?"

"No; I didn't hear any sound; which makes me suspect that she did. She
would have heard our voices and she is probably keeping a sharp look-out
at this very moment. I wonder if she saw you at the window. But whether
she did or not, we must go very warily. Neither of us must return to the
Temple direct, and we had better separate when we have returned the keys
and I will watch you out of sight and see if anyone is following you.
What are you going to do?"

"If you don't want me, I shall run over to Kensington and drop in to
lunch at the Hornbys'. I said I would call as soon as I had an hour or
so free."

"Very well. Do so; and keep a look-out in case you are followed. I have
to go down to Guildford this afternoon. Under the circumstances, I shall
not go back home, but send Polton a telegram and take a train at
Vauxhall and change at some small station where I can watch the
platform. Be as careful as you can. Remember that what you have to
avoid is being followed to any place where you are known, and, above
all, revealing your connection with number Five A, King's Bench Walk."

Having thus considered our immediate movements, we emerged together from
the wicket, and locking it behind us, walked quickly to the
house-agents', where an opportune office-boy received the keys without
remark. As we came out of the office, I halted irresolutely and we both
looked up and down the lane.

"There is no suspicious looking person in sight at present," Thorndyke
said, and then asked: "Which way do you think of going?"

"It seems to me," I replied, "that my best plan would be to take a cab
or an omnibus so as to get out of the neighbourhood as quickly as
possible. If I go through Ravensden Street into Kennington Park Road, I
can pick up an omnibus that will take me to the Mansion House, where I
can change for Kensington. I shall go on the top so that I can keep a
look-out for any other omnibus or cab that may be following."

"Yes," said Thorndyke, "that seems a good plan. I will walk with you and
see that you get a fair start."

We walked briskly along the lane and through Ravensden Street to the
Kennington Park Road. An omnibus was approaching from the south at a
steady jog-trot and we halted at the corner to wait for it. Several
people passed us in different directions, but none seemed to take any
particular notice of us, though we observed them rather narrowly,
especially the women. Then the omnibus crawled up. I sprang on the
foot-board and ascended to the roof, where I seated myself and surveyed
the prospect to the rear. No one else got on the omnibus--which had not
stopped--and no cab or other passenger vehicle was in sight. I continued
to watch Thorndyke as he stood sentinel at the corner, and noted that no
one appeared to be making any effort to overtake the omnibus. Presently
my colleague waved his hand to me and turned back towards Vauxhall, and
I, having satisfied myself once more that no pursuing cab or hurrying
foot-passenger was in sight, decided that our precautions had been
unnecessary and settled myself in a rather more comfortable position.




Chapter X

The Hunter Hunted


The omnibus of those days was a leisurely vehicle. Its ordinary pace was
a rather sluggish trot, and in a thickly populated thoroughfare its
speed was further reduced by frequent stoppages. Bearing these facts in
mind, I gave an occasional backward glance as we jogged northward,
though my attention soon began to wander from the rather remote
possibility of pursuit to the incidents of our late exploration.

It had not been difficult to see that Thorndyke was very well pleased
with the results of our search, but excepting the letter--which
undoubtedly opened up a channel for further inquiry and possible
identification--I could not perceive that any of the traces that we had
found justified his satisfaction. There were the spectacles, for
instance. They were almost certainly the pair worn by Mr. Graves. But
what then? It was exceedingly improbable that we should be able to
discover the maker of them, and if we were, it was still more improbable
that he would be able to give us any information that would help us.
Spectacle-makers are not usually on confidential terms with their
customers.

As to the other objects, I could make nothing of them. The little sticks
of reed evidently had some use that was known to Thorndyke and
furnished, by inference, some kind of information about Weiss, Graves,
or Mrs. Schallibaum. But I had never seen anything like them before and
they conveyed nothing whatever to me. Then the bottle that had seemed so
significant to Thorndyke was to me quite uninforming. It did, indeed,
suggest that some member of the household might be connected with the
stage, but it gave no hint as to which one. Certainly that person was
not Mr. Weiss, whose appearance was as remote from that of an actor as
could well be imagined. At any rate, the bottle and its label gave me no
more useful hint than it might be worth while to call on Mr. Fox and
make inquiries; and something told me very emphatically that this was
not what it had conveyed to Thorndyke.

These reflections occupied me until the omnibus, having rumbled over
London Bridge and up King William Street, joined the converging streams
of traffic at the Mansion House. Here I got down and changed to an
omnibus bound for Kensington; on which I travelled westward pleasantly
enough, looking down into the teeming streets and whiling away the time
by meditating upon the very agreeable afternoon that I promised myself,
and considering how far my new arrangement with Thorndyke would justify
me in entering into certain domestic engagements of a highly interesting
kind.

What might have happened under other circumstances it is impossible to
tell and useless to speculate; the fact is that my journey ended in a
disappointment. I arrived, all agog, at the familiar house in Endsley
Gardens only to be told by a sympathetic housemaid that the family was
out; that Mrs. Hornby had gone into the country and would not be home
until night, and--which mattered a good deal more to me--that her niece,
Miss Juliet Gibson, had accompanied her.

Now a man who drops into lunch without announcing his intention or
previously ascertaining those of his friends has no right to quarrel
with fate if he finds an empty house. Thus philosophically I reflected
as I turned away from the house in profound discontent, demanding of the
universe in general why Mrs. Hornby need have perversely chosen my first
free day to go gadding into the country, and above all, why she must
needs spirit away the fair Juliet. This was the crowning misfortune (for
I could have endured the absence of the elder lady with commendable
fortitude), and since I could not immediately return to the Temple it
left me a mere waif and stray for the time being.

Instinct--of the kind that manifests itself especially about one
o'clock in the afternoon--impelled me in the direction of Brompton Road,
and finally landed me at a table in a large restaurant apparently
adjusted to the needs of ladies who had come from a distance to engage
in the feminine sport of shopping. Here, while waiting for my lunch, I
sat idly scanning the morning paper and wondering what I should do with
the rest of the day; and presently it chanced that my eye caught the
announcement of a matinée at the theatre in Sloane Square. It was quite
a long time since I had been at a theatre, and, as the play--light
comedy--seemed likely to satisfy my not very critical taste, I decided
to devote the afternoon to reviving my acquaintance with the drama.
Accordingly as soon as my lunch was finished, I walked down the Brompton
Road, stepped on to an omnibus, and was duly deposited at the door of
the theatre. A couple of minutes later I found myself occupying an
excellent seat in the second row of the pit, oblivious alike of my
recent disappointment and of Thorndyke's words of warning.

I am not an enthusiastic play-goer. To dramatic performances I am
disposed to assign nothing further than the modest function of
furnishing entertainment. I do not go to a theatre to be instructed or
to have my moral outlook elevated. But, by way of compensation, I am not
difficult to please. To a simple play, adjusted to my primitive taste, I
can bring a certain bucolic appreciation that enables me to extract from
the performance the maximum of enjoyment; and when, on this occasion,
the final curtain fell and the audience rose, I rescued my hat from its
insecure resting-place and turned to go with the feeling that I had
spent a highly agreeable afternoon.

Emerging from the theatre, borne on the outgoing stream, I presently
found myself opposite the door of a tea-shop. Instinct--the five o'clock
instinct this time--guided me in; for we are creatures of habit,
especially of the tea habit. The unoccupied table to which I drifted was
in a shady corner not very far from the pay-desk; and here I had been
seated less than a minute when a lady passed me on her way to the
farther table. The glimpse that I caught of her as she approached--it
was but a glimpse, since she passed behind me--showed that she was
dressed in black, that she wore a beaded veil and hat, and in addition
to the glass of milk and the bun that she carried, she was encumbered by
an umbrella and a small basket, apparently containing some kind of
needlework. I must confess that I gave her very little attention at the
time, being occupied in anxious speculation as to how long it would be
before the fact of my presence would impinge on the consciousness of the
waitress.

The exact time by the clock on the wall was three minutes and a quarter,
at the expiration of which an anaemic young woman sauntered up to the
table and bestowed on me a glance of sullen interrogation, as if mutely
demanding what the devil I wanted. I humbly requested that I might be
provided with a pot of tea; whereupon she turned on her heel (which was
a good deal worn down on the offside) and reported my conduct to a lady
behind a marble-topped counter.

It seemed that the counter lady took a lenient view of the case, for in
less than four minutes the waitress returned and gloomily deposited on
the table before me a tea-pot, a milk-jug, a cup and saucer, a jug of
hot water, and a small pool of milk. Then she once more departed in
dudgeon.

I had just given the tea in the pot a preliminary stir and was about to
pour out the first cup when I felt some one bump lightly against my
chair and heard something rattle on the floor. I turned quickly and
perceived the lady, whom I had seen enter, stooping just behind my
chair. It seemed that having finished her frugal meal she was on her way
out when she had dropped the little basket that I had noticed hanging
from her wrist; which basket had promptly disgorged its entire contents
on the floor.

Now every one must have noticed the demon of agility that seems to enter
into an inanimate object when it is dropped, and the apparently
intelligent malice with which it discovers, and rolls into, the most
inaccessible places. Here was a case in point. This particular basket
had contained materials for Oriental bead-work; and no sooner had it
reached the floor than each item of its contents appeared to become
possessed of a separate and particular devil impelling it to travel at
headlong speed to some remote and unapproachable corner as distant as
possible from its fellows.

As the only man--and almost the only person--near, the duty of
salvage-agent manifestly devolved upon me; and down I went, accordingly,
on my hands and knees, regardless of a nearly new pair of trousers, to
grope under tables, chairs and settles in reach of the scattered
treasure. A ball of the thick thread or twine I recovered from a dark
and dirty corner after a brief interview with the sharp corner of a
settle, and a multitude of the large beads with which this infernal
industry is carried on I gathered from all parts of the compass, coming
forth at length (quadrupedally) with a double handful of the
treasure-trove and a very lively appreciation of the resistant qualities
of a cast-iron table-stand when applied to the human cranium.

The owner of the lost and found property was greatly distressed by the
accident and the trouble it had caused me; in fact she was quite
needlessly agitated about it. The hand which held the basket into which
I poured the rescued trash trembled visibly, and the brief glance that I
bestowed on her as she murmured her thanks and apologies--with a very
slight foreign accent--showed me that she was excessively pale. That
much I could see plainly in spite of the rather dim light in this part
of the shop and the beaded veil that covered her face; and I could also
see that she was a rather remarkable looking woman, with a great mass of
harsh, black hair and very broad black eyebrows that nearly met above
her nose and contrasted strikingly with the dead white of her skin. But,
of course, I did not look at her intently. Having returned her property
and received her acknowledgments, I resumed my seat and left her to go
on her way.

I had once more grasped the handle of the tea-pot when I made a rather
curious discovery. At the bottom of the tea-cup lay a single lump of
sugar. To the majority of persons it would have meant nothing. They
would have assumed that they had dropped it in and forgotten it and
would have proceeded to pour out the tea. But it happened that, at this
time, I did not take sugar in my tea; whence it followed that the lump
had not been put in by me. Assuming, therefore, that it had been
carelessly dropped in by the waitress, I turned it out on the table,
filled the cup, added the milk, and took a tentative draught to test the
temperature.

The cup was yet at my lips when I chanced to look into the mirror that
faced my table. Of course it reflected the part of the shop that was
behind me, including the cashier's desk; at which the owner of the
basket now stood paying for her refreshment. Between her and me was a
gas chandelier which cast its light on my back but full on her face; and
her veil notwithstanding, I could see that she was looking at me
steadily; was, in fact, watching me intently and with a very curious
expression--an expression of expectancy mingled with alarm. But this was
not all. As I returned her intent look--which I could do unobserved,
since my face, reflected in the mirror, was in deep shadow--I suddenly
perceived that that steady gaze engaged her right eye only; the other
eye was looking sharply towards her left shoulder. In short, she had a
divergent squint of the left eye.

I put down my cup with a thrill of amazement and a sudden surging up of
suspicion and alarm. An instant's reflection reminded me that when she
had spoken to me a few moments before, both her eyes had looked into
mine without the slightest trace of a squint. My thoughts flew back to
the lump of sugar, to the unguarded milk-jug and the draught of tea that
I had already swallowed; and, hardly knowing what I intended, I started
to my feet and turned to confront her. But as I rose, she snatched up
her change and darted from the shop. Through the glass door, I saw her
spring on to the foot-board of a passing hansom and give the driver some
direction. I saw the man whip up his horse, and, by the time I reached
the door, the cab was moving off swiftly towards Sloane Street.

I stood irresolute. I had not paid and could not run out of the shop
without making a fuss, and my hat and stick were still on the rail
opposite my seat. The woman ought to be followed, but I had no fancy for
the task. If the tea that I had swallowed was innocuous, no harm was
done and I was rid of my pursuer. So far as I was concerned, the
incident was closed. I went back to my seat, and picking up the lump of
sugar which still lay on the table where I had dropped it, put it
carefully in my pocket. But my appetite for tea was satisfied for the
present. Moreover it was hardly advisable to stay in the shop lest some
fresh spy should come to see how I fared. Accordingly I obtained my
check, handed it in at the cashier's desk and took my departure.

All this time, it will be observed, I had been taking it for granted
that the lady in black had followed me from Kensington to this shop;
that, in fact, she was none other than Mrs. Schallibaum. And, indeed,
the circumstances had rendered the conclusion inevitable. In the very
instant when I had perceived the displacement of the left eye, complete
recognition had come upon me. When I had stood facing the woman, the
brief glance at her face had conveyed to me something dimly reminiscent
of which I had been but half conscious and had instantly forgotten. But
the sight of that characteristic squint had at once revived and
explained it. That the woman was Mrs. Schallibaum I now felt no doubt
whatever.

Nevertheless, the whole affair was profoundly mysterious. As to the
change in the woman's appearance, there was little in that. The coarse,
black hair might be her own, dyed, or it might be a wig. The eyebrows
were made-up; it was a simple enough proceeding and made still more
simple by the beaded veil. But how did she come to be there at all? How
did she happen to be made-up in this fashion at this particular time?
And, above all, how came she to be provided with a lump of what I had
little doubt was poisoned sugar?

I turned over the events of the day, and the more I considered them the
less comprehensible they appeared. No one had followed the omnibus
either on foot or in a vehicle, as far as I could see; and I had kept a
careful look-out, not only at starting but for some considerable time
after. Yet, all the time, Mrs. Schallibaum must have been following.
But how? If she had known that I was intending to travel by the omnibus
she might have gone to meet it and entered before I did. But she could
not have known: and moreover she did not meet the omnibus, for we
watched its approach from some considerable distance. I considered
whether she might not have been concealed in the house and overheard me
mention my destination to Thorndyke. But this failed to explain the
mystery, since I had mentioned no address beyond "Kensington." I had,
indeed, mentioned the name of Mrs. Hornby, but the supposition that my
friends might be known by name to Mrs. Schallibaum, or even that she
might have looked the name up in the directory, presented a probability
too remote to be worth entertaining.

But, if I reached no satisfactory conclusion, my cogitations had one
useful effect; they occupied my mind to the exclusion of that
unfortunate draught of tea. Not that I had been seriously uneasy after
the first shock. The quantity that I had swallowed was not large--the
tea being hotter than I cared for--and I remembered that, when I had
thrown out the lump of sugar, I had turned the cup upside down on the
table; so there could have been nothing solid left in it. And the lump
of sugar was in itself reassuring, for it certainly would not have been
used in conjunction with any less conspicuous but more incriminating
form of poison. That lump of sugar was now in my pocket, reserved for
careful examination at my leisure; and I reflected with a faint grin
that it would be a little disconcerting if it should turn out to
contain nothing but sugar after all.

On leaving the tea-shop, I walked up Sloane Street with the intention of
doing what I ought to have done earlier in the day. I was going to make
perfectly sure that no spy was dogging my footsteps. But for my
ridiculous confidence I could have done so quite easily before going to
Endsley Gardens; and now, made wiser by a startling experience, I
proceeded with systematic care. It was still broad daylight--for the
lamps in the tea-shop had been rendered necessary only by the faulty
construction of the premises and the dullness of the afternoon--and in
an open space I could see far enough for complete safety. Arriving at
the top of Sloane Street, I crossed Knightsbridge, and, entering Hyde
Park, struck out towards the Serpentine. Passing along the eastern
shore, I entered one of the long paths that lead towards the Marble Arch
and strode along it at such a pace as would make it necessary for any
pursuer to hurry in order to keep me in sight. Half-way across the great
stretch of turf, I halted for a few moments and noted the few people who
were coming in my direction. Then I turned sharply to the left and
headed straight for the Victoria Gate, but again, half-way, I turned off
among a clump of trees, and, standing behind the trunk of one of them,
took a fresh survey of the people who were moving along the paths. All
were at a considerable distance and none appeared to be coming my way.

I now moved cautiously from one tree to another and passed through the
wooded region to the south, crossed the Serpentine bridge at a rapid
walk and hurrying along the south shore left the Park by Apsley House.
From hence I walked at the same rapid pace along Piccadilly, insinuating
myself among the crowd with the skill born of long acquaintance with the
London streets, crossed amidst the seething traffic at the Circus,
darted up Windmill Street and began to zigzag amongst the narrow streets
and courts of Soho. Crossing the Seven Dials and Drury Lane I passed
through the multitudinous back-streets and alleys that then filled the
area south of Lincoln's Inn, came out by Newcastle Street, Holywell
Street and Half-Moon Alley into the Strand, which I crossed immediately,
ultimately entering the Temple by Devereux Court.

Even then I did not relax my precautions. From one court to another I
passed quickly, loitering in those dark entries and unexpected passages
that are known to so few but the regular Templars, and coming out into
the open only at the last where the wide passage of King's Bench Walk
admits of no evasion. Half-way up the stairs, I stood for some time in
the shadow, watching the approaches from the staircase window; and when,
at length, I felt satisfied that I had taken every precaution that was
possible, I inserted my key and let myself into our chambers.

Thorndyke had already arrived, and, as I entered, he rose to greet me
with an expression of evident relief.

"I am glad to see you, Jervis," he said. "I have been rather anxious
about you."

"Why?" I asked.

"For several reasons. One is that you are the sole danger that threatens
these people--as far as they know. Another is that we made a most
ridiculous mistake. We overlooked a fact that ought to have struck us
instantly. But how have you fared?"

"Better than I deserved. That good lady stuck to me like a burr--at
least I believe she did."

"I have no doubt she did. We have been caught napping finely, Jervis."

"How?"

"We'll go into that presently. Let us hear about your adventures first."

I gave him a full account of my movements from the time when we parted
to that of my arrival home, omitting no incident that I was able to
remember and, as far as I could, reconstituting my exceedingly devious
homeward route.

"Your retreat was masterly," he remarked with a broad smile. "I should
think that it would have utterly defeated any pursuer; and the only pity
is that it was probably wasted on the desert air. Your pursuer had by
that time become a fugitive. But you were wise to take these
precautions, for, of course, Weiss might have followed you."

"But I thought he was in Hamburg?"

"Did you? You are a very confiding young gentleman, for a budding
medical jurist. Of course we don't know that he is not; but the fact
that he has given Hamburg as his present whereabouts establishes a
strong presumption that he is somewhere else. I only hope that he has
not located you, and, from what you tell me of your later methods, I
fancy that you would have shaken him off even if he had started to
follow you from the tea-shop."

"I hope so too. But how did that woman manage to stick to me in that
way? What was the mistake we made?"

Thorndyke laughed grimly. "It was a perfectly asinine mistake, Jervis.
You started up Kennington Park Road on a leisurely, jog-trotting
omnibus, and neither you nor I remembered what there is underneath
Kennington Park Road."

"Underneath!" I exclaimed, completely puzzled for the moment. Then,
suddenly realizing what he meant, "Of course!" I exclaimed. "Idiot that
I am! You mean the electric railway?"

"Yes. That explains everything. Mrs. Schallibaum must have watched us
from some shop and quietly followed us up the lane. There were a good
many women about and several were walking in our direction. There was
nothing to distinguish her from the others unless you had recognized
her, which you would hardly have been able to do if she had worn a veil
and kept at a fair distance. At least I think not."

"No," I agreed, "I certainly should not. I had only seen her in a
half-dark room. In outdoor clothes and with a veil, I should never have
been able to identify her without very close inspection. Besides there
was the disguise or make-up."

"Not at that time. She would hardly come disguised to her own house,
for it might have led to her being challenged and asked who she was. I
think we may take it that there was no actual disguise, although she
would probably wear a shady hat and a veil; which would have prevented
either of us from picking her out from the other women in the street."

"And what do you think happened next?"

"I think that she simply walked past us--probably on the other side of
the road--as we stood waiting for the omnibus, and turned up Kennington
Park Road. She probably guessed that we were waiting for the omnibus and
walked up the road in the direction in which it was going. Presently the
omnibus would pass her, and there were you in full view on top keeping a
vigilant look-out in the wrong direction. Then she would quicken her
pace a little and in a minute or two would arrive at the Kennington
Station of the South London Railway. In a minute or two more she would
be in one of the electric trains whirling along under the street on
which your omnibus was crawling. She would get out at the Borough
Station, or she might take a more risky chance and go on to the
Monument; but in any case she would wait for your omnibus, hail it and
get inside. I suppose you took up some passengers on the way?"

"Oh dear, yes. We were stopping every two or three minutes to take up or
set down passengers; and most of them were women."

"Very well; then we may take it that when you arrived at the Mansion
House, Mrs. Schallibaum was one of your inside passengers. It was a
rather quaint situation, I think."

"Yes, confound her! What a couple of noodles she must have thought us!"

"No doubt. And that is the one consoling feature in the case. She will
have taken us for a pair of absolute greenhorns. But to continue. Of
course she travelled in your omnibus to Kensington--you ought to have
gone inside on both occasions, so that you could see every one who
entered and examine the inside passengers; she will have followed you to
Endsley Gardens and probably noted the house you went to. Thence she
will have followed you to the restaurant and may even have lunched
there."

"It is quite possible," said I. "There were two rooms and they were
filled principally with women."

"Then she will have followed you to Sloane Street, and, as you persisted
in riding outside, she could easily take an inside place in your
omnibus. As to the theatre, she must have taken it as a veritable gift
of the gods; an arrangement made by you for her special convenience."

"Why?"

"My dear fellow! consider. She had only to follow you in and see you
safely into your seat and there you were, left till called for. She
could then go home, make up for her part; draw out a plan of action,
with the help, perhaps, of Mr. Weiss, provide herself with the necessary
means and appliances and, at the appointed time, call and collect you."

"That is assuming a good deal," I objected. "It is assuming, for
instance, that she lives within a moderate distance of Sloane Square.
Otherwise it would have been impossible."

"Exactly. That is why I assume it. You don't suppose that she goes about
habitually with lumps of prepared sugar in her pocket. And if not, then
she must have got that lump from somewhere. Then the beads suggest a
carefully prepared plan, and, as I said just now, she can hardly have
been made-up when she met us in Kennington Lane. From all of which it
seems likely that her present abode is not very far from Sloane Square."

"At any rate," said I, "it was taking a considerable risk. I might have
left the theatre before she came back."

"Yes," Thorndyke agreed. "But it is like a woman to take chances. A man
would probably have stuck to you when once he had got you off your
guard. But she was ready to take chances. She chanced the railway, and
it came off; she chanced your remaining in the theatre, and that came
off too. She calculated on the probability of your getting tea when you
came out, and she hit it off again. And then she took one chance too
many; she assumed that you probably took sugar in your tea, and she was
wrong."

"We are taking it for granted that the sugar was prepared," I remarked.

"Yes. Our explanation is entirely hypothetical and may be entirely
wrong. But it all hangs together, and if we find any poisonous matter in
the sugar, it will be reasonable to assume that we are right. The sugar
is the Experimentum Crucis. If you will hand it over to me, we will go
up to the laboratory and make a preliminary test or two."

I took the lump of sugar from my pocket and gave it to him, and he
carried it to the gas-burner, by the light of which he examined it with
a lens.

"I don't see any foreign crystals on the surface," said he; "but we had
better make a solution and go to work systematically. If it contains any
poison we may assume that it will be some alkaloid, though I will test
for arsenic too. But a man of Weiss's type would almost certainly use an
alkaloid, on account of its smaller bulk and more ready solubility. You
ought not to have carried this loose in your pocket. For legal purposes
that would seriously interfere with its value as evidence. Bodies that
are suspected of containing poison should be carefully isolated and
preserved from contact with anything that might lead to doubt in the
analysis. It doesn't matter much to us, as this analysis is only for our
own information and we can satisfy ourselves as to the state of your
pocket. But bear the rule in mind another time."

We now ascended to the laboratory, where Thorndyke proceeded at once to
dissolve the lump of sugar in a measured quantity of distilled water by
the aid of gentle heat.

"Before we add any acid," said he, "or introduce any fresh matter, we
will adopt the simple preliminary measure of tasting the solution. The
sugar is a disturbing factor, but some of the alkaloids and most
mineral poisons excepting arsenic have a very characteristic taste."

He dipped a glass rod in the warm solution and applied it gingerly to
his tongue.

"Ha!" he exclaimed, as he carefully wiped his mouth with his
handkerchief, "simple methods are often very valuable. There isn't much
doubt as to what is in that sugar. Let me recommend my learned brother
to try the flavour. But be careful. A little of this will go a long
way."

He took a fresh rod from the rack, and, dipping it in the solution,
handed it to me. I cautiously applied it to the tip of my tongue and was
immediately aware of a peculiar tingling sensation accompanied by a
feeling of numbness.

"Well," said Thorndyke; "what is it?"

"Aconite," I replied without hesitation.

"Yes," he agreed; "aconite it is, or more probably aconitine. And that,
I think, gives us all the information we want. We need not trouble now
to make a complete analysis, though I shall have a quantitative
examination made later. You note the intensity of the taste and you see
what the strength of the solution is. Evidently that lump of sugar
contained a very large dose of the poison. If the sugar had been
dissolved in your tea, the quantity that you drank would have contained
enough aconitine to lay you out within a few minutes; which would
account for Mrs. Schallibaum's anxiety to get clear of the premises. She
saw you drink from the cup, but I imagine she had not seen you turn the
sugar out."

"No, I should say not, to judge by her expression. She looked
terrified. She is not as hardened as her rascally companion."

"Which is fortunate for you, Jervis. If she had not been in such a
fluster, she would have waited until you had poured out your tea, which
was what she probably meant to do, or have dropped the sugar into the
milk-jug. In either case you would have got a poisonous dose before you
noticed anything amiss."

"They are a pretty pair, Thorndyke," I exclaimed. "A human life seems to
be no more to them than the life of a fly or a beetle."

"No; that is so. They are typical poisoners of the worst kind; of the
intelligent, cautious, resourceful kind. They are a standing menace to
society. As long as they are at large, human lives are in danger, and it
is our business to see that they do not remain at large a moment longer
than is unavoidable. And that brings us to another point. You had better
keep indoors for the next few days."

"Oh, nonsense," I protested. "I can take care of myself."

"I won't dispute that," said Thorndyke, "although I might. But the
matter is of vital importance and we can't be too careful. Yours is the
only evidence that could convict these people. They know that and will
stick at nothing to get rid of you--for by this time they will almost
certainly have ascertained that the tea-shop plan has failed. Now your
life is of some value to you and to another person whom I could mention;
but apart from that, you are the indispensable instrument for ridding
society of these dangerous vermin. Moreover, if you were seen abroad and
connected with these chambers, they would get the information that their
case was really being investigated in a businesslike manner. If Weiss
has not already left the country he would do so immediately, and if he
has, Mrs. Schallibaum would join him at once, and we might never be able
to lay hands on them. You must stay indoors, out of sight, and you had
better write to Miss Gibson and ask her to warn the servants to give no
information about you to anyone."

"And how long," I asked, "am I to be held on parole?"

"Not long, I think. We have a very promising start. If I have any luck,
I shall be able to collect all the evidence I want in about a week. But
there is an element of chance in some of it which prevents me from
giving a date. And it is just possible that I may have started on a
false track. But that I shall be able to tell you better in a day or
two."

"And I suppose," I said gloomily, "I shall be out of the hunt
altogether?"

"Not at all," he replied. "You have got the Blackmore case to attend to.
I shall hand you over all the documents and get you to make an orderly
digest of the evidence. You will then have all the facts and can work
out the case for yourself. Also I shall ask you to help Polton in some
little operations which are designed to throw light into dark places and
which you will find both entertaining and instructive."

"Supposing Mrs. Hornby should propose to call and take tea with us in
the gardens?" I suggested.

"And bring Miss Gibson with her?" Thorndyke added dryly. "No, Jervis, it
would never do. You must make that quite clear to her. It is more
probable than not that Mrs. Schallibaum made a careful note of the house
in Endsley Gardens, and as that would be the one place actually known to
her, she and Weiss--if he is in England--would almost certainly keep a
watch on it. If they should succeed in connecting that house with these
chambers, a few inquiries would show them the exact state of the case.
No; we must keep them in the dark if we possibly can. We have shown too
much of our hand already. It is hard on you, but it cannot be helped."

"Oh, don't think I am complaining," I exclaimed. "If it is a matter of
business, I am as keen as you are. I thought at first that you were
merely considering the safety of my vile body. When shall I start on my
job?"

"To-morrow morning. I shall give you my notes on the Blackmore case and
the copies of the will and the depositions, from which you had better
draw up a digest of the evidence with remarks as to the conclusions that
it suggests. Then there are our gleanings from New Inn to be looked over
and considered; and with regard to this case, we have the fragments of a
pair of spectacles which had better be put together into a rather more
intelligible form in case we have to produce them in evidence. That will
keep you occupied for a day or two, together with some work
appertaining to other cases. And now let us dismiss professional topics.
You have not dined and neither have I, but I dare say Polton has made
arrangements for some sort of meal. We will go down and see."

We descended to the lower floor, where Thorndyke's anticipations were
justified by a neatly laid table to which Polton was giving the
finishing touches.




Chapter XI

The Blackmore Case Reviewed


One of the conditions of medical practice is the capability of
transferring one's attention at a moment's notice from one set of
circumstances to another equally important but entirely unrelated. At
each visit on his round, the practitioner finds himself concerned with a
particular, self-contained group of phenomena which he must consider at
the moment with the utmost concentration, but which he must instantly
dismiss from his mind as he moves on to the next case. It is a difficult
habit to acquire; for an important, distressing or obscure case is apt
to take possession of the consciousness and hinder the exercise of
attention that succeeding cases demand; but experience shows the faculty
to be indispensable, and the practitioner learns in time to forget
everything but the patient with whose condition he is occupied at the
moment.

My first morning's work on the Blackmore case showed me that the same
faculty is demanded in legal practice; and it also showed me that I had
yet to acquire it. For, as I looked over the depositions and the copy of
the will, memories of the mysterious house in Kennington Lane
continually intruded into my reflections, and the figure of Mrs.
Schallibaum, white-faced, terrified, expectant, haunted me continually.

In truth, my interest in the Blackmore case was little more than
academic, whereas in the Kennington case I was one of the parties and
was personally concerned. To me, John Blackmore was but a name, Jeffrey
but a shadowy figure to which I could assign no definite personality,
and Stephen himself but a casual stranger. Mr. Graves, on the other
hand, was a real person. I had seen him amidst the tragic circumstances
that had probably heralded his death, and had brought away with me, not
only a lively recollection of him, but a feeling of profound pity and
concern as to his fate. The villain Weiss, too, and the terrible woman
who aided, abetted and, perhaps, even directed him, lived in my memory
as vivid and dreadful realities. Although I had uttered no hint to
Thorndyke, I lamented inwardly that I had not been given some work--if
there was any to do--connected with this case, in which I was so deeply
interested, rather than with the dry, purely legal and utterly
bewildering case of Jeffrey Blackmore's will.

Nevertheless, I stuck loyally to my task. I read through the depositions
and the will--without getting a single glimmer of fresh light on the
case--and I made a careful digest of all the facts. I compared my
digest with Thorndyke's notes--of which I also made a copy--and found
that, brief as they were, they contained several matters that I had
overlooked. I also drew up a brief account of our visit to New Inn, with
a list of the objects that we had observed or collected. And then I
addressed myself to the second part of my task, the statement of my
conclusions from the facts set forth.

It was only when I came to make the attempt that I realized how
completely I was at sea. In spite of Thorndyke's recommendation to study
Marchmont's statement as it was summarized in those notes which I had
copied, and of his hint that I should find in that statement something
highly significant, I was borne irresistibly to one conclusion, and one
only--and the wrong one at that, as I suspected: that Jeffrey
Blackmore's will was a perfectly regular, sound and valid document.

I tried to attack the validity of the will from various directions, and
failed every time. As to its genuineness, that was obviously not in
question. There seemed to me only two conceivable respects in which any
objection could be raised, viz. the competency of Jeffrey to execute a
will and the possibility of undue influence having been brought to bear
on him.

With reference to the first, there was the undoubted fact that Jeffrey
was addicted to the opium habit, and this might, under some
circumstances, interfere with a testator's competency to make a will.
But had any such circumstances existed in this case? Had the drug habit
produced such mental changes in the deceased as would destroy or weaken
his judgment? There was not a particle of evidence in favour of any such
belief. Up to the very end he had managed his own affairs, and, if his
habits of life had undergone a change, they were still the habits of a
perfectly sane and responsible man.

The question of undue influence was more difficult. If it applied to any
person in particular, that person could be none other than John
Blackmore. Now it was an undoubted fact that, of all Jeffrey's
acquaintance, his brother John was the only one who knew that he was in
residence at New Inn. Moreover John had visited him there more than
once. It was therefore possible that influence might have been brought
to bear on the deceased. But there was no evidence that it had. The fact
that the deceased man's only brother should be the one person who knew
where he was living was not a remarkable one, and it had been
satisfactorily explained by the necessity of Jeffrey's finding a
reference on applying for the chambers. And against the theory of undue
influence was the fact that the testator had voluntarily brought his
will to the lodge and executed it in the presence of entirely
disinterested witnesses.

In the end I had to give up the problem in despair, and, abandoning the
documents, turned my attention to the facts elicited by our visit to New
Inn.

What had we learned from our exploration? It was clear that Thorndyke
had picked up some facts that had appeared to him important. But
important in what respect? The only possible issue that could be raised
was the validity or otherwise of Jeffrey Blackmore's will; and since the
validity of that will was supported by positive evidence of the most
incontestable kind, it seemed that nothing that we had observed could
have any real bearing on the case at all.

But this, of course, could not be. Thorndyke was no dreamer nor was he
addicted to wild speculation. If the facts observed by us seemed to him
to be relevant to the case, I was prepared to assume that they were
relevant, although I could not see their connection with it. And, on
this assumption, I proceeded to examine them afresh.

Now, whatever Thorndyke might have observed on his own account, I had
brought away from the dead man's chambers only a single fact; and a very
extraordinary fact it was. The cuneiform inscription was upside down.
That was the sum of the evidence that I had collected; and the question
was, What did it prove? To Thorndyke it conveyed some deep significance.
What could that significance be?

The inverted position was not a mere temporary accident, as it might
have been if the frame had been stood on a shelf or support. It was hung
on the wall, and the plates screwed on the frame showed that its
position was permanent and that it had never hung in any other. That it
could have been hung up by Jeffrey himself was clearly inconceivable.
But allowing that it had been fixed in its present position by some
workman when the new tenant moved in, the fact remained that there it
had hung, presumably for months, and that Jeffrey Blackmore, with his
expert knowledge of the cuneiform character, had never noticed that it
was upside down; or, if he had noticed it, that he had never taken the
trouble to have it altered.

What could this mean? If he had noticed the error but had not troubled
to correct it, that would point to a very singular state of mind, an
inertness and indifference remarkable even in an opium-smoker. But
assuming such a state of mind, I could not see that it had any bearing
on the will, excepting that it was rather inconsistent with the tendency
to make fussy and needless alterations which the testator had actually
shown. On the other hand, if he had not noticed the inverted position of
the photograph he must have been nearly blind or quite idiotic; for the
photograph was over two feet long and the characters large enough to be
read easily by a person of ordinary eyesight at a distance of forty or
fifty feet. Now he obviously was not in a state of dementia, whereas his
eyesight was admittedly bad; and it seemed to me that the only
conclusion deducible from the photograph was that it furnished a measure
of the badness of the deceased man's vision--that it proved him to have
been verging on total blindness.

But there was nothing startling new in this. He had, himself, declared
that he was fast losing his sight. And again, what was the bearing of
his partial blindness on the will? A totally blind man cannot draw up
his will at all. But if he has eyesight sufficient to enable him to
write out and sign a will, mere defective vision will not lead him to
muddle the provisions. Yet something of this kind seemed to be in
Thorndyke's mind, for now I recalled the question that he had put to the
porter: "When you read the will over in Mr. Blackmore's presence, did
you read it aloud?" That question could have but one significance. It
implied a doubt as to whether the testator was fully aware of the exact
nature of the document that he was signing. Yet, if he was able to write
and sign it, surely he was able also to read it through, to say nothing
of the fact that, unless he was demented, he must have remembered what
he had written.

Thus, once more, my reasoning only led me into a blind alley at the end
of which was the will, regular and valid and fulfilling all the
requirements that the law imposed. Once again I had to confess myself
beaten and in full agreement with Mr. Marchmont that "there was no
case"; that "there was nothing in dispute." Nevertheless, I carefully
fixed in the pocket file that Thorndyke had given me the copy that I had
made of his notes, together with the notes on our visit to New Inn, and
the few and unsatisfactory conclusions at which I had arrived; and this
brought me to the end of my first morning in my new capacity.

"And how," Thorndyke asked as we sat at lunch, "has my learned friend
progressed? Does he propose that we advise Mr. Marchmont to enter a
caveat?"

"I've read all the documents and boiled all the evidence down to a stiff
jelly; and I am in a worse fog than ever."

"There seems to be a slight mixture of metaphors in my learned friend's
remarks. But never mind the fog, Jervis. There is a certain virtue in
fog. It serves, like a picture frame, to surround the essential with a
neutral zone that separates it from the irrelevant."

"That is a very profound observation, Thorndyke," I remarked ironically.

"I was just thinking so myself," he rejoined.

"And if you could contrive to explain what it means--"

"Oh, but that is unreasonable. When one throws off a subtly philosophic
obiter dictum one looks to the discerning critic to supply the meaning.
By the way, I am going to introduce you to the gentle art of photography
this afternoon. I am getting the loan of all the cheques that were drawn
by Jeffrey Blackmore during his residence at New Inn--there are only
twenty-three of them, all told--and I am going to photograph them."

"I shouldn't have thought the bank people would have let them go out of
their possession."

"They are not going to. One of the partners, a Mr. Britton, is bringing
them here himself and will be present while the photographs are being
taken; so they will not go out of his custody. But, all the same, it is
a great concession, and I should not have obtained it but for the fact
that I have done a good deal of work for the bank and that Mr. Britton
is more or less a personal friend."

"By the way, how comes it that the cheques are at the bank? Why were
they not returned to Jeffrey with the pass-book in the usual way?"

"I understand from Britton," replied Thorndyke, "that all Jeffrey's
cheques were retained by the bank at his request. When he was travelling
he used to leave his investment securities and other valuable documents
in his bankers' custody, and, as he has never applied to have them
returned, the bankers still have them and are retaining them until the
will is proved, when they will, of course, hand over everything to the
executors."

"What is the object of photographing these cheques?" I asked.

"There are several objects. First, since a good photograph is
practically as good as the original, when we have the photographs we
practically have the cheques for reference. Then, since a photograph can
be duplicated indefinitely, it is possible to perform experiments on it
which involve its destruction; which would, of course, be impossible in
the case of original cheques."

"But the ultimate object, I mean. What are you going to prove?"

"You are incorrigible, Jervis," he exclaimed. "How should I know what I
am going to prove? This is an investigation. If I knew the result
beforehand, I shouldn't want to perform the experiment."

He looked at his watch, and, as we rose from the table, he said:

"If we have finished, we had better go up to the laboratory and see that
the apparatus is ready. Mr. Britton is a busy man, and, as he is doing
us a great service, we mustn't keep him waiting when he comes."

We ascended to the laboratory, where Polton was already busy inspecting
the massively built copying camera which--with the long, steel guides on
which the easel or copy-holder travelled--took up the whole length of
the room on the side opposite to that occupied by the chemical bench. As
I was to be inducted into the photographic art, I looked at it with more
attention than I had ever done before.

"We've made some improvements since you were here last, sir," said
Polton, who was delicately lubricating the steel guides. "We've fitted
these steel runners instead of the blackleaded wooden ones that we used
to have. And we've made two scales instead of one. Hallo! That's the
downstairs bell. Shall I go sir?"

"Perhaps you'd better," said Thorndyke. "It may not be Mr. Britton, and
I don't want to be caught and delayed just now."

However, it was Mr. Britton; a breezy alert-looking middle-aged man, who
came in escorted by Polton and shook our hands cordially, having been
previously warned of my presence. He carried a small but solid hand-bag,
to which he clung tenaciously up to the very moment when its contents
were required for use.

"So that is the camera," said he, running an inquisitive eye over the
instrument. "Very fine one, too; I am a bit of a photographer myself.
What is that graduation on the side-bar?"

"Those are the scales," replied Thorndyke, "that shows the degree of
magnification or reduction. The pointer is fixed to the easel and
travels with it, of course, showing the exact size of the photograph.
When the pointer is opposite 0 the photograph will be identical in size
with the object photographed; when it points to, say, × 6, the
photograph will be six times as long as the object, or magnified
thirty-six times superficially, whereas if the pointer is at ÷ 6, the
photograph will be a sixth of the length of the object, or one
thirty-sixth superficial."

"Why are there two scales?" Mr. Britton asked.

"There is a separate scale for each of the two lenses that we
principally use. For great magnification or reduction a lens of
comparatively short focus must be used, but, as a long-focus lens gives
a more perfect image, we use one of very long focus--thirty-six
inches--for copying the same size or for slight magnification or
reduction."

"Are you going to magnify these cheques?" Mr. Britton asked.

"Not in the first place," replied Thorndyke. "For convenience and speed
I am going to photograph them half-size, so that six cheques will go on
one whole plate. Afterwards we can enlarge from the negatives as much as
we like. But we should probably enlarge only the signatures in any
case."

The precious bag was now opened and the twenty-three cheques brought out
and laid on the bench in a consecutive series in the order of their
dates. They were then fixed by tapes--to avoid making pin-holes in
them--in batches of six to small drawing boards, each batch being so
arranged that the signatures were towards the middle. The first board
was clamped to the easel, the latter was slid along its guides until
the pointer stood at ÷ 2 on the long-focus scale and Thorndyke proceeded
to focus the camera with the aid of a little microscope that Polton had
made for the purpose. When Mr. Britton and I had inspected the
exquisitely sharp image on the focusing-screen through the microscope,
Polton introduced the plate and made the first exposure, carrying the
dark-slide off to develop the plate while the next batch of cheques was
being fixed in position.

In his photographic technique, as in everything else, Polton followed as
closely as he could the methods of his principal and instructor; methods
characterized by that unhurried precision that leads to perfect
accomplishment. When the first negative was brought forth, dripping,
from the dark-room, it was without spot or stain, scratch or pin-hole;
uniform in colour and of exactly the required density. The six cheques
shown on it--ridiculously small in appearance, though only reduced to
half-length--looked as clear and sharp as fine etchings; though, to be
sure, my opportunity for examining them was rather limited, for Polton
was uncommonly careful to keep the wet plate out of reach and so safe
from injury.

"Well," said Mr. Britton, when, at the end of the séance, he returned
his treasures to the bag, "you have now got twenty-three of our cheques,
to all intents and purposes. I hope you are not going to make any
unlawful use of them--must tell our cashiers to keep a bright look-out;
and"--here he lowered his voice impressively and addressed himself to
me and Polton--"you understand that this is a private matter between Dr.
Thorndyke and me. Of course, as Mr. Blackmore is dead, there is no
reason why his cheques should not be photographed for legal purposes;
but we don't want it talked about; nor, I think, does Dr. Thorndyke."

"Certainly not," Thorndyke agreed emphatically; "but you need not be
uneasy, Mr. Britton. We are very uncommunicative people in this
establishment."

As my colleague and I escorted our visitor down the stairs, he returned
to the subject of the cheques.

"I don't understand what you want them for," he remarked. "There is no
question turning on signatures in the case of Blackmore deceased, is
there?"

"I should say not," Thorndyke replied rather evasively.

"I should say very decidedly not," said Mr. Britton, "if I understood
Marchmont aright. And, even if there were, let me tell you, these
signatures that you have got wouldn't help you. I have looked them over
very closely--and I have seen a few signatures in my time, you know.
Marchmont asked me to glance over them as a matter of form, but I don't
believe in matters of form; I examined them very carefully. There is an
appreciable amount of variation; a very appreciable amount. <i>But</i> under
the variation one can trace the personal character (which is what
matters); the subtle, indescribable quality that makes it recognizable
to the expert eye as Jeffrey Blackmore's writing. You understand me.
There is such a quality, which remains when the coarser characteristics
vary; just as a man may grow old, or fat, or bald, or may take to drink,
and become quite changed; and yet, through it all, he preserves a
certain something which makes him recognizable as a member of a
particular family. Well, I find that quality in all those signatures,
and so will you, if you have had enough experience of handwriting. I
thought it best to mention it in case you might be giving yourself
unnecessary trouble."

"It is very good of you," said Thorndyke, "and I need not say that the
information is of great value, coming from such a highly expert source.
As a matter of fact, your hint will be of great value to me."

He shook hands with Mr. Britton, and, as the latter disappeared down the
stairs, he turned into the sitting-room and remarked:

"There is a very weighty and significant observation, Jervis. I advise
you to consider it attentively in all its bearings."

"You mean the fact that these signatures are undoubtedly genuine?"

"I meant, rather, the very interesting general truth that is contained
in Britton's statement; that physiognomy is not a mere matter of facial
character. A man carries his personal trademark, not in his face only,
but in his nervous system and muscles--giving rise to characteristic
movements and gait; in his larynx--producing an individual voice; and
even in his mouth, as shown by individual peculiarities of speech and
accent. And the individual nervous system, by means of these
characteristic movements, transfers its peculiarities to inanimate
objects that are the products of such movements; as we see in pictures,
in carving, in musical execution and in handwriting. No one has ever
painted quite like Reynolds or Romney; no one has ever played exactly
like Liszt or Paganini; the pictures or the sounds produced by them,
were, so to speak, an extension of the physiognomy of the artist. And so
with handwriting. A particular specimen is the product of a particular
set of motor centres in an individual brain."

"These are very interesting considerations, Thorndyke," I remarked; "but
I don't quite see their present application. Do you mean them to bear in
any special way on the Blackmore case?"

"I think they do bear on it very directly. I thought so while Mr.
Britton was making his very illuminating remarks."

"I don't see how. In fact I cannot see why you are going into the
question of the signatures at all. The signature on the will is
admittedly genuine, and that seems to me to dispose of the whole
affair."

"My dear Jervis," said he, "you and Marchmont are allowing yourselves to
be obsessed by a particular fact--a very striking and weighty fact, I
will admit, but still, only an isolated fact. Jeffrey Blackmore executed
his will in a regular manner, complying with all the necessary
formalities and conditions. In the face of that single circumstance you
and Marchmont would 'chuck up the sponge,' as the old pugilists
expressed it. Now that is a great mistake. You should never allow
yourself to be bullied and browbeaten by a single fact."

"But, my dear Thorndyke!" I protested, "this fact seems to be final. It
covers all possibilities---unless you can suggest any other that would
cancel it."

"I could suggest a dozen," he replied. "Let us take an instance.
Supposing Jeffrey executed this will for a wager; that he immediately
revoked it and made a fresh will, that he placed the latter in the
custody of some person and that that person has suppressed it."

"Surely you do not make this suggestion seriously!" I exclaimed.

"Certainly I do not," he replied with a smile. "I merely give it as an
instance to show that your final and absolute fact is really only
conditional on there being no other fact that cancels it."

"Do you think he might have made a third will?"

"It is obviously possible. A man who makes two wills may make three or
more; but I may say that I see no present reason for assuming the
existence of another will. What I want to impress on you is the
necessity of considering all the facts instead of bumping heavily
against the most conspicuous one and forgetting all the rest. By the
way, here is a little problem for you. What was the object of which
these are the parts?"

He pushed across the table a little cardboard box, having first removed
the lid. In it were a number of very small pieces of broken glass, some
of which had been cemented together by their edges.

"These, I suppose," said I, looking with considerable curiosity at the
little collection, "are the pieces of glass that we picked up in poor
Blackmore's bedroom?"

"Yes. You see that Polton has been endeavouring to reconstitute the
object, whatever it was; but he has not been very successful, for the
fragments were too small and irregular and the collection too
incomplete. However, here is a specimen, built up of six small pieces,
which exhibits the general character of the object fairly well."

He picked out the little irregularly shaped object and handed it to me;
and I could not but admire the neatness with which Polton had joined the
tiny fragments together.

I took the little "restoration," and, holding it up before my eyes,
moved it to and fro as I looked through it at the window.

"It was not a lens," I pronounced eventually.

"No," Thorndyke agreed, "it was not a lens."

"And so cannot have been a spectacle-glass. But the surface was
curved--one side convex and the other concave--and the little piece that
remains of the original edge seems to have been ground to fit a bezel or
frame. I should say that these are portions of a watch-glass."

"That is Polton's opinion," said Thorndyke, "and I think you are both
wrong."

"What do you say to the glass of a miniature or locket?"

"That is rather more probable, but it is not my view."

"What do you think it is?" I asked. But Thorndyke was not to be drawn.

"I am submitting the problem for solution by my learned friend," he
replied with an exasperating smile, and then added: "I don't say that
you and Polton are wrong; only that I don't agree with you. Perhaps you
had better make a note of the properties of this object, and consider it
at your leisure when you are ruminating on the other data referring to
the Blackmore case."

"My ruminations," I said, "always lead me back to the same point."

"But you mustn't let them," he replied. "Shuffle your data about. Invent
hypotheses. Never mind if they seem rather wild. Don't put them aside on
that account. Take the first hypothesis that you can invent and test it
thoroughly with your facts. You will probably have to reject it, but you
will be certain to have learned something new. Then try again with a
fresh one. You remember what I told you of my methods when I began this
branch of practice and had plenty of time on my hands?"

"I am not sure that I do."

"Well, I used to occupy my leisure in constructing imaginary cases,
mostly criminal, for the purpose of study and for the acquirement of
experience. For instance, I would devise an ingenious fraud and would
plan it in detail, taking every precaution that I could think of against
failure or detection, considering, and elaborately providing for, every
imaginable contingency. For the time being, my entire attention was
concentrated on it, making it as perfect and secure and undetectable as
I could with the knowledge and ingenuity at my command. I behaved
exactly as if I were proposing actually to carry it out, and my life or
liberty depended on its success--excepting that I made full notes of
every detail of the scheme. Then when my plans were as complete as I
could make them, and I could think of no way in which to improve them, I
changed sides and considered the case from the standpoint of detection.
I analysed the case, I picked out its inherent and unavoidable
weaknesses, and, especially, I noted the respects in which a fraudulent
proceeding of a particular kind differed from the <i>bona fide</i> proceeding
that it simulated. The exercise was invaluable to me. I acquired as much
experience from those imaginary cases as I should from real ones, and in
addition, I learned a method which is the one that I practise to this
day."

"Do you mean that you still invent imaginary cases as mental exercises?"

"No; I mean that, when I have a problem of any intricacy, I invent a
case which fits the facts and the assumed motives of one of the parties.
Then I work at that case until I find whether it leads to elucidation or
to some fundamental disagreement. In the latter case I reject it and
begin the process over again."

"Doesn't that method sometimes involve a good deal of wasted time and
energy?" I asked.

"No; because each time that you fail to establish a given case, you
exclude a particular explanation of the facts and narrow down the field
of inquiry. By repeating the process, you are bound, in the end, to
arrive at an imaginary case which fits all the facts. Then your
imaginary case is the real case and the problem is solved. Let me
recommend you to give the method a trial."

I promised to do so, though with no very lively expectations as to the
result, and with this, the subject was allowed, for the present, to
drop.




Chapter XII

The Portrait


The state of mind which Thorndyke had advised me to cultivate was one
that did not come easily. However much I endeavoured to shuffle the
facts of the Blackmore case, there was one which inevitably turned up on
the top of the pack. The circumstances surrounding the execution of
Jeffrey Blackmore's will intruded into all my cogitations on the subject
with hopeless persistency. That scene in the porter's lodge was to me
what King Charles's head was to poor Mr. Dick. In the midst of my
praiseworthy efforts to construct some intelligible scheme of the case,
it would make its appearance and reduce my mind to instant chaos.

For the next few days, Thorndyke was very much occupied with one or two
civil cases, which kept him in court during the whole of the sitting;
and when he came home, he seemed indisposed to talk on professional
topics. Meanwhile, Polton worked steadily at the photographs of the
signatures, and, with a view to gaining experience, I assisted him and
watched his methods.

In the present case, the signatures were enlarged from their original
dimensions--rather less than an inch and a half in length--to a length
of four and a half inches; which rendered all the little peculiarities
of the handwriting surprisingly distinct and conspicuous. Each signature
was eventually mounted on a slip of card bearing a number and the date
of the cheque from which it was taken, so that it was possible to place
any two signatures together for comparison. I looked over the whole
series and very carefully compared those which showed any differences,
but without discovering anything more than might have been expected in
view of Mr. Britton's statement. There were some trifling variations,
but they were all very much alike, and no one could doubt, on looking at
them, that they were all written by the same hand.

As this, however, was apparently not in dispute, it furnished no new
information. Thorndyke's object--for I felt certain that he had
something definite in his mind--must be to test something apart from the
genuineness of the signatures. But what could that something be? I dared
not ask him, for questions of that kind were anathema, so there was
nothing for it but to lie low and see what he would do with the
photographs.

The whole series was finished on the fourth morning after my adventure
at Sloane Square, and the pack of cards was duly delivered by Polton
when he brought in the breakfast tray. Thorndyke took up the pack
somewhat with the air of a whist player, and, as he ran through them, I
noticed that the number had increased from twenty-three to twenty-four.

"The additional one," Thorndyke explained, "is the signature to the
first will, which was in Marchmont's possession. I have added it to the
collection as it carries us back to an earlier date. The signature of
the second will presumably resembles those of the cheques drawn about
the same date. But that is not material, or, if it should become so, we
could claim to examine the second will."

He laid the cards out on the table in the order of their dates and
slowly ran his eye down the series. I watched him closely and ventured
presently to ask:

"Do you agree with Mr. Britton as to the general identity of character
in the whole set of signatures?"

"Yes," he replied. "I should certainly have put them down as being all
the signatures of one person. The variations are very slight. The later
signatures are a little stiffer, a little more shaky and indistinct, and
the B's and k's are both appreciably different from those in the earlier
ones. But there is another fact which emerges when the whole series is
seen together, and it is so striking and significant a fact, that I am
astonished at its not having been remarked on by Mr. Britton."

"Indeed!" said I, stooping to examine the photographs with fresh
interest; "what is that?"

"It is a very simple fact and very obvious, but yet, as I have said,
very significant. Look carefully at number one, which is the signature
of the first will, dated three years ago, and compare it with number
three, dated the eighteenth of September last year."

"They look to me identical," said I, after a careful comparison.

"So they do to me," said Thorndyke. "Neither of them shows the change
that occurred later. But if you look at number two, dated the sixteenth
of September, you will see that it is in the later style. So is number
four, dated the twenty-third of September; but numbers five and six,
both at the beginning of October, are in the earlier style, like the
signature of the will. Thereafter all the signatures are in the new
style; but, if you compare number two, dated the sixteenth of September
with number twenty-four, dated the fourteenth of March of this year--the
day of Jeffrey's death--you see that they exhibit no difference. Both
are in the 'later style,' but the last shows no greater change than the
first. Don't you consider these facts very striking and significant?"

I reflected a few moments, trying to make out the deep significance to
which Thorndyke was directing my attention--and not succeeding very
triumphantly.

"You mean," I said, "that the occasional reversions to the earlier form
convey some material suggestion?"

"Yes; but more than that. What we learn from an inspection of this
series is this: that there was a change in the character of the
signature; a very slight change, but quite recognizable. Now that change
was not gradual or insidious nor was it progressive. It occurred at a
certain definite time. At first there were one or two reversions to the
earlier form, but after number six the new style continued to the end;
and you notice that it continued without any increase in the change and
without any variation. There are no intermediate forms. Some of the
signatures are in the 'old style' and some in the 'new,' but there are
none that are half and half. So that, to repeat: We have here two types
of signature, very much alike, but distinguishable. They alternate, but
do not merge into one another to produce intermediate forms. The change
occurs abruptly, but shows no tendency to increase as time goes on; it
is not a progressive change. What do you make of that, Jervis?"

"It is very remarkable," I said, poring over the cards to verify
Thorndyke's statements. "I don't quite know what to make of it. If the
circumstances admitted of the idea of forgery, one would suspect the
genuineness of some of the signatures. But they don't--at any rate, in
the case of the later will, to say nothing of Mr. Britton's opinion on
the signatures."

"Still," said Thorndyke, "there must be some explanation of the change
in the character of the signatures, and that explanation cannot be the
failing eyesight of the writer; for that is a gradually progressive and
continuous condition, whereas the change in the writing is abrupt and
intermittent."

I considered Thorndyke's remark for a few moments; and then a
light--though not a very brilliant one--seemed to break on me.

"I think I see what you are driving at," said I. "You mean that the
change in the writing must be associated with some new condition
affecting the writer, and that that condition existed intermittently?"

Thorndyke nodded approvingly, and I continued:

"The only intermittent condition that we know of is the effect of opium.
So that we might consider the clearer signatures to have been made when
Jeffrey was in his normal state, and the less distinct ones after a bout
of opium-smoking."

"That is perfectly sound reasoning," said Thorndyke. "What further
conclusion does it lead to?"

"It suggests that the opium habit had been only recently acquired, since
the change was noticed only about the time he went to live at New Inn;
and, since the change in the writing is at first intermittent and then
continuous, we may infer that the opium-smoking was at first occasional
and later became a a confirmed habit."

"Quite a reasonable conclusion and very clearly stated," said Thorndyke.
"I don't say that I entirely agree with you, or that you have exhausted
the information that these signatures offer. But you have started in the
right direction."

"I may be on the right road," I said gloomily; "but I am stuck fast in
one place and I see no chance of getting any farther."

"But you have a quantity of data," said Thorndyke. "You have all the
facts that I had to start with, from which I constructed the hypothesis
that I am now busily engaged in verifying. I have a few more data now,
for 'as money makes money' so knowledge begets knowledge, and I put my
original capital out to interest. Shall we tabulate the facts that are
in our joint possession and see what they suggest?"

I grasped eagerly at the offer, though I had conned over my notes again
and again.

Thorndyke produced a slip of paper from a drawer, and, uncapping his
fountain-pen, proceeded to write down the leading facts, reading each
aloud as soon as it was written.

"1. The second will was unnecessary since it contained no new matter,
expressed no new intentions and met no new conditions, and the first
will was quite clear and efficient.

"2. The evident intention of the testator was to leave the bulk of his
property to Stephen Blackmore.

"3. The second will did not, under existing circumstances, give effect
to this intention, whereas the first will did.

"4. The signature of the second will differs slightly from that of the
first, and also from what had hitherto been the testator's ordinary
signature.

"And now we come to a very curious group of dates, which I will advise
you to consider with great attention.

"5. Mrs. Wilson made her will at the beginning of September last year,
without acquainting Jeffrey Blackmore, who seems to have been unaware of
the existence of this will.

"6. His own second will was dated the twelfth of November of last year.

"7. Mrs. Wilson died of cancer on the twelfth of March this present
year.

"8. Jeffrey Blackmore was last seen alive on the fourteenth of March.

"9. His body was discovered on the fifteenth of March.

"10. The change in the character of his signature began about September
last year and became permanent after the middle of October.

"You will find that collection of facts repay careful study, Jervis,
especially when considered in relation to the further data:

"11. That we found in Blackmore's chambers a framed inscription of large
size, hung upside down, together with what appeared to be the remains of
a watch-glass and a box of stearine candles and some other objects."

He passed the paper to me and I pored over it intently, focusing my
attention on the various items with all the power of my will. But,
struggle as I would, no general conclusion could be made to emerge from
the mass of apparently disconnected facts.

"Well?" Thorndyke said presently, after watching with grave interest my
unavailing efforts; "what do you make of it?"

"Nothing!" I exclaimed desperately, slapping the paper down on the
table. "Of course, I can see that there are some queer coincidences. But
how do they bear on the case? I understand that you want to upset this
will; which we know to have been signed without compulsion or even
suggestion in the presence of two respectable men, who have sworn to the
identity of the document. That is your object, I believe?"

"Certainly it is."

"Then I am hanged if I see how you are going to do it. Not, I should
say, by offering a group of vague coincidences that would muddle any
brain but your own."

Thorndyke chuckled softly but pursued the subject no farther.

"Put that paper in your file with your other notes," he said, "and think
it over at your leisure. And now I want a little help from you. Have you
a good memory for faces?"

"Fairly good, I think. Why?"

"Because I have a photograph of a man whom I think you may have met.
Just look at it and tell me if you remember the face."

He drew a cabinet size photograph from an envelope that had come by the
morning's post and handed it to me.

"I have certainly seen this face somewhere," said I, taking the portrait
over to the window to examine it more thoroughly, "but I can't, at the
moment, remember where."

"Try," said Thorndyke. "If you have seen the face before, you should be
able to recall the person."

I looked intently at the photograph, and the more I looked, the more
familiar did the face appear. Suddenly the identity of the man flashed
into my mind and I exclaimed in astonishment:

"It can't be that poor creature at Kennington, Mr. Graves?"

"I think it can," replied Thorndyke, "and I think it is. But could you
swear to the identity in a court of law?"

"It is my firm conviction that the photograph is that of Mr. Graves. I
would swear to that."

"No man ought to swear to more," said Thorndyke. "Identification is
always a matter of opinion or belief. The man who will swear
unconditionally to identity from memory only is a man whose evidence
should be discredited. I think your sworn testimony would be
sufficient."

It is needless to say that the production of this photograph filled me
with amazement and curiosity as to how Thorndyke had obtained it. But,
as he replaced it impassively in its envelope without volunteering any
explanation, I felt that I could not question him directly.
Nevertheless, I ventured to approach the subject in an indirect manner.

"Did you get any information from those Darmstadt people?" I asked.

"Schnitzler? Yes. I learned, through the medium of an official
acquaintance, that Dr. H. Weiss was a stranger to them; that they knew
nothing about him excepting that he had ordered from them, and been
supplied with, a hundred grammes of pure hydrochlorate of morphine."

"All at once?"

"No. In separate parcels of twenty-five grammes each."

"Is that all you know about Weiss?"

"It is all that I actually know; but it is not all that I suspect--on
very substantial grounds. By the way, what did you think of the
coachman?"

"I don't know that I thought very much about him. Why?"

"You never suspected that he and Weiss were one and the same person?"

"No. How could they be? They weren't in the least alike. And one was a
Scotchman and the other a German. But perhaps you know that they were
the same?"

"I only know what you have told me. But considering that you never saw
them together, that the coachman was never available for messages or
assistance when Weiss was with you; that Weiss always made his
appearance some time after you arrived, and disappeared some time before
you left; it has seemed to me that they might have been the same
person."

"I should say it was impossible. They were so very different in
appearance. But supposing that they were the same; would the fact be of
any importance?"

"It would mean that we could save ourselves the trouble of looking for
the coachman. And it would suggest some inferences, which will occur to
you if you think the matter over. But being only a speculative opinion,
at present, it would not be safe to infer very much from it."

"You have rather taken me by surprise," I remarked. "It seems that you
have been working at this Kennington case, and working pretty actively I
imagine, whereas I supposed that your entire attention was taken up by
the Blackmore affair."

"It doesn't do," he replied, "to allow one's entire attention to be
taken up by any one case. I have half a dozen others--minor cases,
mostly--to which I am attending at this moment. Did you think I was
proposing to keep you under lock and key indefinitely?"

"Well, no. But I thought the Kennington case would have to wait its
turn. And I had no idea that you were in possession of enough facts to
enable you to get any farther with it."

"But you knew all the very striking facts of the case, and you saw the
further evidence that we extracted from the empty house."

"Do you mean those things that we picked out from the rubbish under the
grate?"

"Yes. You saw those curious little pieces of reed and the pair of
spectacles. They are lying in the top drawer of that cabinet at this
moment, and I should recommend you to have another look at them. To me
they are most instructive. The pieces of reed offered an extremely
valuable suggestion, and the spectacles enabled me to test that
suggestion and turn it into actual information."

"Unfortunately," said I, "the pieces of reed convey nothing to me. I
don't know what they are or of what they have formed a part."

"I think," he replied, "that if you examine them with due consideration,
you will find their use pretty obvious. Have a good look at them and the
spectacles too. Think over all that you know of that mysterious group of
people who lived in that house, and see if you cannot form some coherent
theory of their actions. Think, also, if we have not some information in
our possession by which we might be able to identify some of them, and
infer the identity of the others. You will have a quiet day, as I shall
not be home until the evening; set yourself this task. I assure you that
you have the material for identifying--or rather for testing the
identity of--at least one of those persons. Go over your material
systematically, and let me know in the evening what further
investigations you would propose."

"Very well," said I. "It shall be done according to your word. I will
addle my brain afresh with the affair of Mr. Weiss and his patient, and
let the Blackmore case rip."

"There is no need to do that. You have a whole day before you. An hour's
really close consideration of the Kennington case ought to show you what
your next move should be, and then you could devote yourself to the
consideration of Jeffrey Blackmore's will."

With this final piece of advice, Thorndyke collected the papers for his
day's work, and, having deposited them in his brief bag, took his
departure, leaving me to my meditations.




Chapter XIII

The Statement of Samuel Wilkins


As soon as I was alone, I commenced my investigations with a rather
desperate hope of eliciting some startling and unsuspected facts. I
opened the drawer and taking from it the two pieces of reed and the
shattered remains of the spectacles, laid them on the table. The repairs
that Thorndyke had contemplated in the case of the spectacles, had not
been made. Apparently they had not been necessary. The battered wreck
that lay before me, just as we had found it, had evidently furnished the
necessary information; for, since Thorndyke was in possession of a
portrait of Mr. Graves, it was clear that he had succeeded in
identifying him so far as to get into communication with some one who
had known him intimately.

The circumstance should have been encouraging. But somehow it was not.
What was possible to Thorndyke was, theoretically, possible to me--or to
anyone else. But the possibility did not realize itself in practice.
There was the personal equation. Thorndyke's brain was not an ordinary
brain. Facts of which his mind instantly perceived the relation remained
to other people unconnected and without meaning. His powers of
observation and rapid inference were almost incredible, as I had noticed
again and again, and always with undiminished wonder. He seemed to take
in everything at a single glance and in an instant to appreciate the
meaning of everything that he had seen.

Here was a case in point. I had myself seen all that he had seen, and,
indeed, much more; for I had looked on the very people and witnessed
their actions, whereas he had never set eyes on any of them. I had
examined the little handful of rubbish that he had gathered up so
carefully, and would have flung it back under the grate without a qualm.
Not a glimmer of light had I perceived in the cloud of mystery, nor even
a hint of the direction in which to seek enlightenment. And yet
Thorndyke had, in some incomprehensible manner, contrived to piece
together facts that I had probably not even observed, and that so
completely that he had already, in these few days, narrowed down the
field of inquiry to quite a small area.

From these reflections I returned to the objects on the table. The
spectacles, as things of which I had some expert knowledge, were not so
profound a mystery to me. A pair of spectacles might easily afford good
evidence for identification; that I perceived clearly enough. Not a
ready-made pair, picked up casually at a shop, but a pair constructed by
a skilled optician to remedy a particular defect of vision and to fit a
particular face. And such were the spectacles before me. The build of
the frames was peculiar; the existence of a cylindrical lens--which I
could easily make out from the remaining fragments--showed that one
glass had been cut to a prescribed shape and almost certainly ground to
a particular formula, and also that the distance between centres must
have been carefully secured. Hence these spectacles had an individual
character. But it was manifestly impossible to inquire of all the
spectacle-makers in Europe--for the glasses were not necessarily made in
England. As confirmation the spectacles might be valuable; as a
starting-point they were of no use at all.

From the spectacles I turned to the pieces of reed. These were what had
given Thorndyke his start. Would they give me a leading hint too? I
looked at them and wondered what it was that they had told Thorndyke.
The little fragment of the red paper label had a dark-brown or thin
black border ornamented with a fret-pattern, and on it I detected a
couple of tiny points of gold like the dust from leaf-gilding. But I
learned nothing from that. Then the shorter piece of reed was
artificially hollowed to fit on the longer piece. Apparently it formed a
protective sheath or cap. But what did it protect? Presumably a point or
edge of some kind. Could this be a pocket-knife of any sort, such as a
small stencil-knife? No; the material was too fragile for a
knife-handle. It could not be an etching-needle for the same reason; and
it was not a surgical appliance--at least it was not like any surgical
instrument that was known to me.

I turned it over and over and cudgelled my brains; and then I had a
brilliant idea. Was it a reed pen of which the point had been broken
off? I knew that reed pens were still in use by draughtsmen of
decorative leanings with an affection for the "fat line." Could any of
our friends be draughtsmen? This seemed the most probable solution of
the difficulty, and the more I thought about it the more likely it
seemed. Draughtsmen usually sign their work intelligibly, and even when
they use a device instead of a signature their identity is easily
traceable. Could it be that Mr. Graves, for instance, was an
illustrator, and that Thorndyke had established his identity by looking
through the works of all the well-known thick-line draughtsmen?

This problem occupied me for the rest of the day. My explanation did not
seem quite to fit Thorndyke's description of his methods; but I could
think of no other. I turned it over during my solitary lunch; I
meditated on it with the aid of several pipes in the afternoon; and
having refreshed my brain with a cup of tea, I went forth to walk in the
Temple gardens--which I was permitted to do without breaking my
parole--to think it out afresh.

The result was disappointing. I was basing my reasoning on the
assumption that the pieces of reed were parts of a particular appliance,
appertaining to a particular craft; whereas they might be the remains of
something quite different, appertaining to a totally different craft or
to no craft at all. And in no case did they point to any known
individual or indicate any but the vaguest kind of search. After pacing
the pleasant walks for upwards of two hours, I at length turned back
towards our chambers, where I arrived as the lamp-lighter was just
finishing his round.

My fruitless speculations had left me somewhat irritable. The lighted
windows that I had noticed as I approached had given me the impression
that Thorndyke had returned. I had intended to press him for a little
further information. When, therefore, I let myself into our chambers and
found, instead of my colleague, a total stranger--and only a back view
at that--I was disappointed and annoyed.

The stranger was seated by the table, reading a large document that
looked like a lease. He made no movement when I entered, but when I
crossed the room and wished him "Good evening," he half rose and bowed
silently. It was then that I first saw his face, and a mighty start he
gave me. For one moment I actually thought he was Mr. Weiss, so close
was the resemblance, but immediately I perceived that he was a much
smaller man.

I sat down nearly opposite and stole an occasional furtive glance at
him. The resemblance to Weiss was really remarkable. The same flaxen
hair, the same ragged beard and a similar red nose, with the patches of
<i>acne rosacea</i> spreading to the adjacent cheeks. He wore spectacles,
too, through which he took a quick glance at me now and again, returning
immediately to his document.

After some moments of rather embarrassing silence, I ventured to remark
that it was a mild evening; to which he assented with a sort of Scotch
"Hm--hm" and nodded slowly. Then came another interval of silence,
during which I speculated on the possibility of his being a relative of
Mr. Weiss and wondered what the deuce he was doing in our chambers.

"Have you an appointment with Dr. Thorndyke?" I asked, at length.

He bowed solemnly, and by way of reply--in the affirmative, as I
assumed--emitted another "hm--hm."

I looked at him sharply, a little nettled by his lack of manners;
whereupon he opened out the lease so that it screened his face, and as I
glanced at the back of the document, I was astonished to observe that it
was shaking rapidly.

The fellow was actually laughing! What he found in my simple question to
cause him so much amusement I was totally unable to imagine. But there
it was. The tremulous movements of the document left me in no possible
doubt that he was for some reason convulsed with laughter.

It was extremely mysterious. Also, it was rather embarrassing. I took
out my pocket file and began to look over my notes. Then the document
was lowered and I was able to get another look at the stranger's face.
He was really extraordinarily like Weiss. The shaggy eyebrows, throwing
the eye-sockets into shadow, gave him, in conjunction with the
spectacles, the same owlish, solemn expression that I had noticed in my
Kennington acquaintance; and which, by the way, was singularly out of
character with the frivolous behaviour that I had just witnessed.

From time to time as I looked at him, he caught my eye and instantly
averted his own, turning rather red. Apparently he was a shy, nervous
man, which might account for his giggling; for I have noticed that shy
or nervous people have a habit of smiling inopportunely and even
giggling when embarrassed by meeting an over-steady eye. And it seemed
my own eye had this disconcerting quality, for even as I looked at him,
the document suddenly went up again and began to shake violently.

I stood it for a minute or two, but, finding the situation intolerably
embarrassing, I rose, and brusquely excusing myself, went up to the
laboratory to look for Polton and inquire at what time Thorndyke was
expected home. To my surprise, however, on entering, I discovered
Thorndyke himself just finishing the mounting of a microscopical
specimen.

"Did you know that there is some one below waiting to see you?" I asked.

"Is it anyone you know?" he inquired.

"No," I answered. "It is a red-nosed, sniggering fool in spectacles. He
has got a lease or a deed or some other sort of document which he has
been using to play a sort of idiotic game of Peep-Bo! I couldn't stand
him, so I came up here."

Thorndyke laughed heartily at my description of his client.

"What are you laughing at?" I asked sourly; at which he laughed yet more
heartily and added to the aggravation by wiping his eyes.

"Our friend seems to have put you out," he remarked.

"He put me out literally. If I had stayed much longer I should have
punched his head."

"In that case," said Thorndyke, "I am glad you didn't stay. But come
down and let me introduce you."

"No, thank you. I've had enough of him for the present."

"But I have a very special reason for wishing to introduce you. I think
you will get some information from him that will interest you very much;
and you needn't quarrel with a man for being of a cheerful disposition."

"Cheerful be hanged!" I exclaimed. "I don't call a man cheerful because
he behaves like a gibbering idiot."

To this Thorndyke made no reply but a broad and appreciative smile, and
we descended to the lower floor. As we entered the room, the stranger
rose, and, glancing in an embarrassed way from one of us to the other,
suddenly broke out into an undeniable snigger. I looked at him sternly,
and Thorndyke, quite unmoved by his indecorous behaviour, said in a
grave voice:

"Let me introduce you, Jervis; though I think you have met this
gentleman before."

"I think not," I said stiffly.

"Oh yes, you have, sir," interposed the stranger; and, as he spoke, I
started; for the voice was uncommonly like the familiar voice of Polton.

I looked at the speaker with sudden suspicion. And now I could see that
the flaxen hair was a wig; that the beard had a decidedly artificial
look, and that the eyes that beamed through the spectacles were
remarkably like the eyes of our factotum. But the blotchy face, the
bulbous nose and the shaggy, overhanging eyebrows were alien features
that I could not reconcile with the personality of our refined and
aristocratic-looking little assistant.

"Is this a practical joke?" I asked.

"No," replied Thorndyke; "it is a demonstration. When we were talking
this morning it appeared to me that you did not realize the extent to
which it is possible to conceal identity under suitable conditions of
light. So I arranged, with Polton's rather reluctant assistance, to give
you ocular evidence. The conditions are not favourable--which makes the
demonstration more convincing. This is a very well-lighted room and
Polton is a very poor actor; in spite of which it has been possible for
you to sit opposite him for several minutes and look at him, I have no
doubt, very attentively, without discovering his identity. If the room
had been lighted only with a candle, and Polton had been equal to the
task of supporting his make-up with an appropriate voice and manner, the
deception would have been perfect."

"I can see that he has a wig on, quite plainly," said I.

"Yes; but you would not in a dimly lighted room. On the other hand, if
Polton were to walk down Fleet Street at mid-day in this condition, the
make-up would be conspicuously evident to any moderately observant
passer-by. The secret of making up consists in a careful adjustment to
the conditions of light and distance in which the make-up is to be seen.
That in use on the stage would look ridiculous in an ordinary room; that
which would serve in an artificially lighted room would look ridiculous
out of doors by daylight."

"Is any effective make-up possible out of doors in ordinary daylight?" I
asked.

"Oh, yes," replied Thorndyke. "But it must be on a totally different
scale from that of the stage. A wig, and especially a beard or
moustache, must be joined up at the edges with hair actually stuck on
the skin with transparent cement and carefully trimmed with scissors.
The same applies to eyebrows; and alterations in the colour of the skin
must be carried out much more subtly. Polton's nose has been built up
with a small covering of toupée-paste, the pimples on the cheeks
produced with little particles of the same material; and the general
tinting has been done with grease-paint with a very light scumble of
powder colour to take off some of the shine. This would be possible in
outdoor make-up, but it would have to be done with the greatest care and
delicacy; in fact, with what the art-critics call 'reticence.' A very
little make-up is sufficient and too much is fatal. You would be
surprised to see how little paste is required to alter the shape of the
nose and the entire character of the face."

At this moment there came a loud knock at the door; a single, solid dab
of the knocker which Polton seemed to recognize, for he ejaculated:

"Good lord, sir! That'll be Wilkins, the cabman! I'd forgotten all
about him. Whatever's to be done?"

He stared at us in ludicrous horror for a moment or two, and then,
snatching off his wig, beard and spectacles, poked them into a cupboard.
But his appearance was now too much even for Thorndyke--who hastily got
behind him--for he had now resumed his ordinary personality--but with a
very material difference.

"Oh, it's nothing to laugh at, sir," he exclaimed indignantly as I
crammed my handkerchief into my mouth. "Somebody's got to let him in, or
he'll go away."

"Yes; and that won't do," said Thorndyke. "But don't worry, Polton. You
can step into the office. I'll open the door."

Polton's presence of mind, however, seemed to have entirely forsaken
him, for he only hovered irresolutely in the wake of his principal. As
the door opened, a thick and husky voice inquired:

"Gent of the name of Polton live here?"

"Yes, quite right," said Thorndyke. "Come in. Your name is Wilkins, I
think?"

"That's me, sir," said the voice; and in response to Thorndyke's
invitation, a typical "growler" cabman of the old school, complete even
to imbricated cape and dangling badge, stalked into the room, and
glancing round with a mixture of embarrassment and defiance, suddenly
fixed on Polton's nose a look of devouring curiosity.

"Here you are, then," Polton remarked nervously.

"Yus," replied the cabman in a slightly hostile tone. "Here I am. What
am I wanted to do? And where's this here Mr. Polton?"

"I am Mr. Polton," replied our abashed assistant.

"Well, it's the other Mr. Polton what I want," said the cabman, with his
eyes still riveted on the olfactory prominence.

"There isn't any other Mr. Polton," our subordinate replied irritably.
"I am the--er--person who spoke to you in the shelter."

"Are you though?" said the manifestly incredulous cabby. "I shouldn't
have thought it; but you ought to know. What do you want me to do?"

"We want you," said Thorndyke, "to answer one or two questions. And the
first one is, Are you a teetotaller?"

The question being illustrated by the production of a decanter, the
cabman's dignity relaxed somewhat.

"I ain't bigoted," said he.

"Then sit down and mix yourself a glass of grog. Soda or plain water?"

"May as well have all the extries," replied the cabman, sitting down and
grasping the decanter with the air of a man who means business. "Per'aps
you wouldn't mind squirtin' out the soda, sir, bein' more used to it."

While these preliminaries were being arranged, Polton silently slipped
out of the room, and when our visitor had fortified himself with a gulp
of the uncommonly stiff mixture, the examination began.

"Your name, I think, is Wilkins?" said Thorndyke.

"That's me, sir. Samuel Wilkins is my name."

"And your occupation?"

"Is a very tryin' one and not paid for as it deserves. I drives a cab,
sir; a four-wheeled cab is what I drives; and a very poor job it is."

"Do you happen to remember a very foggy day about a month ago?"

"Do I not, sir! A regler sneezer that was! Wednesday, the fourteenth of
March. I remember the date because my benefit society came down on me
for arrears that morning."

"Will you tell us what happened to you between six and seven in the
evening of that day?"

"I will, sir," replied the cabman, emptying his tumbler by way of
bracing himself up for the effort. "A little before six I was waiting on
the arrival side of the Great Northern Station, King's Cross, when I see
a gentleman and a lady coming out. The gentleman he looks up and down
and then he sees me and walks up to the cab and opens the door and helps
the lady in. Then he says to me: 'Do you know New Inn?' he says. That's
what he says to me what was born and brought up in White Horse Alley,
Drury Lane.

"'Get inside,' says I.

"'Well,' says he, 'you drive in through the gate in Wych Street,' he
says, as if he expected me to go in by Houghton Street and down the
steps, 'and then,' he says, 'you drive nearly to the end and you'll see
a house with a large brass plate at the corner of the doorway. That's
where we want to be set down,' he says, and with that he nips in and
pulls up the windows and off we goes.

"It took us a full half-hour to get to New Inn through the fog, for I
had to get down and lead the horse part of the way. As I drove in under
the archway, I saw it was half-past six by the clock in the porter's
lodge. I drove down nearly to the end of the inn and drew up opposite a
house where there was a big brass plate by the doorway. It was number
thirty-one. Then the gent crawls out and hands me five bob--two
'arf-crowns--and then he helps the lady out, and away they waddles to
the doorway and I see them start up the stairs very slow--regler
Pilgrim's Progress. And that was the last I see of 'em."

Thorndyke wrote down the cabman's statement verbatim together with his
own questions, and then asked:

"Can you give us any description of the gentleman?"

"The gent," said Wilkins, was a very respectable-looking gent, though he
did look as if he'd had a drop of something short, and small blame to
him on a day like that. But he was all there, and he knew what was the
proper fare for a foggy evening, which is more than some of 'em do. He
was a elderly gent, about sixty, and he wore spectacles, but he didn't
seem to be able to see much through 'em. He was a funny 'un to look at;
as round in the back as a turtle and he walked with his head stuck
forward like a goose."

"What made you think he had been drinking?"

"Well, he wasn't as steady as he might have been on his pins. But he
wasn't drunk, you know. Only a bit wobbly on the plates."

"And the lady; what was she like?"

"I couldn't see much of her because her head was wrapped up in a sort of
woollen veil. But I should say she wasn't a chicken. Might have been
about the same age as the gent, but I couldn't swear to that. She seemed
a trifle rickety on the pins too; in fact they were a rum-looking
couple. I watched 'em tottering across the pavement and up the stairs,
hanging on to each other, him peering through his blinkers and she
trying to see through her veil, and I thought it was a jolly good job
they'd got a nice sound cab and a steady driver to bring 'em safe home."

"How was the lady dressed?"

"Can't rightly say, not being a hexpert. Her head was done up in this
here veil like a pudden in a cloth and she had a small hat on. She had a
dark brown mantle with a fringe of beads round it and a black dress; and
I noticed when she got into the cab at the station that one of her
stockings looked like the bellows of a concertina. That's all I can tell
you."

Thorndyke wrote down the last answer, and, having read the entire
statement aloud, handed the pen to our visitor.

"If that is all correct," he said, "I will ask you to sign your name at
the bottom."

"Do you want me to swear a affidavy that it's all true?" asked Wilkins.

"No, thank you," replied Thorndyke. "We may have to call you to give
evidence in court, and then you'll be sworn; and you'll also be paid for
your attendance. For the present I want you to keep your own counsel and
say nothing to anybody about having been here. We have to make some
other inquiries and we don't want the affair talked about."

"I see, sir," said Wilkins, as he laboriously traced his signature at
the foot of the statement; "you don't want the other parties for to ogle
your lay. All right, sir; you can depend on me. I'm fly, I am."

"Thank you, Wilkins," said Thorndyke. "And now what are we to give you
for your trouble in coming here?"

"I'll leave the fare to you, sir. You know what the information's worth;
but I should think 'arf a thick-un wouldn't hurt you."

Thorndyke laid on the table a couple of sovereigns, at the sight of
which the cabman's eyes glistened.

"We have your address, Wilkins," said he. "If we want you as a witness
we shall let you know, and if not, there will be another two pounds for
you at the end of a fortnight, provided you have not let this little
interview leak out."

Wilkins gathered up the spoils gleefully. "You can trust me, sir," said
he, "for to keep my mouth shut. I knows which side my bread's buttered.
Good night, gentlemen all."

With this comprehensive salute he moved towards the door and let
himself out.

"Well, Jervis; what do you think of it?" Thorndyke asked, as the
cabman's footsteps faded away in a creaky diminuendo.

"I don't know what to think. This woman is a new factor in the case and
I don't know how to place her."

"Not entirely new," said Thorndyke. "You have not forgotten those beads
that we found in Jeffrey's bedroom, have you?"

"No, I had not forgotten them, but I did not see that they told us much
excepting that some woman had apparently been in his bedroom at some
time."

"That, I think, is all that they did tell us. But now they tell us that
a particular woman was in his bedroom at a particular time, which is a
good deal more significant."

"Yes. It almost looks as if she must have been there when he made away
with himself."

"It does, very much."

"By the way, you were right about the colours of those beads, and also
about the way they were used."

"As to their use, that was a mere guess; but it has turned out to be
correct. It was well that we found the beads, for, small as is the
amount of information they give, it is still enough to carry us a stage
further."

"How so?"

"I mean that the cabman's evidence tells us only that this woman entered
the house. The beads tell us that she was in the bedroom; which, as you
say, seems to connect her to some extent with Jeffrey's death. Not
necessarily, of course. It is only a suggestion; but a rather strong
suggestion under the peculiar circumstances."

"Even so," said I, "this new fact seems to me so far from clearing up
the mystery, only to add to it a fresh element of still deeper mystery.
The porter's evidence at the inquest could leave no doubt that Jeffrey
contemplated suicide, and his preparations pointedly suggest this
particular night as the time selected by him for doing away with
himself. Is not that so?"

"Certainly. The porter's evidence was very clear on that point."

"Then I don't see where this woman comes in. It is obvious that her
presence at the inn, and especially in the bedroom, on this occasion and
in these strange, secret circumstances, has a rather sinister look; but
yet I do not see in what way she could have been connected with the
tragedy. Perhaps, after all, she has nothing to do with it. You remember
that Jeffrey went to the lodge about eight o'clock, to pay his rent, and
chatted for some time with the porter. That looks as if the lady had
already left."

"Yes," said Thorndyke. "But, on the other hand, Jeffrey's remarks to the
porter with reference to the cab do not quite agree with the account
that we have just heard from Wilkins. Which suggests--as does Wilkins's
account generally--some secrecy as to the lady's visit to his chambers."

"Do you know who the woman was?" I asked.

"No, I don't know," he replied. "I have a rather strong suspicion that I
can identify her, but I am waiting for some further facts."

"Is your suspicion founded on some new matter that you have discovered,
or is it deducible from facts that are known to me?"

"I think," he replied, "that you know practically all that I know,
although I have, in one instance, turned a very strong suspicion into a
certainty by further inquiries. But I think you ought to be able to form
some idea as to who this lady probably was."

"But no woman has been mentioned in the case at all."

"No; but I think you should be able to give this lady a name,
notwithstanding."

"Should I? Then I begin to suspect that I am not cut out for
medico-legal practice, for I don't see the faintest glimmer of a
suggestion."

Thorndyke smiled benevolently. "Don't be discouraged, Jervis," said he.
"I expect that when you first began to go round the wards, you doubted
whether you were cut out for medical practice. I did. For special work
one needs special knowledge and an acquired faculty for making use of
it. What does a second year's student make of a small thoracic aneurysm?
He knows the anatomy of the chest; he begins to know the normal heart
sounds and areas of dullness; but he cannot yet fit his various items of
knowledge together. Then comes the experienced physician and perhaps
makes a complete diagnosis without any examination at all, merely from
hearing the patient speak or cough. He has the same facts as the
student, but he has acquired the faculty of instantly connecting an
abnormality of function with its correleated anatomical change. It is a
matter of experience. And, with your previous training, you will soon
acquire the faculty. Try to observe everything. Let nothing escape you.
And try constantly to find some connection between facts and events that
seem to be unconnected. That is my advice to you; and with that we will
put away the Blackmore case for the present and consider our day's work
at an end."




Chapter XIV

Thorndyke Lays the Mine


The information supplied by Mr. Samuel Wilkins, so far from dispelling
the cloud of mystery that hung over the Blackmore case, only enveloped
it in deeper obscurity, so far as I was concerned. The new problem that
Thorndyke offered for solution was a tougher one than any of the others.
He proposed that I should identify and give a name to this mysterious
woman. But how could I? No woman, excepting Mrs. Wilson, had been
mentioned in connection with the case. This new <i>dramatis persona</i> had
appeared suddenly from nowhere and straightway vanished without leaving
a trace, excepting the two or three beads that we had picked up in
Jeffrey's room.

Nor was it in the least clear what part, if any, she had played in the
tragedy. The facts still pointed as plainly to suicide as before her
appearance. Jeffrey's repeated hints as to his intentions, and the very
significant preparations that he had made, were enough to negative any
idea of foul play. And yet the woman's presence in the chambers at that
time, the secret manner of her arrival and her precautions against
recognition, strongly suggested some kind of complicity in the dreadful
event that followed.

But what complicity is possible in the case of suicide? The woman might
have furnished him with the syringe and the poison, but it would not
have been necessary for her to go to his chambers for that purpose.
Vague ideas of persuasion and hypnotic suggestion floated through my
brain; but the explanations did not fit the case and the hypnotic
suggestion of crime is not very convincing to the medical mind. Then I
thought of blackmail in connection with some disgraceful secret; but
though this was a more hopeful suggestion, it was not very probable,
considering Jeffrey's age and character.

And all these speculations failed to throw the faintest light on the
main question: "Who was this woman?"

A couple of days passed, during which Thorndyke made no further
reference to the case. He was, most of the time, away from home, though
how he was engaged I had no idea. What was rather more unusual was that
Polton seemed to have deserted the laboratory and taken to outdoor
pursuits. I assumed that he had seized the opportunity of leaving me in
charge, and I dimly surmised that he was acting as Thorndyke's private
inquiry agent, as he seemed to have done in the case of Samuel Wilkins.

On the evening of the second day Thorndyke came home in obviously good
spirits, and his first proceedings aroused my expectant curiosity. He
went to a cupboard and brought forth a box of Trichinopoly cheroots. Now
the Trichinopoly cheroot was Thorndyke's one dissipation, to be enjoyed
only on rare and specially festive occasions; which, in practice, meant
those occasions on which he had scored some important point or solved
some unusually tough problem. Wherefore I watched him with lively
interest.

"It's a pity that the 'Trichy' is such a poisonous beast," he remarked,
taking up one of the cheroots and sniffing at it delicately. "There is
no other cigar like it, to a really abandoned smoker." He laid the cigar
back in the box and continued: "I think I shall treat myself to one
after dinner to celebrate the occasion."

"What occasion?" I asked.

"The completion of the Blackmore case. I am just going to write to
Marchmont advising him to enter a caveat."

"Do you mean to say that you have discovered a flaw in the will, after
all?"

"A flaw!" he exclaimed. "My dear Jervis, that second will is a forgery."

I stared at him in amazement; for his assertion sounded like nothing
more or less than arrant nonsense.

"But the thing is impossible, Thorndyke," I said. "Not only did the
witnesses recognize their own signatures and the painter's greasy
finger-marks, but they had both read the will and remembered its
contents."

"Yes; that is the interesting feature in the case. It is a very pretty
problem. I shall give you a last chance to solve it. To-morrow evening
we shall have to give a full explanation, so you have another
twenty-four hours in which to think it over. And, meanwhile, I am going
to take you to my club to dine. I think we shall be pretty safe there
from Mrs. Schallibaum."

He sat down and wrote a letter, which was apparently quite a short one,
and having addressed and stamped it, prepared to go out.

"Come," said he, "let us away to 'the gay and festive scenes and halls
of dazzling light.' We will lay the mine in the Fleet Street pillar box.
I should like to be in Marchmont's office when it explodes."

"I expect, for that matter," said I, "that the explosion will be felt
pretty distinctly in these chambers."

"I expect so, too," replied Thorndyke; "and that reminds me that I shall
be out all day to-morrow, so, if Marchmont calls, you must do all that
you can to persuade him to come round after dinner and bring Stephen
Blackmore, if possible. I am anxious to have Stephen here, as he will be
able to give us some further information and confirm certain matters of
fact."

I promised to exercise my utmost powers of persuasion on Mr. Marchmont
which I should certainly have done on my own account, being now on the
very tiptoe of curiosity to hear Thorndyke's explanation of the
unthinkable conclusion at which he had arrived--and the subject dropped
completely; nor could I, during the rest of the evening, induce my
colleague to reopen it even in the most indirect or allusive manner.

Our explanations in respect of Mr. Marchmont were fully realized; for,
on the following morning, within an hour of Thorndyke's departure from
our chambers, the knocker was plied with more than usual emphasis, and,
on my opening the door, I discovered the solicitor in company with a
somewhat older gentleman. Mr. Marchmont appeared somewhat out of humour,
while his companion was obviously in a state of extreme irritation.

"How d'you do, Dr. Jervis?" said Marchmont as he entered at my
invitation. "Your friend, I suppose, is not in just now?"

"No; and he will not be returning until the evening."

"Hm; I'm sorry. We wished to see him rather particularly. This is my
partner, Mr. Winwood."

The latter gentleman bowed stiffly and Marchmont continued:

"We have had a letter from Dr. Thorndyke, and it is, I may say, a rather
curious letter; in fact, a very singular letter indeed."

"It is the letter of a madman!" growled Mr. Winwood.

"No, no, Winwood; nothing of the kind. Control yourself, I beg you. But
really, the letter is rather incomprehensible. It relates to the will of
the late Jeffrey Blackmore--you know the main facts of the case; and we
cannot reconcile it with those facts."

"This is the letter," exclaimed Mr. Winwood, dragging the document from
his wallet and slapping it down on the table. "If you are acquainted
with the case, sir, just read that, and let us hear what <i>you</i> think."

I took up the letter and read aloud:

"JEFFREY BLACKMORE, DECD.

"DEAR MR. MARCHMONT,--

"I have gone into this case with great care and have now no doubt that
the second will is a forgery. Criminal proceedings will, I think, be
inevitable, but meanwhile it would be wise to enter a caveat.

"If you could look in at my chambers to-morrow evening we could talk the
case over; and I should be glad if you could bring Mr. Stephen
Blackmore; whose personal knowledge of the events and the parties
concerned would be of great assistance in clearing up obscure details.

"I am,

"Yours sincerely,

"JOHN EVELYN THORNDYKE

"C.F. MARCHMONT, ESQ."

"Well!" exclaimed Mr. Winwood, glaring ferociously at me, "what do you
think of the learned counsel's opinion?"

"I knew that Thorndyke was writing to you to this effect," I replied,
"but I must frankly confess that I can make nothing of it. Have you
acted on his advice?"

"Certainly not!" shouted the irascible lawyer. "Do you suppose that we
wish to make ourselves the laughing-stock of the courts? The thing is
impossible--ridiculously impossible!"

"It can't be that, you know," I said, a little stiffly, for I was
somewhat nettled by Mr. Winwood's manner, "or Thorndyke would not have
written this letter. The conclusion looks as impossible to me as it does
to you; but I have complete confidence in Thorndyke. If he says that the
will is a forgery, I have no doubt that it is a forgery."

"But how the deuce can it be?" roared Winwood. "You know the
circumstances under which the will was executed."

"Yes; but so does Thorndyke. And he is not a man who overlooks important
facts. It is useless to argue with me. I am in a complete fog about the
case myself. You had better come in this evening and talk it over with
him as he suggests."

"It is very inconvenient," grumbled Mr. Winwood. "We shall have to dine
in town."

"Yes," said Marchmont, "but it is the only thing to be done. As Dr.
Jervis says, we must take it that Thorndyke has something solid to base
his opinion on. He doesn't make elementary mistakes. And, of course, if
what he says is correct, Mr. Stephen's position is totally changed."

"Bah!" exclaimed Winwood, "he has found a mare's nest, I tell you.
Still, I agree that the explanation should be worth hearing."

"You mustn't mind Winwood," said Marchmont, in an apologetic undertone;
"he's a peppery old fellow with a rough tongue, but he doesn't mean any
harm." Which statement Winwood assented to--or dissented from; for it
was impossible to say which--by a prolonged growl.

"We shall expect you then," I said, "about eight to-night, and you will
try to bring Mr. Stephen with you?"

"Yes," replied Marchmont; "I think we can promise that he shall come
with us. I have sent him a telegram asking him to attend."

With this the two lawyers took their departure, leaving me to meditate
upon my colleague's astonishing statement; which I did, considerably to
the prejudice of other employment. That Thorndyke would be able to
justify the opinion that he had given, I had no doubt whatever; but yet
there was no denying that his proposition was what Mr. Dick Swiveller
would call "a staggerer."

When Thorndyke returned, I informed him of the visit of our two friends,
and acquainted him with the sentiments that they had expressed; whereat
he smiled with quiet amusement.

"I thought," he remarked, "that letter would bring Marchmont to our door
before long. As to Winwood, I have never met him, but I gather that he
is one of those people whom you 'mustn't mind.' In a general way, I
object to people who tacitly claim exemption from the ordinary rules of
conduct that are held to be binding on their fellows. But, as he
promises to give us what the variety artists call 'an extra turn,' we
will make the best of him and give him a run for his money."

Here Thorndyke smiled mischievously--I understood the meaning of that
smile later in the evening--and asked: "What do you think of the affair
yourself?"

"I have given it up," I answered. "To my paralysed brain, the Blackmore
case is like an endless algebraical problem propounded by an insane
mathematician."

Thorndyke laughed at my comparison, which I flatter myself was a rather
apt one.

"Come and dine," said he, "and let us crack a bottle, that our hearts
may not turn to water under the frown of the disdainful Winwood. I think
the old 'Bell' in Holborn will meet our present requirements better than
the club. There is something jovial and roystering about an ancient
tavern; but we must keep a sharp lookout for Mrs. Schallibaum."

Thereupon we set forth; and, after a week's close imprisonment, I once
more looked upon the friendly London streets, the cheerfully lighted
shop windows and the multitudes of companionable strangers who moved
unceasingly along the pavements.



Chapter XV

Thorndyke Explodes the Mine


We had not been back in our chambers more than a few minutes when the
little brass knocker on the inner door rattled out its summons.
Thorndyke himself opened the door, and, finding our three expected
visitors on the threshold, he admitted them and closed the "oak."

"We have accepted your invitation, you see," said Marchmont, whose
manner was now a little flurried and uneasy. "This is my partner, Mr.
Winwood; you haven't met before, I think. Well, we thought we should
like to hear some further particulars from you, as we could not quite
understand your letter."

"My conclusion, I suppose," said Thorndyke, "was a little unexpected?"

"It was more than that, sir," exclaimed Winwood. "It was absolutely
irreconcilable either with the facts of the case or with common physical
possibilities."

"At the first glance," Thorndyke agreed, "it would probably have that
appearance."

"It has that appearance still to me." said Winwood, growing suddenly red
and wrathful, "and I may say that I speak as a solicitor who was
practising in the law when you were an infant in arms. You tell us, sir,
that this will is a forgery; this will, which was executed in broad
daylight in the presence of two unimpeachable witnesses who have sworn,
not only to their signatures and the contents of the document, but to
their very finger-marks on the paper. Are those finger-marks forgeries,
too? Have you examined and tested them?"

"I have not," replied Thorndyke. "The fact is they are of no interest to
me, as I am not disputing the witnesses' signatures."

At this, Mr. Winwood fairly danced with irritation.

"Marchmont!" he exclaimed fiercely, "you know this good gentleman, I
believe. Tell me, is he addicted to practical jokes?"

"Now, my dear Winwood," groaned Marchmont, "I pray you--I beg you to
control yourself. No doubt--"

"But confound it!" roared Winwood, "you have, yourself, heard him say
that the will is a forgery, but that he doesn't dispute the signatures;
which," concluded Winwood, banging his fist down on the table, "is
damned nonsense."

"May I suggest," interposed Stephen Blackmore, "that we came here to
receive Dr. Thorndyke's explanation of his letter. Perhaps it would be
better to postpone any comments until we have heard it."

"Undoubtedly, undoubtedly," said Marchmont. "Let me entreat you,
Winwood, to listen patiently and refrain from interruption until we have
heard our learned friend's exposition of the case."

"Oh, very well," Winwood replied sulkily; "I'll say no more."

He sank into a chair with the manner of a man who shuts himself up and
turns the key; and so remained--excepting when the internal pressure
approached bursting-point--throughout the subsequent proceedings,
silent, stony and impassive, like a seated statue of Obstinacy.

"I take it," said Marchmont, "that you have some new facts that are not
in our possession?"

"Yes," replied Thorndyke; "we have some new facts, and we have made some
new use of the old ones. But how shall I lay the case before you? Shall
I state my theory of the sequence of events and furnish the verification
afterwards? Or shall I retrace the actual course of my investigations
and give you the facts in the order in which I obtained them myself,
with the inferences from them?"

"I almost think," said Mr. Marchmont, "that it would be better if you
would put us in possession of the new facts. Then, if the conclusions
that follow from them are not sufficiently obvious, we could hear the
argument. What do you say, Winwood?"

Mr. Winwood roused himself for an instant, barked out the one word
"Facts," and shut himself up again with a snap.

"You would like to have the new facts by themselves?" said Thorndyke.

"If you please. The facts only, in the first place, at any rate."

"Very well," said Thorndyke; and here I caught his eye with a
mischievous twinkle in it that I understood perfectly; for I had most of
the facts myself and realized how much these two lawyers were likely to
extract from them. Winwood was going to "have a run for his money," as
Thorndyke had promised.

My colleague, having placed on the table by his side a small cardboard
box and the sheets of notes from his file, glanced quickly at Mr.
Winwood and began:

"The first important new facts came into my possession on the day on
which you introduced the case to me. In the evening, after you left, I
availed myself of Mr. Stephen's kind invitation to look over his uncle's
chambers in New Inn. I wished to do so in order to ascertain, if
possible, what had been the habits of the deceased during his residence
there. When I arrived with Dr. Jervis, Mr. Stephen was in the chambers,
and I learned from him that his uncle was an Oriental scholar of some
position and that he had a very thorough acquaintance with the cuneiform
writing. Now, while I was talking with Mr. Stephen I made a very curious
discovery. On the wall over the fire-place hung a large framed
photograph of an ancient Persian inscription in the cuneiform character;
and that photograph was upside down."

"Upside down!" exclaimed Stephen. "But that is really very odd."

"Very odd indeed," agreed Thorndyke, "and very suggestive. The way in
which it came to be inverted is pretty obvious and also rather
suggestive. The photograph had evidently been in the frame some years
but had apparently never been hung up before."

"It had not," said Stephen, "though I don't know how you arrived at the
fact. It used to stand on the mantelpiece in his old rooms in Jermyn
Street."

"Well," continued Thorndyke, "the frame-maker had pasted his label on
the back of the frame, and as this label hung the right way up, it
appeared as if the person who fixed the photograph on the wall had
adopted it as a guide."

"It is very extraordinary," said Stephen. "I should have thought the
person who hung it would have asked Uncle Jeffrey which was the right
way up; and I can't imagine how on earth it could have hung all those
months without his noticing it. He must have been practically blind."

Here Marchmont, who had been thinking hard, with knitted brows, suddenly
brightened up.

"I see your point," said he. "You mean that if Jeffrey was as blind as
that, it would have been possible for some person to substitute a false
will, which he might sign without noticing the substitution."

"That wouldn't make the will a forgery," growled Winwood. "If Jeffrey
signed it, it was Jeffrey's will. You could contest it if you could
prove the fraud. But he said: 'This is my will,' and the two witnesses
read it and have identified it."

"Did they read it aloud?" asked Stephen.

"No, they did not," replied Thorndyke.

"Can you prove substitution?" asked Marchmont.

"I haven't asserted it," answered Thorndyke, "My position is that the
will is a forgery."

"But it is not," said Winwood.

"We won't argue it now," said Thorndyke. "I ask you to note the fact
that the inscription was upside down. I also observed on the walls of
the chambers some valuable Japanese colour-prints on which were recent
damp-spots. I noted that the sitting-room had a gas-stove and that the
kitchen contained practically no stores or remains of food and hardly
any traces of even the simplest cooking. In the bedroom I found a large
box that had contained a considerable stock of hard stearine candles,
six to the pound, and that was now nearly empty. I examined the clothing
of the deceased. On the soles of the boots I observed dried mud, which
was unlike that on my own and Jervis's boots, from the gravelly square
of the inn. I noted a crease on each leg of the deceased man's trousers
as if they had been turned up half-way to the knee; and in the waistcoat
pocket I found the stump of a 'Contango' pencil. On the floor of the
bedroom, I found a portion of an oval glass somewhat like that of a
watch or locket, but ground at the edge to a double bevel. Dr. Jervis
and I also found one or two beads and a bugle, all of dark brown glass."

Here Thorndyke paused, and Marchmont, who had been gazing at him with
growing amazement, said nervously:

"Er--yes. Very interesting. These observations of yours--er--are--"

"Are all the observations that I made at New Inn."

The two lawyers looked at one another and Stephen Blackmore stared
fixedly at a spot on the hearth-rug. Then Mr. Winwood's face contorted
itself into a sour, lopsided smile.

"You might have observed a good many other things, sir," said he, "if
you had looked. If you had examined the doors, you would have noted that
they had hinges and were covered with paint; and, if you had looked up
the chimney you might have noted that it was black inside."

"Now, now, Winwood," protested Marchmont in an agony of uneasiness as to
what his partner might say next, "I must really beg you--er--to refrain
from--what Mr. Winwood means, Dr. Thorndyke, is that--er--we do not
quite perceive the relevancy of these--ah--observations of yours."

"Probably not," said Thorndyke, "but you will perceive their relevancy
later. For the present, I will ask you to note the facts and bear them
in mind, so that you may be able to follow the argument when we come to
that.

"The next set of data I acquired on the same evening, when Dr. Jervis
gave me a detailed account of a very strange adventure that befell him.
I need not burden you with all the details, but I will give you the
substance of his story."

He then proceeded to recount the incidents connected with my visits to
Mr. Graves, dwelling on the personal peculiarities of the parties
concerned and especially of the patient, and not even forgetting the
very singular spectacles worn by Mr. Weiss. He also explained briefly
the construction of the chart, presenting the latter for the inspection
of his hearers. To this recital our three visitors listened in utter
bewilderment, as, indeed did I also; for I could not conceive in what
way my adventures could possibly be related to the affairs of the late
Mr. Blackmore. This was manifestly the view taken by Mr. Marchmont, for,
during a pause in which the chart was handed to him, he remarked
somewhat stiffly:

"I am assuming, Dr. Thorndyke, that the curious story you are telling us
has some relevance to the matter in which we are interested."

"You are quite correct in your assumption," replied Thorndyke. "The
story is very relevant indeed, as you will presently be convinced."

"Thank you," said Marchmont, sinking back once more into his chair with
a sigh of resignation.

"A few days ago," pursued Thorndyke, "Dr. Jervis and I located, with the
aid of this chart, the house to which he had been called. We found that
the late tenant had left somewhat hurriedly and that the house was to
let; and, as no other kind of investigation was possible, we obtained
the keys and made an exploration of the premises."

Here he gave a brief account of our visit and the conditions that we
observed, and was proceeding to furnish a list of the articles that we
had found under the grate, when Mr. Winwood started from his chair.

"Really, sir!" he exclaimed, "this is too much! Have I come here, at
great personal inconvenience, to hear you read the inventory of a
dust-heap?"

Thorndyke smiled benevolently and caught my eye, once more, with a gleam
of amusement.

"Sit down, Mr. Winwood," he said quietly. "You came here to learn the
facts of the case, and I am giving them to you. Please don't interrupt
needlessly and waste time."

Winwood stared at him ferociously for several seconds; then, somewhat
disconcerted by the unruffled calm of his manner, he uttered a snort of
defiance, sat down heavily and shut himself up again.

"We will now," Thorndyke continued, with unmoved serenity, "consider
these relics in more detail, and we will begin with this pair of
spectacles. They belonged to a person who was near-sighted and
astigmatic in the left eye and almost certainly blind in the right. Such
a description agrees entirely with Dr. Jervis's account of the sick
man."

He paused for the moment, and then, as no one made any comment,
proceeded:

"We next come to these little pieces of reed, which you, Mr. Stephen,
will probably recognize as the remains of a Japanese brush, such as is
used for writing in Chinese ink or for making small drawings."

Again he paused, as though expecting some remark from his listeners; but
no one spoke, and he continued:

"Then there is this bottle with the theatrical wig-maker's label on it,
which once contained cement such as is used for fixing on false beards,
moustaches or eyebrows."

He paused once more and looked round expectantly at his audience, none
of whom, however, volunteered any remark.

"Do none of these objects that I have described and shown you, seem to
have any significance for us?" he asked, in a tone of some surprise.

"They convey nothing to me," said Mr. Marchmont, glancing at his
partner, who shook his head like a restive horse.

"Nor to you, Mr. Stephen?"

"No," replied Stephen. "Under the existing circumstances they convey no
reasonable suggestion to me."

Thorndyke hesitated as if he were half inclined to say something more;
then, with a slight shrug, he turned over his notes and resumed:

"The next group of new facts is concerned with the signatures of the
recent cheques. We have photographed them and placed them together for
the purpose of comparison and analysis."

"I am not prepared to question the signatures." said Winwood. "We have
had a highly expert opinion, which would override ours in a court of law
even if we differed from it; which I think we do not."

"Yes," said Marchmont; "that is so. I think we must accept the
signatures, especially as that of the will has been proved, beyond any
question" to be authentic."

"Very well," agreed Thorndyke; "we will pass over the signatures. Then
we have some further evidence in regard to the spectacles, which serves
to verify our conclusions respecting them."

"Perhaps," said Marchmont, "we might pass over that, too, as we do not
seem to have reached any conclusions."

"As you please," said Thorndyke. "It is important, but we can reserve it
for verification. The next item will interest you more, I think. It is
the signed and witnessed statement of Samuel Wilkins, the driver of the
cab in which the deceased came home to the inn on the evening of his
death."

My colleague was right. An actual document, signed by a tangible
witness, who could be put in the box and sworn, brought both lawyers to
a state of attention; and when Thorndyke read out the cabman's evidence,
their attention soon quickened into undisguised astonishment.

"But this is a most mysterious affair," exclaimed Marchmont. "Who could
this woman have been, and what could she have been doing in Jeffrey's
chambers at this time? Can you throw any light on it, Mr. Stephen?"

"No, indeed I can't," replied Stephen. "It is a complete mystery to me.
My uncle Jeffrey was a confirmed old bachelor, and, although he did not
dislike women, he was far from partial to their society, wrapped up as
he was in his favourite studies. To the best of my belief, he had not a
single female friend. He was not on intimate terms even with his sister,
Mrs. Wilson."

"Very remarkable," mused Marchmont; "most remarkable. But, perhaps, you
can tell us, Dr. Thorndyke, who this woman was?"

"I think," replied Thorndyke, "that the next item of evidence will
enable you to form an opinion for yourselves. I only obtained it
yesterday, and, as it made my case quite complete, I wrote off to you
immediately. It is the statement of Joseph Ridley, another cabman, and
unfortunately, a rather dull, unobservant fellow, unlike Wilkins. He has
not much to tell us, but what little he has is highly instructive. Here
is the statement, signed by the deponent and witnessed by me:

"'My name is Joseph Ridley. I am the driver of a four-wheeled cab. On
the fourteenth of March, the day of the great fog, I was waiting at
Vauxhall Station, where I had just set down a fare. About five o'clock a
lady came and told me to drive over to Upper Kennington Lane to take up
a passenger. She was a middle-sized woman. I could not tell what her age
was, or what she was like, because her head was wrapped up in a sort of
knitted, woollen veil to keep out the fog. I did not notice how she was
dressed. She got into the cab and I led the horse over to Upper
Kennington Lane and a little way up the lane, until the lady tapped at
the front window for me to stop.

"'She got out of the cab and told me to wait. Then she went away and
disappeared in the fog. Presently a lady and gentleman came from the
direction in which she had gone. The lady looked like the same lady, but
I won't answer to that. Her head was wrapped up in the same kind of veil
or shawl, and I noticed that she had on a dark coloured mantle with
bead fringe on it.

"'The gentleman was clean shaved and wore spectacles, and he stooped a
good deal. I can't say whether his sight was good or bad. He helped the
lady into the cab and told me to drive to the Great Northern Station,
King's Cross. Then he got in himself and I drove off. I got to the
station about a quarter to six and the lady and gentleman got out. The
gentleman paid my fare and they both went into the station. I did not
notice anything unusual about either of them. Directly after they had
gone, I got a fresh fare and drove away.'

"That," Thorndyke concluded, "is Joseph Ridley's statement; and I think
it will enable you to give a meaning to the other facts that I have
offered for your consideration."

"I am not so sure about that," said Marchmont. "It is all exceedingly
mysterious. Your suggestion is, of course, that the woman who came to
New Inn in the cab was Mrs. Schallibaum!"

"Not at all," replied Thorndyke. "My suggestion is that the woman was
Jeffrey Blackmore."

There was deathly silence for a few moments. We were all absolutely
thunderstruck, and sat gaping at Thorndyke in speechless-astonishment.
Then--Mr. Winwood fairly bounced out of his chair.

"But--my--good--sir!" he screeched. "Jeffrey Blackmore was with her at
the time!"

"Naturally," replied Thorndyke, "my suggestion implies that the person
who was with her was not Jeffrey Blackmore."

"But he was!" bawled Winwood. "The porter saw him!"

"The porter saw a person whom he believed to be Jeffrey Blackmore. I
suggest that the porter's belief was erroneous."

"Well," snapped Winwood, "perhaps you can prove that it was. I don't see
how you are going to; but perhaps you can."

He subsided once more into his chair and glared defiantly at Thorndyke.

"You seemed," said Stephen, "to suggest some connection between the sick
man, Graves, and my uncle. I noted it at the time, but put it aside as
impossible. Was I right. Did you mean to suggest any connection?"

"I suggest something more than a connection. I suggest identity. My
position is that the sick man, Graves, was your uncle."

"From Dr. Jervis's description," said Stephen, "this man must have been
very like my uncle. Both were blind in the right eye and had very poor
vision with the left; and my uncle certainly used brushes of the kind
that you have shown us, when writing in the Japanese character, for I
have watched him and admired his skill; but--"

"But," said Marchmont, "there is the insuperable objection that, at the
very time when this man was lying sick in Kennington Lane, Mr. Jeffrey
was living at New Inn."

"What evidence is there of that?" asked Thorndyke.

"Evidence!" Marchmont exclaimed impatiently. "Why, my dear sir--"

He paused suddenly, and, leaning forward, regarded Thorndyke with a new
and rather startled expression.

"You mean to suggest--" he began.

"I suggest that Jeffrey Blackmore never lived at New Inn at all."

For the moment, Marchmont seemed absolutely paralysed by astonishment.

"This is an amazing proposition!" he exclaimed, at length. "Yet the
thing is certainly not impossible, for, now that you recall the fact, I
realize that no one who had known him previously--excepting his brother,
John--ever saw him at the inn. The question of identity was never
raised."

"Excepting," said Mr. Winwood, "in regard to the body; which was
certainly that of Jeffrey Blackmore."

"Yes, yes. Of course," said Marchmont. "I had forgotten that for the
moment. The body was identified beyond doubt. You don't dispute the
identity of the body, do you?"

"Certainly not," replied Thorndyke.

Here Mr. Winwood grasped his hair with both hands and stuck his elbows
on his knees, while Marchmont drew forth a large handkerchief and mopped
his forehead. Stephen Blackmore looked from one to the other
expectantly, and finally said:

"If I might make a suggestion, it would be that, as Dr. Thorndyke has
shown us the pieces now of the puzzle, he should be so kind as to put
them together for our information."

"Yes," agreed Marchmont, "that will be the best plan. Let us have the
argument, Doctor, and any additional evidence that you possess."

"The argument," said Thorndyke, "will be a rather long one, as the data
are so numerous, and there are some points in verification on which I
shall have to dwell in some detail. We will have some coffee to clear
our brains, and then I will bespeak your patience for what may seem like
a rather prolix demonstration."




Chapter XVI

An Exposition and a Tragedy


"You may have wondered," Thorndyke commenced, when he had poured out the
coffee and handed round the cups, "what induced me to undertake the
minute investigation of so apparently simple and straightforward a case.
Perhaps I had better explain that first and let you see what was the
real starting-point of the inquiry.

"When you, Mr. Marchmont and Mr. Stephen, introduced the case to me, I
made a very brief précis of the facts as you presented them, and of
these there were one or two which immediately attracted my attention. In
the first place, there was the will. It was a very strange will. It was
perfectly unnecessary. It contained no new matter; it expressed no
changed intentions; it met no new circumstances, as known to the
testator. In short it was not really a new will at all, but merely a
repetition of the first one, drafted in different and less suitable
language. It differed only in introducing a certain ambiguity from which
the original was free. It created the possibility that, in certain
circumstances, not known to or anticipated by the testator, John
Blackmore might become the principal beneficiary, contrary to the
obvious wishes of the testator.

"The next point that impressed me was the manner of Mrs. Wilson's death.
She died of cancer. Now people do not die suddenly and unexpectedly of
cancer. This terrible disease stands almost alone in that it marks out
its victim months in advance. A person who has an incurable cancer is a
person whose death may be predicted with certainty and its date fixed
within comparatively narrow limits.

"And now observe the remarkable series of coincidences that are brought
into light when we consider this peculiarity of the disease. Mrs. Wilson
died on the twelfth of March of this present year. Mr. Jeffrey's second
will was signed on the twelfth of November of last year; at a time, that
is to say, when the existence of cancer must have been known to Mrs.
Wilson's doctor, and might have been known to any of her relatives who
chose to inquire after her.

"Then you will observe that the remarkable change in Mr. Jeffrey's
habits coincides in the most singular way with the same events. The
cancer must have been detectable as early as September of last year;
about the time, in fact, at which Mrs. Wilson made her will. Mr. Jeffrey
went to the inn at the beginning of October. From that time his habits
were totally changed, and I can demonstrate to you that a change--not a
gradual, but an abrupt change--took place in the character of his
signature.

"In short, the whole of this peculiar set of circumstances--the change
in Jeffrey's habits, the change in his signature, and the execution of
his strange will--came into existence about the time when Mrs. Wilson
was first known to be suffering from cancer.

"This struck me as a very suggestive fact.

"Then there is the extraordinarily opportune date of Mr. Jeffrey's
death. Mrs. Wilson died on the twelfth of March. Mr. Jeffrey was found
dead on the fifteenth of March, having apparently died on the
fourteenth, on which day he was seen alive. If he had died only three
days sooner, he would have predeceased Mrs. Wilson, and her property
would never have devolved on him at all; while, if he had lived only a
day or two longer, he would have learned of her death and would
certainly have made a new will or codicil in his nephew's favour.

"Circumstances, therefore, conspired in the most singular manner in
favour of John Blackmore.

"But there is yet another coincidence. Jeffrey's body was found, by the
merest chance, the day after his death. But it might have remained
undiscovered for weeks, or even months; and if it had, it would have
been impossible to fix the date of his death. Then Mrs. Wilson's next
of kin would certainly have contested John Blackmore's claim--and
probably with success--on the ground that Jeffrey died before Mrs.
Wilson. But all this uncertainty is provided for by the circumstance
that Mr. Jeffrey paid his rent personally--and prematurely--to the
porter on the fourteenth of March, thus establishing beyond question the
fact that he was alive on that date; and yet further, in case the
porter's memory should be untrustworthy or his statement doubted,
Jeffrey furnished a signed and dated document--the cheque--which could
be produced in a court to furnish incontestable proof of survival.

"To sum up this part of the evidence. Here was a will which enabled John
Blackmore to inherit the fortune of a man who, almost certainly, had no
intention of bequeathing it to him. The wording of that will seemed to
be adjusted to the peculiarities of Mrs. Wilson's disease; and the death
of the testator occurred under a peculiar set of circumstances which
seemed to be exactly adjusted to the wording of the will. Or, to put it
in another way: the wording of the will and the time, the manner and the
circumstances of the testator's death, all seemed to be precisely
adjusted to the fact that the approximate date of Mrs. Wilson's death
was known some months before it occurred.

"Now you must admit that this compound group of coincidences, all
conspiring to a single end--the enrichment of John Blackmore--has a very
singular appearance. Coincidences are common enough in real life; but
we cannot accept too many at a time. My feeling was that there were too
many in this case and that I could not accept them without searching
inquiry."

Thorndyke paused, and Mr. Marchmont, who had listened with close
attention, nodded, as he glanced at his silent partner.

"You have stated the case with remarkable clearness," he said; "and I am
free to confess that some of the points that you have raised had escaped
my notice."

"My first idea," Thorndyke resumed, "was that John Blackmore, taking
advantage of the mental enfeeblement produced by the opium habit, had
dictated this will to Jeffrey, It was then that I sought permission to
inspect Jeffrey's chambers; to learn what I could about him and to see
for myself whether they presented the dirty and disorderly appearance
characteristic of the regular opium-smoker's den. But when, during a
walk into the City, I thought over the case, it seemed to me that this
explanation hardly met the facts. Then I endeavoured to think of some
other explanation; and looking over my notes I observed two points that
seemed worth considering. One was that neither of the witnesses to the
will was really acquainted with Jeffrey Blackmore; both being strangers
who had accepted his identity on his own statement. The other was that
no one who had previously known him, with the single exception of his
brother John, had ever seen Jeffrey at the inn.

"What was the import of these two facts? Probably they had none. But
still they suggested the desirability of considering the question: Was
the person who signed the will really Jeffrey Blackmore? The contrary
supposition--that some one had personated Jeffrey and forged his
signature to a false will--seemed wildly improbable, especially in view
of the identification of the body; but it involved no actual
impossibility; and it offered a complete explanation of the, otherwise
inexplicable, coincidences that I have mentioned.

"I did not, however, for a moment, think that this was the true
explanation, but I resolved to bear it in mind, to test it when the
opportunity arose, and consider it by the light of any fresh facts that
I might acquire.

"The new facts came sooner than I had expected. That same evening I went
with Dr. Jervis to New Inn and found Mr. Stephen in the chambers. By him
I was informed that Jeffrey was a learned Orientalist, with a quite
expert knowledge of the cuneiform writing; and even as he was telling me
this, I looked over his shoulder and saw a cuneiform inscription hanging
on the wall upside down.

"Now, of this there could be only one reasonable explanation.
Disregarding the fact that no one would screw the suspension plates on a
frame without ascertaining which was the right way up, and assuming it
to be hung up inverted, it was impossible that the misplacement could
have been overlooked by Jeffrey. He was not blind, though his sight was
defective. The frame was thirty inches long and the individual
characters nearly an inch in length--about the size of the D 18 letters
of Snellen's test-types, which can be read by a person of ordinary sight
at a distance of fifty-five feet. There was, I repeat, only one
reasonable explanation; which was that the person who had inhabited
those chambers was not Jeffrey Blackmore.

"This conclusion received considerable support from a fact which I
observed later, but mention in this place. On examining the soles of the
shoes taken from the dead man's feet, I found only the ordinary mud of
the streets. There was no trace of the peculiar gravelly mud that
adhered to my own boots and Jervis's, and which came from the square of
the inn. Yet the porter distinctly stated that the deceased, after
paying the rent, walked back towards his chambers across the square; the
mud of which should, therefore, have been conspicuous on his shoes.

"Thus, in a moment, a wildly speculative hypothesis had assumed a high
degree of probability.

"When Mr. Stephen was gone, Jervis and I looked over the chambers
thoroughly; and then another curious fact came to light. On the wall
were a number of fine Japanese colour-prints, all of which showed recent
damp-spots. Now, apart from the consideration that Jeffrey, who had been
at the trouble and expense of collecting these valuable prints, would
hardly have allowed them to rot on his walls, there arose the question:
How came they to be damp? There was a gas stove in the room, and a gas
stove has at least the virtue of preserving a dry atmosphere. It was
winter weather, when the stove would naturally be pretty constantly
alight. How came the walls to be so damp? The answer seemed to be that
the stove had not been constantly alight, but had been lighted only
occasionally. This suggestion was borne out by a further examination of
the rooms. In the kitchen there were practically no stores and hardly
any arrangements even for simple bachelor cooking; the bedroom offered
the same suggestion; the soap in the wash-stand was shrivelled and
cracked; there was no cast-off linen, and the shirts in the drawers,
though clean, had the peculiar yellowish, faded appearance that linen
acquires when long out of use. In short, the rooms had the appearance of
not having been lived in at all, but only visited at intervals.

"Against this view, however, was the statement of the night porter that
he had often seen a light in Jeffrey's sitting-room at one o'clock in
the morning, with the apparent implication that it was then turned out.
Now a light may be left in an empty room, but its extinction implies the
presence of some person to extinguish it; unless some automatic device
be adopted for putting it out at a given time. Such a device--the alarm
movement of a clock, for instance, with a suitable attachment--is a
simple enough matter, but my search of the rooms failed to discover
anything of the kind. However, when looking over the drawers in the
bedroom, I came upon a large box that had held a considerable quantity
of hard stearine candles. There were only a few left, but a flat
candlestick with numerous wick-ends in its socket accounted for the
remainder.

"These candles seemed to dispose of the difficulty. They were not
necessary for ordinary lighting, since gas was laid on in all three
rooms. For what purpose, then, were they used, and in such considerable
quantities? I subsequently obtained some of the same brand--Price's
stearine candles, six to the pound--and experimented with them. Each
candle was seven and a quarter inches in length, not counting the cone
at the top, and I found that they burned in still air at the rate of a
fraction over one inch in an hour. We may say that one of these candles
would burn in still air a little over six hours. It would thus be
possible for the person who inhabited these rooms to go away at seven
o'clock in the evening and leave a light which would burn until past one
in the morning and then extinguish itself. This, of course, was only
surmise, but it destroyed the significance of the night porter's
statement.

"But, if the person who inhabited these chambers was not Jeffrey, who
was he?

"The answer to that question seemed plain enough. There was only one
person who had a strong motive for perpetrating a fraud of this kind,
and there was only one person to whom it was possible. If this person
was not Jeffrey, he must have been very like Jeffrey; sufficiently like
for the body of the one to be mistaken for the body of the other. For
the production of Jeffrey's body was an essential part of the plan and
must have been contemplated from the first. But the only person who
fulfills the conditions is John Blackmore.

"We have learned from Mr. Stephen that John and Jeffrey, though very
different in appearance in later years, were much alike as young men.
But when two brothers who are much alike as young men, become unlike in
later life, we shall find that the unlikeness is produced by superficial
differences and that the essential likeness remains. Thus, in the
present case, Jeffrey was clean shaved, had bad eyesight, wore
spectacles and stooped as he walked; John wore a beard and moustache,
had good eyesight, did not wear spectacles and had a brisk gait and
upright carriage. But supposing John to shave off his beard and
moustache, to put on spectacles and to stoop in his walk, these
conspicuous but superficial differences would vanish and the original
likeness reappear.

"There is another consideration. John had been an actor and was an actor
of some experience. Now, any person can, with some care and practice,
make up a disguise; the great difficulty is to support that disguise by
a suitable manner and voice. But to an experienced actor this difficulty
does not exist. To him, personation is easy; and, moreover, an actor is
precisely the person to whom the idea of disguise and impersonation
would occur.

"There is a small item bearing on this point, so small as to be hardly
worth calling evidence, but just worth noting. In the pocket of the
waistcoat taken from the body of Jeffrey I found the stump of a
'Contango' pencil; a pencil that is sold for the use of stock dealers
and brokers. Now John was an outside broker and might very probably have
used such a pencil, whereas Jeffrey had no connection with the stock
markets and there is no reason why he should have possessed a pencil of
this kind. But the fact is merely suggestive; it has no evidential
value.

"A more important inference is to be drawn from the collected
signatures. I have remarked that the change in the signature occurred
abruptly, with one or two alterations of manner, last September, and
that there are two distinct forms with no intermediate varieties. This
is, in itself, remarkable and suspicious. But a remark made by Mr.
Britton furnishes a really valuable piece of evidence on the point we
are now considering. He admitted that the character of the signature had
undergone a change, but observed that the change did not affect the
individual or personal character of the writing. This is very important;
for handwriting is, as it were, an extension of the personality of the
writer. And just as a man to some extent snares his personality with his
near blood-relations in the form of family resemblances, so his
handwriting often shows a subtle likeness to that of his near relatives.
You must have noticed, as I have, how commonly the handwriting of one
brother resembles that of another, and in just this peculiar and subtle
way. The inference, then, from Mr. Britton's statement is, that if the
signature of the will was forged, it was probably forged by a relative
of the deceased. But the only relative in question is his brother John.

"All the facts, therefore, pointed to John Blackmore as the person who
occupied these chambers, and I accordingly adopted that view as a
working hypothesis."

"But this was all pure speculation," objected Mr. Winwood.

"Not speculation," said Thorndyke. "Hypothesis. It was ordinary
inductive reasoning such as we employ in scientific research. I started
with the purely tentative hypothesis that the person who signed the will
was not Jeffrey Blackmore. I assumed this; and I may say that I did not
believe it at the time, but merely adopted it as a proposition that was
worth testing. I accordingly tested it, 'Yes?' or 'No?' with each new
fact; but as each new fact said 'Yes,' and no fact said definitely 'No,'
its probability increased rapidly by a sort of geometrical progression.
The probabilities multiplied into one another. It is a perfectly sound
method, for one knows that if a hypothesis be true, it will lead one,
sooner or later, to a crucial fact by which its truth can be
demonstrated.

"To resume our argument. We have now set up the proposition that John
Blackmore was the tenant of New Inn and that he was personating Jeffrey.
Let us reason from this and see what it leads to.

"If the tenant of New Inn was John, then Jeffrey must be elsewhere,
since his concealment at the inn was clearly impossible. But he could
not have been far away, for he had to be producible at short notice
whenever the death of Mrs. Wilson should make the production of his
body necessary. But if he was producible, his person must have been in
the possession or control of John. He could not have been at large, for
that would have involved the danger of his being seen and recognized. He
could not have been in any institution or place where he would be in
contact with strangers. Then he must be in some sort of confinement. But
it is difficult to keep an adult in confinement in an ordinary house.
Such a proceeding would involve great risk of discovery and the use of
violence which would leave traces on the body, to be observed and
commented on at the inquest. What alternative method could be suggested?

"The most obvious method is that of keeping the prisoner in such a state
of debility as would confine him to his bed. But such debility could be
produced by only starvation, unsuitable food, or chronic poisoning. Of
these alternatives, poisoning is much more exact, more calculable in its
effect and more under control. The probabilities, then, were in favour
of chronic poisoning.

"Having reached this stage, I recalled a singular case which Jervis had
mentioned to me and which seemed to illustrate this method. On our
return home I asked him for further particulars, and he then gave me a
very detailed description of the patient and the circumstances. The
upshot was rather startling. I had looked on his case as merely
illustrative, and wished to study it for the sake of the suggestions
that it might offer. But when I had heard his account, I began to
suspect that there was something more than mere parallelism of method.
It began to look as if his patient, Mr. Graves, might actually be
Jeffrey Blackmore.

"The coincidences were remarkable. The general appearance of the patient
tallied completely with Mr. Stephen's description of his uncle Jeffrey.
The patient had a tremulous iris in his right eye and had clearly
suffered from dislocation of the crystalline lens. But from Mr.
Stephen's account of his uncle's sudden loss of sight in the right eye
after a fall, I judged that Jeffrey had also suffered from dislocation
of the lens and therefore had a tremulous iris in the right eye. The
patient, Graves, evidently had defective vision in his left eye, as
proved by the marks made behind his ears by the hooked side-bars of his
spectacles; for it is only on spectacles that are intended for constant
use that we find hooked side-bars. But Jeffrey had defective vision in
his left eye and wore spectacles constantly. Lastly, the patient Graves
was suffering from chronic morphine poisoning, and morphine was found in
the body of Jeffrey.

"Once more, it appeared to me that there were too many coincidences.

"The question as to whether Graves and Jeffrey were identical admitted
of fairly easy disproof; for if Graves was still alive, he could not be
Jeffrey. It was an important question and I resolved to test it without
delay. That night, Jervis and I plotted out the chart, and on the
following morning we located the house. But it was empty and to let.
The birds had flown, and we failed to discover whither they had gone.

"However, we entered the house and explored. I have told you about the
massive bolts and fastenings that we found on the bedroom doors and
window, showing that the room had been used as a prison. I have told you
of the objects that we picked out of the dust-heap under the grate. Of
the obvious suggestion offered by the Japanese brush and the bottle of
'spirit gum' or cement, I need not speak now; but I must trouble you
with some details concerning the broken spectacles. For here we had come
upon the crucial fact to which, as I have said, all sound inductive
reasoning brings one sooner or later.

"The spectacles were of a rather peculiar pattern. The frames were of
the type invented by Mr. Stopford of Moorfields and known by his name.
The right eye-piece was fitted with plain glass, as is usual in the case
of a blind, or useless, eye. It was very much shattered, but its
character was obvious. The glass of the left eye was much thicker and
fortunately less damaged, so that I was able accurately to test its
refraction.

"When I reached home, I laid the pieces of the spectacles together,
measured the frames very carefully, tested the left eye-glass, and wrote
down a full description such as would have been given by the surgeon to
the spectacle-maker. Here it is, and I will ask you to note it
carefully.

"'Spectacles for constant use. Steel frame, Stopford's pattern, curl
sides, broad bridge with gold lining. Distance between centres, 6.2
centimetres; extreme length of side-bars, 13.3 centimetres.

"'Right eye plain glass.

"'Left eye -5.75 D. spherical
            -------------------
           -3.25 D. cylindrical axis 35°.'

"The spectacles, you see, were of a very distinctive character and
seemed to offer a good chance of identification. Stopford's frames are,
I believe, made by only one firm of opticians in London, Parry & Cuxton
of Regent Street. I therefore wrote to Mr. Cuxton, who knows me, asking
him if he had supplied spectacles to the late Jeffrey Blackmore,
Esq.--here is a copy of my letter--and if so, whether he would mind
letting me have a full description of them, together with the name of
the oculist who prescribed them.

"He replied in this letter, which is pinned to the copy of mine, that,
about four years ago, he supplied a pair of glasses to Mr. Jeffrey
Blackmore, and described them thus: 'The spectacles were for constant
use and had steel frames of Stopford's pattern with curl sides, the
length of the side-bars including the curled ends being 13.3 cm. The
bridge was broad with a gold lining-plate, shaped as shown by the
enclosed tracing from the diagram on the prescription. Distance between
centres 6.2 cm.

"'Right eye plain glass.

"'Left eye -5.75 D. spherical
            -------------------
           -3.25 D. cylindrical, axis 35°.'

"'The spectacles were prescribed by Mr. Hindley of Wimpole Street.'

"You see that Mr. Cuxton's description is identical with mine. However,
for further confirmation, I wrote to Mr. Hindley, asking certain
questions, to which he replied thus:

"'You are quite right. Mr. Jeffrey Blackmore had a tremulous iris in his
right eye (which was practically blind), due to dislocation of the lens.
The pupils were rather large; certainly not contracted.'

"Here, then, we have three important facts. One is that the spectacles
found by us at Kennington Lane were undoubtedly Jeffrey's; for it is as
unlikely that there exists another pair of spectacles exactly identical
with those as that there exists another face exactly like Jeffrey's
face. The second fact is that the description of Jeffrey tallies
completely with that of the sick man, Graves, as given by Dr. Jervis;
and the third is that when Jeffrey was seen by Mr. Hindley, there was no
sign of his being addicted to the taking of morphine. The first and
second facts, you will agree, constitute complete identification."

"Yes," said Marchmont; "I think we must admit the identification as
being quite conclusive, though the evidence is of a kind that is more
striking to the medical than to the legal mind."

"You will not have that complaint to make against the next item of
evidence," said Thorndyke. "It is after the lawyer's own heart, as you
shall hear. A few days ago I wrote to Mr. Stephen asking him if he
possessed a recent photograph of his uncle Jeffrey. He had one, and he
sent it to me by return. This portrait I showed to Dr. Jervis and asked
him if he had ever seen the person it represented. After examining it
attentively, without any hint whatever from me, he identified it as the
portrait of the sick man, Graves."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Marchmont. "This is most important. Are you prepared
to swear to the identity, Dr. Jervis?"

"I have not the slightest doubt," I replied, "that the portrait is that
of Mr. Graves."

"Excellent!" said Marchmont, rubbing his hands gleefully; "this will be
much more convincing to a jury. Pray go on, Dr. Thorndyke."

"That," said Thorndyke, "completes the first part of my investigation.
We had now reached a definite, demonstrable fact; and that fact, as you
see, disposed at once of the main question--the genuineness of the will.
For if the man at Kennington Lane was Jeffrey Blackmore, then the man at
New Inn was not. But it was the latter who had signed the will.
Therefore the will was not signed by Jeffrey Blackmore; that is to say,
it was a forgery. The case was complete for the purposes of the civil
proceedings; the rest of my investigations had reference to the criminal
prosecution that was inevitable. Shall I proceed, or is your interest
confined to the will?"

"Hang the will!" exclaimed Stephen. "I want to hear how you propose to
lay hands on the villain who murdered poor old uncle Jeffrey--for I
suppose he did murder him?"

"I think there is no doubt of it," replied Thorndyke.

"Then," said Marchmont, "we will hear the rest of the argument, if you
please."

"Very well," said Thorndyke. "As the evidence stands, we have proved
that Jeffrey Blackmore was a prisoner in the house in Kennington Lane
and that some one was personating him at New Inn. That some one, we have
seen, was, in all probability, John Blackmore. We now have to consider
the man Weiss. Who was he? and can we connect him in any way with New
Inn?

"We may note in passing that Weiss and the coachman were apparently one
and the same person. They were never seen together. When Weiss was
present, the coachman was not available even for so urgent a service as
the obtaining of an antidote to the poison. Weiss always appeared some
time after Jervis's arrival and disappeared some time before his
departure, in each case sufficiently long to allow of a change of
disguise. But we need not labour the point, as it is not of primary
importance.

"To return to Weiss. He was clearly heavily disguised, as we see by his
unwillingness to show himself even by the light of a candle. But there
is an item of positive evidence on this point which is important from
having other bearings. It is furnished by the spectacles worn by Weiss,
of which you have heard Jervis's description. These spectacles had very
peculiar optical properties. When you looked <i>through</i> them they had the
properties of plain glass; when you looked <i>at</i> them they had the
appearance of lenses. But only one kind of glass possesses these
properties; namely, that which, like an ordinary watch-glass, has
curved, parallel surfaces. But for what purpose could a person wear
'watch-glass' spectacles? Clearly, not to assist his vision. The only
alternative is disguise.

"The properties of these spectacles introduce a very curious and
interesting feature into the case. To the majority of persons, the
wearing of spectacles for the purpose of disguise or personation, seems
a perfectly simple and easy proceeding. But, to a person of normal
eyesight, it is nothing of the kind. For, if he wears spectacles suited
for long sight he cannot see distinctly through them at all; while, if
he wears concave, or near sight, glasses, the effort to see through them
produces such strain and fatigue that his eyes become disabled
altogether. On the stage the difficulty is met by using spectacles of
plain window-glass, but in real life this would hardly do; the
'property' spectacles would be detected at once and give rise to
suspicion.

"The personator is therefore in this dilemma: if he wears actual
spectacles, he cannot see through them; if he wears sham spectacles of
plain glass, his disguise will probably be detected. There is only one
way out of the difficulty, and that not a very satisfactory one; but Mr.
Weiss seems to have adopted it in lieu of a better. It is that of using
watch-glass spectacles such as I have described.

"Now, what do we learn from these very peculiar glasses? In the first
place they confirm our opinion that Weiss was wearing a disguise. But,
for use in a room so very dimly lighted, the ordinary stage spectacles
would have answered quite well. The second inference is, then, that
these spectacles were prepared to be worn under more trying conditions
of light--out of doors, for instance. The third inference is that Weiss
was a man with normal eyesight; for otherwise he could have worn real
spectacles suited to the state of his vision.

"These are inferences by the way, to which we may return. But these
glasses furnish a much more important suggestion. On the floor of the
bedroom at New Inn I found some fragments of glass which had been
trodden on. By joining one or two of them together, we have been able to
make out the general character of the object of which they formed parts.
My assistant--who was formerly a watch-maker--judged that object to be
the thin crystal glass of a lady's watch, and this, I think, was
Jervis's opinion. But the small part which remains of the original edge
furnishes proof in two respects that this was not a watch-glass. In the
first place, on taking a careful tracing of this piece of the edge, I
found that its curve was part of an ellipse; but watch-glasses,
nowadays, are invariably circular. In the second place, watch-glasses
are ground on the edge to a single bevel to snap into the bezel or
frame; but the edge of this object was ground to a double bevel, like
the edge of a spectacle-glass, which fits into a groove in the frame and
is held by the side-bar screw. The inevitable inference was that this
was a spectacle-glass. But, if so, it was part of a pair of spectacles
identical in properties with those worn by Mr. Weiss.

"The importance of this conclusion emerges when we consider the
exceptional character of Mr. Weiss's spectacles. They were not merely
peculiar or remarkable; they were probably unique. It is exceedingly
likely that there is not in the entire world another similar pair of
spectacles. Whence the finding of these fragments of glass in the
bedroom establishes a considerable probability that Mr. Weiss was, at
some time, in the chambers at New Inn.

"And now let us gather up the threads of this part of the argument. We
are inquiring into the identity of the man Weiss. Who was he?

"In the first place, we find him committing a secret crime from which
John Blackmore alone will benefit. This suggests the <i>prima-facie</i>
probability that he was John Blackmore.

"Then we find that he was a man of normal eyesight who was wearing
spectacles for the purpose of disguise. But the tenant of New Inn, whom
we have seen to be, almost certainly, John Blackmore--and whom we will,
for the present, assume to have been John Blackmore--was a man with
normal eyesight who wore spectacles for disguise.

"John Blackmore did not reside at New Inn, but at some place within
easy reach of it. But Weiss resided at a place within easy reach of New
Inn.

"John Blackmore must have had possession and control of the person of
Jeffrey. But Weiss had possession and control of the person of Jeffrey.

"Weiss wore spectacles of a certain peculiar and probably unique
character. But portions of such spectacles were found in the chambers at
New Inn.

"The overwhelming probability, therefore, is that Weiss and the tenant
of New Inn were one and the same person; and that that person was John
Blackmore."

"That," said Mr. Winwood, "is a very plausible argument. But, you
observe, sir, that it contains an undistributed middle term."

Thorndyke smiled genially. I think he forgave Winwood everything for
that remark.

"You are quite right, sir," he said. "It does. And, for that reason, the
demonstration is not absolute. But we must not forget, what logicians
seem occasionally to overlook: that the 'undistributed middle,' while it
interferes with absolute proof, may be quite consistent with a degree of
probability that approaches very near to certainty. Both the Bertillon
system and the English fingerprint system involve a process of reasoning
in which the middle term is undistributed. But the great probabilities
are accepted in practice as equivalent to certainties."

Mr. Winwood grunted a grudging assent, and Thorndyke resumed:

"We have now furnished fairly conclusive evidence on three heads: we
have proved that the sick man, Graves, was Jeffrey Blackmore; that the
tenant of New Inn was John Blackmore; and that the man Weiss was also
John Blackmore. We now have to prove that John and Jeffrey were together
in the chambers at New Inn on the night of Jeffrey's death.

"We know that two persons, and two persons only, came from Kennington
Lane to New Inn. But one of those persons was the tenant of New
Inn--that is, John Blackmore. Who was the other? Jeffrey is known by us
to have been at Kennington Lane. His body was found on the following
morning in the room at New Inn. No third person is known to have come
from Kennington Lane; no third person is known to have arrived at New
Inn. The inference, by exclusion, is that the second person--the
woman--was Jeffrey.

"Again; Jeffrey had to be brought from Kennington to the inn by John.
But John was personating Jeffrey and was made up to resemble him very
closely. If Jeffrey were undisguised the two men would be almost exactly
alike; which would be very noticeable in any case and suspicious after
the death of one of them. Therefore Jeffrey would have to be disguised
in some way; and what disguise could be simpler and more effective than
the one that I suggest was used?

"Again; it was unavoidable that some one--the cabman--should know that
Jeffrey was not alone when he came to the inn that night. If the fact
had leaked out and it had become known that a man had accompanied him to
his chambers, some suspicion might have arisen, and that suspicion would
have pointed to John, who was directly interested in his brother's
death. But if it had transpired that Jeffrey was accompanied by a woman,
there would have been less suspicion, and that suspicion would not have
pointed to John Blackmore.

"Thus all the general probabilities are in favour of the hypothesis that
this woman was Jeffrey Blackmore. There is, however, an item of positive
evidence that strongly supports this view. When I examined the clothing
of the deceased, I found on the trousers a horizontal crease on each leg
as if the trousers had been turned up half-way to the knees. This
appearance is quite understandable if we suppose that the trousers were
worn under a skirt and were turned up so that they should not be
accidentally seen. Otherwise it is quite incomprehensible."

"Is it not rather strange," said Marchmont, "that Jeffrey should have
allowed himself to be dressed up in this remarkable manner?"

"I think not," replied Thorndyke. "There is no reason to suppose that he
knew how he was dressed. You have heard Jervis's description of his
condition; that of a mere automaton. You know that without his
spectacles he was practically blind, and that he could not have worn
them since we found them at the house in Kennington Lane. Probably his
head was wrapped up in the veil, and the skirt and mantle put on
afterwards; but, in any case, his condition rendered him practically
devoid of will power. That is all the evidence I have to prove that the
unknown woman was Jeffrey. It is not conclusive but it is convincing
enough for our purpose, seeing that the case against John Blackmore does
not depend upon it."

"Your case against him is on the charge of murder, I presume?" said
Stephen.

"Undoubtedly. And you will notice that the statements made by the
supposed Jeffrey to the porter, hinting at suicide, are now important
evidence. By the light of what we know, the announcement of intended
suicide becomes the announcement of intended murder. It conclusively
disproves what it was intended to prove; that Jeffrey died by his own
hand."

"Yes, I see that," said Stephen, and then after a pause he asked: "Did
you identify Mrs. Schallibaum? You have told us nothing about her."

"I have considered her as being outside the case as far as I am
concerned," replied Thorndyke. "She was an accessory; my business was
with the principal. But, of course, she will be swept up in the net. The
evidence that convicts John Blackmore will convict her. I have not
troubled about her identity. If John Blackmore is married, she is
probably his wife. Do you happen to know if he is married?"

"Yes; but Mrs. John Blackmore is not much like Mrs. Schallibaum,
excepting that she has a cast in the left eye. She is a dark woman with
very heavy eyebrows."

"That is to say that she differs from Mrs. Schallibaum in those
peculiarities that can be artificially changed and resembles her in the
one feature that is unchangeable. Do you know if her Christian name
happens to be Pauline?"

"Yes, it is. She was a Miss Pauline Hagenbeck, a member of an American
theatrical company. What made you ask?"

"The name which Jervis heard poor Jeffrey struggling to pronounce seemed
to me to resemble Pauline more than any other name."

"There is one little point that strikes me," said Marchmont. "Is it not
rather remarkable that the porter should have noticed no difference
between the body of Jeffrey and the living man whom he knew by sight,
and who must, after all, have been distinctly different in appearance?"

"I am glad you raised that question," Thorndyke replied, "for that very
difficulty presented itself to me at the beginning of the case. But on
thinking it over, I decided that it was an imaginary difficulty,
assuming, as we do, that there was a good deal of resemblance between
the two men. Put yourself in the porter's place and follow his mental
processes. He is informed that a dead man is lying on the bed in Mr.
Blackmore's rooms. Naturally, he assumes that the dead man is Mr.
Blackmore--who, by the way, had hinted at suicide only the night before.
With this idea he enters the chambers and sees a man a good deal like
Mr. Blackmore and wearing Mr. Blackmore's clothes, lying on Mr.
Blackmore's bed. The idea that the body could be that of some other
person has never entered his mind. If he notes any difference of
appearance he will put that down to the effects of death; for every one
knows that a man dead looks somewhat different from the same man alive.
I take it as evidence of great acuteness on the part of John Blackmore
that he should have calculated so cleverly, not only the mental process
of the porter, but the erroneous reasoning which every one would base on
the porter's conclusions. For, since the body was actually Jeffrey's,
and was identified by the porter as that of his tenant, it has been
assumed by every one that no question was possible as to the identity of
Jeffrey Blackmore and the tenant of New Inn."

There was a brief silence, and then Marchmont asked:

"May we take it that we have now heard all the evidence?"

"Yes," replied Thorndyke. "That is my case."

"Have you given information to the police?" Stephen asked eagerly.

"Yes. As soon as I had obtained the statement of the cabman, Ridley, and
felt that I had enough evidence to secure a conviction, I called at
Scotland Yard and had an interview with the Assistant Commissioner. The
case is in the hands of Superintendent Miller of the Criminal
Investigation Department, a most acute and energetic officer. I have
been expecting to hear that the warrant has been executed, for Mr.
Miller is usually very punctilious in keeping me informed of the
progress of the cases to which I introduce him. We shall hear to-morrow,
no doubt."

"And, for the present," said Marchmont, "the case seems to have passed
out of our hands."

"I shall enter a caveat, all the same," said Mr. Winwood.

"That doesn't seem very necessary," Marchmont objected. "The evidence
that we have heard is amply sufficient to ensure a conviction and there
will be plenty more when the police go into the case. And a conviction
on the charges of forgery and murder would, of course, invalidate the
second will."

"I shall enter a caveat, all the same," repeated Mr. Winwood.

As the two partners showed a disposition to become heated over this
question, Thorndyke suggested that they might discuss it at leisure by
the light of subsequent events. Acting on this hint--for it was now
close upon midnight--our visitors prepared to depart; and were, in fact,
just making their way towards the door when the bell rang. Thorndyke
flung open the door, and, as he recognized his visitor, greeted him with
evident satisfaction.

"Ha! Mr. Miller; we were just speaking of you. These gentlemen are Mr.
Stephen Blackmore and his solicitors, Mr. Marchmont and Mr. Winwood. You
know Dr. Jervis, I think."

The officer bowed to our friends and remarked:

"I am just in time, it seems. A few minutes more and I should have
missed these gentlemen. I don't know what you'll think of my news."

"You haven't let that villain escape, I hope," Stephen exclaimed.

"Well," said the Superintendent, "he is out of my hands and yours too;
and so is the woman. Perhaps I had better tell you what has happened."

"If you would be so kind," said Thorndyke, motioning the officer to a
chair.

The superintendent seated himself with the manner of a man who has had a
long and strenuous day, and forthwith began his story.

"As soon as we had your information, we procured a warrant for the
arrest of both parties, and then I went straight to their flat with
Inspector Badger and a sergeant. There we learned from the attendant
that they were away from home and were not expected back until to-day
about noon. We kept a watch on the premises, and this morning, about the
time appointed, a man and a woman, answering to the description, arrived
at the flat. We followed them in and saw them enter the lift, and we
were going to get into the lift too, when the man pulled the rope, and
away they went. There was nothing for us to do but run up the stairs,
which we did as fast as we could race; but they got to their landing
first, and we were only just in time to see them nip in and shut the
door. However, it seemed that we had them safe enough, for there was no
dropping out of the windows at that height; so we sent the sergeant to
get a locksmith to pick the lock or force the door, while we kept on
ringing the bell.

"About three minutes after the sergeant left, I happened to look out of
the landing window and saw a hansom pull up opposite the flats. I put my
head out of the window, and, hang me if I didn't see our two friends
getting into the cab. It seems that there was a small lift inside the
flat communicating with the kitchen, and they had slipped down it one at
a time.

"Well, of course, we raced down the stairs like acrobats, but by the
time we got to the bottom the cab was off with a fine start. We ran out
into Victoria Street, and there we could see it half-way down the street
and going like a chariot race. We managed to pick up another hansom and
told the cabby to keep the other one in sight, and away we went like the
very deuce; along Victoria Street and Broad Sanctuary, across Parliament
Square, over Westminster Bridge and along York Road; we kept the other
beggar in sight, but we couldn't gain an inch on him. Then we turned
into Waterloo Station, and, as we were driving up the slope we met
another hansom coming down; and when the cabby kissed his hand and
smiled at us, we guessed that he was the sportsman we had been
following.

"But there was no time to ask questions. It is an awkward station with a
lot of different exits, and it looked a good deal as if our quarry had
got away. However, I took a chance. I remembered that the Southampton
express was due to start about this time, and I took a short cut across
the lines and made for the platform that it starts from. Just as Badger
and I got to the end, about thirty yards from the rear of the train, we
saw a man and a woman running in front of us. Then the guard blew his
whistle and the train began to move. The man and the woman managed to
scramble into one of the rear compartments and Badger and I raced up the
platform like mad. A porter tried to head us off, but Badger capsized
him and we both sprinted harder than ever, and just hopped on the
foot-board of the guard's van as the train began to get up speed. The
guard couldn't risk putting us off, so he had to let us into his van,
which suited us exactly, as we could watch the train on both sides from
the look-out. And we did watch, I can tell you; for our friend in front
had seen us. His head was out of the window as we climbed on to the
foot-board.

"However, nothing happened until we stopped at Southampton West. There,
I need not say, we lost no time in hopping out, for we naturally
expected our friends to make a rush for the exit. But they didn't.
Badger watched the platform, and I kept a look-out to see that they
didn't slip away across the line from the off-side. But still there was
no sign of them. Then I walked up the train to the compartment which I
had seen them enter. And there they were, apparently fast asleep in the
corner by the off-side window, the man leaning back with his mouth open
and the woman resting against him with her head on his shoulder. She
gave me quite a turn when I went in to look at them, for she had her
eyes half-closed and seemed to be looking round at me with a most
horrible expression; but I found afterwards that the peculiar appearance
of looking round was due to the cast in her eye."

"They were dead, I suppose?" said Thorndyke.

"Yes, sir. Stone dead; and I found these on the floor of the carriage."

He held up two tiny yellow glass tubes, each labelled "Hypodermic
tabloids. Aconitine Nitrate gr. 1/640."

"Ha!" exclaimed Thorndyke, "this fellow was well up in alkaloidal
poisons, it seems; and they appear to have gone about prepared for
emergencies. These tubes each contained twenty tabloids, a thirty-second
of a grain altogether, so we may assume that about twelve times the
medicinal dose was swallowed. Death must have occurred in a few minutes,
and a merciful death too."

"A more merciful death than they deserved," exclaimed Stephen, "when one
thinks of the misery and suffering that they inflicted on poor old uncle
Jeffrey. I would sooner have had them hanged."

"It's better as it is, sir," said Miller. "There is no need, now, to
raise any questions in detail at the inquest. The publicity of a trial
for murder would have been very unpleasant for you. I wish Dr. Jervis
had given the tip to me instead of to that confounded,
over-cautious--but there, I mustn't run down my brother officers: and
it's easy to be wise after the event.

"Good night, gentlemen. I suppose this accident disposes of your
business as far as the will is concerned?"

"I suppose it does," agreed Mr. Winwood. "But I shall enter a caveat,
all the same."


THE END

