
A DESERT DRAMA




CHAPTER I

The public may possibly wonder why it is that they have never heard in
the papers of the fate of the passengers of the __Korosko__. In these
days of universal press agencies, responsive to the slightest stimulus,
it may well seem incredible that an international incident of such
importance should remain so long unchronicled. Suffice it that there
were very valid reasons, both of a personal and political nature, for
holding it back. The facts were well known to a good number of people at
the time, and some version of them did actually appear in a provincial
paper, but was generally discredited They have now been thrown into
narrative form, the incidents having been collated from the sworn
statements of Colonel Cochrane Cochrane, of the Army and Navy Club,
and from the letters of Miss Adams, of Boston, Mass. These have been
supplemented by the evidence of Captain Archer, of the Egyptian Camel
Corps, as given before the secret Government inquiry at Cairo. Mr. James
Stephens has refused to put his version of the matter into writing,
but as these proofs have been submitted to him, and no correction or
deletion has been made in them, it may be supposed that he has not
succeeded in detecting any grave misstatement of fact, and that any
objection which he may have to their publication depends rather upon
private and personal scruples.

The __Korosko__, a turtle-bottomed, round-bowed stern-wheeler, with a
30-inch draught and the lines of a flat-iron, started upon the 13th
of February, in the year 1895, from Shellal, at the head of the first
cataract, bound for Wady Haifa. I have a passenger card for the trip,
which I hereby produce:

S. W. "_Korosko_," February 13TH.

PASSENGERS.

     Colonel Cochrane Cochrane         London

     Mr. Cecil Brown                   London

     John H. Headingly                 Boston, USA

     Miss Adams                        Boston, USA

     Miss S. Adams                     Worcester, Mass,  USA

     Mons Fardet                       Paris

     Mr. and Mrs. Belmont              Dublin

     James Stephens                    Manchester

     Rev. John Stuart                  Birmingham

     Mrs. Shlesinger, nurse and child  Florence


This was the party as it started from Shellal with the intention of
travelling up the two hundred miles of Nubian Nile which lie between the
first and the second cataract.

It is a singular country, this Nubia. Varying in breadth from a few
miles to as many yards (for the name is only applied to the narrow
portion which is capable of cultivation), it extends in a thin, green,
palm-fringed strip upon either side of the broad coffee-coloured river.
Beyond it there stretches on the Libyan bank a savage and illimitable
desert, extending to the whole breadth of Africa. On the other side
an equally desolate wilderness is bounded only by the distant Red Sea.
Between these two huge and barren expanses Nubia writhes like a green
sandworm along the course of the river. Here and there it disappears
altogether, and the Nile runs between black and sun-cracked hills, with
the orange drift-sand lying like glaciers in their valleys. Everywhere
one sees traces of vanished races and submerged civilisations. Grotesque
graves dot the hills or stand up against the sky-line: pyramidal graves,
tumulus graves, rock graves,--everywhere, graves. And, occasionally,
as the boat rounds a rocky point, one sees a deserted city up
above,--houses, walls, battlements, with the sun shining through the
empty window squares. Sometimes you learn that it has been Roman,
sometimes Egyptian, sometimes all record of its name or origin has been
absolutely lost, You ask yourself in amazement why any race should build
in so uncouth a solitude, and you find it difficult to accept the theory
that this has only been of value as a guard-house to the richer country
down below, and that these frequent cities have been so many fortresses
to hold off the wild and predatory men of the south. But whatever be
their explanation, be it a fierce neighbour, or be it a climatic change,
there they stand, these grim and silent cities, and up on the hills you
can see the graves of their people, like the port-holes of a man-of-war.
It is through this weird, dead country that the tourists smoke and
gossip and flirt as they pass up to the Egyptian frontier.

The passengers of the _Korosko_ formed a merry party, for most of them
had travelled up together from Cairo to Assouan, and even Anglo-Saxon
ice thaws rapidly upon the Nile. They were fortunate in being without
the single disagreeable person who in these small boats is sufficient to
mar the enjoyment of the whole party. On a vessel which is little more
than a large steam launch, the bore, the cynic, or the grumbler holds
the company at his mercy. But the _Korosko_ was free from anything of
the kind. Colonel Cochrane Cochrane was one of those officers whom the
British Government, acting upon a large system of averages, declares at
a certain age to be incapable of further service, and who demonstrate
the worth of such a system by spending their declining years in
exploring Morocco, or shooting lions in Somaliland. He was a dark,
straight, aquiline man, with a courteously deferential manner, but
a steady, questioning eye; very neat in his dress and precise in
his habits, a gentleman to the tips of his trim fingernails. In his
Anglo-Saxon dislike to effusiveness he had cultivated a self-contained
manner which was apt at first acquaintance to be repellant, and he
seemed to those who really knew him to be at some pains to conceal
the kind heart and human emotions which influenced his actions. It
was respect rather than affection which he inspired among his
fellow-travellers, for they felt, like all who had ever met him, that
he was a man with whom acquaintance was unlikely to ripen into
a friendship, though a friendship when once attained would be an
unchanging and inseparable part of himself. He wore a grizzled military
moustache, but his hair was singularly black for a man of his years. He
made no allusion in his conversation to the numerous campaigns in which
he had distinguished himself, and the reason usually given for his
reticence was that they dated back to such early Victorian days that
he had to sacrifice his military glory at the shrine of his perennial
youth.

Mr. Cecil Brown--to take the names in the chance order in which
they appear upon the passenger list--was a young diplomatist from a
Continental Embassy, a man slightly tainted with the Oxford manner, and
erring upon the side of unnatural and inhuman refinement, but full of
interesting talk and cultured thought. He had a sad, handsome face, a
small wax-tipped moustache, a low voice and a listless manner, which was
relieved by a charming habit of suddenly lighting up into a rapid smile
and gleam when anything caught his fancy. An acquired cynicism was
eternally crushing and overlying his natural youthful enthusiasms, and
he ignored what was obvious while expressing keen appreciation for what
seemed to the average man to be either trivial or unhealthy. He chose
Walter Pater for his travelling author, and sat all day, reserved but
affable, under the awning, with his novel and his sketch-book upon a
campstool beside him. His personal dignity prevented him from making
advances to others, but if they chose to address him, they found him a
courteous and amiable companion.

The Americans formed a group by themselves. John H. Headingly was a New
Englander, a graduate of Harvard, who was completing his education by
a tour round the world. He stood for the best type of young
American,--quick, observant, serious, eager for knowledge, and fairly
free from prejudice, with a fine ballast of unsectarian but earnest
religious feeling, which held him steady amid all the sudden gusts of
youth. He had less of the appearance and more of the reality of culture
than the young Oxford diplomatist, for he had keener emotions though
less exact knowledge. Miss Adams and Miss Sadie Adams were aunt and
niece, the former a little, energetic, hard-featured Bostonian old-maid,
with a huge surplus of unused love behind her stern and swarthy
features. She had never been from home before, and she was now busy
upon the self-imposed task of bringing the East up to the standard of
Massachusetts. She had hardly landed in Egypt before she realised that
the country needed putting to rights, and since the conviction struck
her she had been very fully occupied. The saddle-galled donkeys, the
starved pariah dogs, the flies round the eyes of the babies, the naked
children, the importunate begging, the ragged, untidy women,--they were
all challenges to her conscience, and she plunged in bravely at her work
of reformation. As she could not speak a word of the language, however,
and was unable to make any of the delinquents understand what it was
that she wanted, her passage up the Nile left the immemorial East
very much as she had found it, but afforded a good deal of sympathetic
amusement to her fellow-travellers. No one enjoyed her efforts more than
her niece, Sadie, who shared with Mrs. Belmont the distinction of being
the most popular person upon the boat. She was very young,--fresh from
Smith College,--and she still possessed many both of the virtues and of
the faults of a child. She had the frankness, the trusting confidence,
the innocent straightforwardness, the high spirits, and also the
loquacity and the want of reverence. But even her faults caused
amusement, and if she had preserved many of the characteristics of
a clever child, she was none the less a tall and handsome woman, who
looked older than her years on account of that low curve of the hair
over the ears, and that fulness of bodice and skirt which Mr. Gibson has
either initiated or imitated. The whisk of those skirts, and the frank
incisive voice and pleasant, catching laugh were familiar and welcome
sounds on board of the _Korosko_. Even the rigid Colonel softened into
geniality, and the Oxford-bred diplomatist forgot to be unnatural with
Miss Sadie Adams as a companion.

The other passengers may be dismissed more briefly. Some were
interesting, some neutral, and all amiable. Monsieur Fardet was a
good-natured but argumentative Frenchman, who held the most decided
views as to the deep machinations of Great Britain and the illegality
of her position in Egypt. Mr. Belmont was an iron-grey, sturdy Irishman,
famous as an astonishingly good long-range rifle-shot, who had carried
off nearly every prize which Wimbledon or Bisley had to offer. With him
was his wife, a very charming and refined woman, full of the pleasant
playfulness of her country. Mrs. Shiesinger was a middle-aged widow,
quiet and soothing, with her thoughts all taken up by her six-year-old
child, as a mother's thoughts are likely to be in a boat which has an
open rail for a bulwark. The Reverend John Stuart was a
Non-conformist minister from Birmingham,--either a Presbyterian or a
Congregationalist,--a man of immense stoutness, slow and torpid in his
ways, but blessed with a considerable fond of homely humour, which made
him, I am told, a very favourite preacher and an effective speaker from
advanced radical platforms.

Finally, there was Mr. James Stephens, a Manchester solicitor (junior
partner of Hickson, Ward, and Stephens), who was travelling to shake off
the effects of an attack of influenza. Stephens was a man who, in the
course of thirty years, had worked himself up from cleaning the firm's
windows to managing its business. For most of that long time he had been
absolutely immersed in dry, technical work, living with the one idea of
satisfying old clients and attracting new ones, until his mind and soul
had become as formal and precise as the laws which he expounded. A fine
and sensitive nature was in danger of being as warped as a busy city
man's is liable to become. His work had become an engrained habit, and,
being a bachelor, he had hardly an interest in life to draw him away
from it, so that his soul was being gradually bricked up like the body
of a mediæval nun. But at last there came this kindly illness, and
Nature hustled James Stephens out of his groove, and sent him into the
broad world far away from roaring Manchester and his shelves full of
calf-skin authorities. At first he resented it deeply. Everything seemed
trivial to him compared to his own petty routine. But gradually his eyes
were opened, and he began dimly to see that it was his work which was
trivial when compared to this wonderful, varied, inexplicable world of
which he was so ignorant. Vaguely he realised that the interruption to
his career might be more important than the career itself. All sorts
of new interests took, possession of him; and the middle-aged lawyer
developed an after-glow of that youth which had been wasted among his
books. His character was too formed to admit of his being anything
but dry and precise in his ways, and a trifle pedantic in his mode of
speech; but he read and thought and observed, scoring his "Baedeker"
with underlinings and annotations as he had once done his "Prideaux's
Commentaries." He had travelled up from Cairo with the party, and
had contracted a friendship with Miss Adams and her niece. The young
American girl, with her chatter, her audacity, and her constant flow of
high spirits, amused and interested him, and she in turn felt a mixture
of respect and of pity for his knowledge and his limitations. So they
became good friends, and people smiled to see his clouded face and her
sunny one bending over the same guide-book.

The little _Korosko_ puffed and spluttered her way up the river, kicking
up the white water behind her, and making more noise and fuss over her
five knots an hour than an Atlantic liner on a record voyage. On deck,
under the thick awning, sat her little family of passengers, and every
few hours she eased down and sidled up to the bank to allow them to
visit one more of that innumerable succession of temples. The remains,
however, grow more modern as one ascends from Cairo, and travellers who
have sated themselves at Gizeh and Sakara with the contemplation of the
very oldest buildings which the hands of man have constructed, become
impatient of temples which are hardly older than the Christian era.
Ruins which would be gazed upon with wonder and veneration in any other
country are hardly noticed in Egypt. The tourists viewed with languid
interest the half-Greek art of the Nubian bas-reliefs; they climbed the
hill of _Korosko_ to see the sun rise over the savage Eastern desert;
they were moved to wonder by the great shrine of Abou-Simbel, where
some old race has hollowed out a mountain as if it were a cheese;
and, finally, upon the evening of the fourth day of their travels they
arrived at Wady Haifa, the frontier garrison town, some few hours after
they were due, on account of a small mishap in the engine-room. The
next morning was to be devoted to an expedition to the famous rock of
Abousir, from which a great view may be obtained of the second cataract.
At eight-thirty, as the passengers sat on deck after dinner, Mansoor,
the dragoman, half Copt half Syrian, came forward, according to the
nightly custom, to announce the programme for the morrow.

"Ladies and gentlemen," said he, plunging boldly into the rapid but
broken stream of his English, "to-morrow you will remember not to forget
to rise when the gong strikes you for to compress the journey before
twelve o'clock. Having arrived at the place where the donkeys expect us,
we shall ride five miles over the desert, passing a very fine temple of
Ammon-ra which dates itself from the eighteenth dynasty upon the way,
and so reach the celebrated pulpit rock of Abou-sir. The pulpit rock is
supposed to have been called so because it is a rock like a pulpit.
When you have reached it you will know that you are on the very edge of
civilisation, and that very little more will take you into the country
of the Dervishes, which will be obvious to you at the top. Having passed
the summit, you will perceive the full extremity of the second cataract,
embracing wild natural beauties of the most dreadful variety. Here all
very famous people carve their names,--and so you will carve your names
also."

[Illustration: So you will carve your names also p26]

Mansoor waited expectantly for a titter, and bowed to it when it
arrived. "You will then return to Wady Haifa, and there remain two hours
to suspect (sp.) the Camel Corps, including the grooming of the beasts,
and the bazaar before returning, so I wish you a very happy good-night."
There was a gleam of his white teeth in the lamplight, and then his
long, dark petticoats, his short English cover-coat, and his red
tarboosh vanished successively down the ladder. The low buzz of
conversation which had been suspended by his coming broke out anew.

"I'm relying on you, Mr. Stephens, to tell me all about Abousir," said
Miss Sadie Adams. "I do like to know what I am looking at right there at
the time, and not six hours afterwards in my state-room. I haven't got
Abou-Simbel and the wall pictures straight in my mind yet, though I saw
them yesterday."

"I never hope to keep up with it," said her aunt. "When I am safe back
in Commonwealth Avenue, and there's no dragoman to hustle me around,
I'll have time to read about it all, and then I expect I shall begin
to enthuse and want to come right back again. But it's just too good of
you, Mr. Stephens, to try and keep us informed."

"I thought that you might wish precise information, and so I prepared a
small digest of the matter," said Stephens, handing a slip of paper to
Miss Sadie. She looked at it in the light of the deck lamp, and broke
into her low, hearty laugh.

"_Re_ Abousir," she read; "now, what _do_ you mean by '_re_,' Mr.
Stephens? You put '_re_ Rameses the Second' on the last paper you gave
me."

"It is a habit I have acquired, Miss Sadie," said Stephens; "it is the
custom in the legal profession when they make a memo."

"Make what, Mr. Stephens?"

"A memo a memorandum, you know. We put _re_ so-and-so to show what it is
about."

"I suppose it's a good short way," said Miss Sadie, "but it feels
queer somehow when applied to scenery or to dead Egyptian kings. '_Re_
Cheops,'--doesn't that strike you as funny?"

"No, I can't say that it does," said Stephens.

"I wonder if it is true that the English have less humour than the
Americans, or whether it's just another kind of humour," said the girl.
She had a quiet, abstracted way of talking as if she were thinking
aloud. "I used to imagine they had less, and yet, when you come to
think of it, Dickens and Thackeray and Barrie, and so many other of the
humourists we admire most, are Britishers. Besides, I never in all my
days heard people laugh so hard as in that London theatre. There was a
man behind us, and every time he laughed auntie looked round to see if
a door had opened, he made such a draught. But you have some funny
expressions, Mr. Stephens!"

"What else strikes you as funny, Miss Sadie?"

"Well, when you sent me the temple ticket and the little map, you
began your letter, 'Enclosed, please find,' and then at the bottom, in
brackets, you had '2 enclo.'"

"That is the usual form in business."

"Yes, in business," said Sadie, demurely, and there was a silence.

"There's one thing I wish," remarked Miss Adams, in the hard, metallic
voice with which she disguised her softness of heart, "and that is, that
I could see the Legislature of this country and lay a few cold-drawn
facts in front of them, I'd make a platform of my own, Mr. Stephens, and
run a party on my ticket. A Bill for the compulsory use of eyewash would
be one of my planks, and another would be for the abolition of those
Yashmak veil things which turn a woman into a bale of cotton goods with
a pair of eyes looking out of it."

"I never could think why they wore them," said Sadie; "until one day I
saw one with her veil lifted. Then I knew."

"They make me tired, those women," cried Miss Adams, wrathfully. "One
might as well try to preach duty and decency and cleanliness to a line
of bolsters. Why, good land, it was only yesterday at Abou-Simbel, Mr.
Stephens, I was passing one of their houses,--if you can call a mud-pie
like that a house,--and I saw two of the children at the door with the
usual crust of flies round their eyes, and great holes in their poor
little blue gowns! So I got off my donkey, and I turned up my sleeves,
and I washed their faces well with my handkerchief, and sewed up the
rents,--for in this country I would as soon think of going ashore
without my needle-case as without my white umbrella, Mr. Stephens. Then
as I warmed on the job I got into the room,--such a room!--and I packed
the folks out of it, and I fairly did the chores as if I had been the
hired help. I've seen no more of that temple of Abou-Simbel than if I
had never left Boston; but, my sakes, I saw more dust and mess than
you would think they could crowd into a house the size of a Newport
bathing-hut. From the time I pinned up my skirt until I came out, with
my face the colour of that smoke-stack, wasn't more than an hour, or
maybe an hour and a half, but I had that house as clean and fresh as a
new pine-wood box. I had a _New York Herald_ with me, and I lined their
shelf with paper for them. Well, Mr. Stephens, when I had done washing
my hands outside, I came past the door again, and there were those two
children sitting on the stoop with their eyes full of flies, and all
just the same as ever, except that each had a little paper cap made out
of the _New York Herald_ upon his head. But, say, Sadie, it's going on
to ten o'clock, and tomorrow an early excursion."

"It's just too beautiful, this purple sky and the great silver stars,"
said Sadie. "Look at the silent desert and the black shadows of the
hills. It's grand, but it's terrible, too; and then when you think that
we really _are_, as that dragoman said just now, on the very end of
civilisation, and with nothing but savagery and bloodshed down there
where the Southern Cross is twinkling so prettily, why, it's like
standing on the beautiful edge of a live volcano."

"Shucks, Sadie, don't talk like that, child," said the older woman,
nervously. "It's enough to scare any one to listen to you."

"Well, but don't you feel it yourself, Auntie? Look at that great desert
stretching away and away until it is lost in the shadows. Hear the sad
whisper of the wind across it! It's just the most solemn thing that ever
I saw in my life."

"I'm glad we've found something that will make you solemn, my dear,"
said her Aunt. "I've sometimes thought---- Sakes alive, what's that?"

From somewhere amongst the hill shadows upon the other side of the river
there had risen a high shrill whimpering, rising and swelling, to end in
a long weary wail.

"It's only a jackal, Miss Adams," said Stephens. "I heard one when we
went out to see the Sphinx by moonlight."

But the American lady had risen, and her face showed that her nerves had
been ruffled.

"If I had my time over again I wouldn't have come past Assouan," said
she. "I can't think what possessed me to bring you all the way up here,
Sadie. Your mother will think that I am clean crazy, and I'd never dare
to look her in the eye if anything went wrong with us. I've seen all
I want to see of this river, and all I ask now is to be back at Cairo
again."

"Why, Auntie," cried the girl, "it isn't like you to be faint-hearted."

"Well, I don't know how it is, Sadie, but I feel a bit unstrung, and
that beast caterwauling over yonder was just more than I could put up
with. There's one consolation, we are scheduled to be on our way home
to-morrow, after we've seen this one rock or temple, or whatever it is.
I'm full up of rocks and temples, Mr. Stephens. I shouldn't mope if I
never saw another. Come, Sadie! Good-night!"

"Good-night! Good-night, Miss Adams!" and the two ladies passed down to
their cabins.

Monsieur Fardet was chatting, in a subdued voice, with Headingly, the
young Harvard graduate, bending forward confidentially between the
whiffs of his cigarette.

"Dervishes, Mister Headingly!" said he, speaking excellent English, but
separating his syllables as a Frenchman will. "There are no Dervishes.
They do not exist."

"Why, I thought the woods were full of them," said the American.

Monsieur Fardet glanced across to where the red core of Colonel
Cochrane's cigar was glowing through the darkness.

"You are an American, and you do not like the English," he whispered.
"It is perfectly comprehended upon the Continent that the Americans are
opposed to the English."

"Well," said Headingly, with his slow, deliberate manner, "I won't say
that we have not our tiffs, and there are some of our people--mostly of
Irish stock--who are always mad with England; but the most of us have a
kindly thought for the mother country. You see, they may be aggravating
folk sometimes, but after all they are our _own_ folk, and we can't wipe
that off the slate."

"_Eh bien!_" said the Frenchman. "At least I can say to you what I could
not without offence say to these others. And I repeat that there _are_
no Dervishes. They were an invention of Lord Cromer in the year 1885."

"You don't say!" cried Headingly.

"It is well known in Paris, and has been exposed in _La Patrie_ and
other of our so well-informed papers."

"But this is colossal," said Headingly.

"Do you mean to tell me, Monsieur Fardet, that the siege of Khartoum and
the death of Gordon and the rest of it was just one great bluff?"

"I will not deny that there was an emeute, but it was local, you
understand, and now long forgotten. Since then there has been profound
peace in the Soudan."

"But I have heard of raids, Monsieur Fardet, and I've read of battles,
too, when the Arabs tried to invade Egypt. It was only two days ago that
we passed Toski, where the dragoman said there had been a fight. Is that
all bluff also?"

"Pah, my friend, you do not know the English. You look at them as you
see them with their pipes and their contented faces, and you say, 'Now,
these are good, simple folk who will never hurt any one.' But all the
time they are thinking and watching and planning. 'Here is Egypt weak,'
they cry. '_Allons!_' and down they swoop like a gull upon a crust. 'You
have no right there,' says the world. 'Come out of it!' But England has
already begun to tidy everything, just like the good Miss Adams when she
forces her way into the house of an Arab. 'Come out,' says the world.
'Certainly,' says England; 'just wait one little minute until I have
made everything nice and proper.' So the world waits for a year or so,
and then it says once again, 'Come out.' 'Just wait a little,' says
England; 'there is trouble at Khartoum, and when I have set that all
right I shall be very glad to come out.' So they wait until it is all
over, and then again they say, 'Come out.' 'How can I come out,' says
England, 'when there are still raids and battles going on? If we were
to leave, Egypt would be run over.' 'But there are no raids,' says the
world. 'Oh, are there not?' says England, and then within a week sure
enough the papers are full of some new raid of Dervishes. We are not all
blind, Mister Headingly. We understand very well how such things can be
done. A few Bedouins, a little backsheesh, some blank cartridges, and,
behold--a raid!"

"Well, well," said the American, "I'm glad to know the rights of this
business, for it has often puzzled me. But what does England get out of
it?"

"She gets the country, monsieur."

"I see. You mean, for example, that there is a favourable tariff for
British goods?"

"No, monsieur; it is the same for all."

"Well, then, she gives the contracts to Britishers?"

"Precisely, monsieur."

"For example, the railroad that they are building right through the
country, the one that runs alongside the river, that would be a valuable
contract for the British?"

Monsieur Fardet was an honest man, if an imaginative one.

"It is a French company, monsieur, which holds the railway contract,"
said he.

The American was puzzled.

"They don't seem to get much for their trouble," said he. "Still, of
course, there must be some indirect pull somewhere. For example, Egypt
no doubt has to pay and keep all those red-coats in Cairo."

"Egypt, monsieur! No, they are paid by England."

"Well, I suppose they know their own business best, but they seem to me
to take a great deal of trouble, and to get mighty little in exchange.
If they don't mind keeping order and guarding the frontier, with a
constant war against the Dervishes on their hands, I don't know why any
one should object. I suppose no one denies that the prosperity of the
country has increased enormously since they came. The revenue returns
show that. They tell me, also, that the poorer folks have justice, which
they never had before."

"What are they doing here at all?" cried the Frenchman, angrily. "Let
them go back to their island. We cannot have them all over the world."

"Well, certainly, to us Americans who live all in our own land it does
seem strange how you European nations are for ever slopping over into
some other country which was not meant for you. It's easy for us to
talk, of course, for we have still got room and to spare for all our
people. When we start pushing each other over the edge we shall have to
start annexing also. But at present just here in North Africa there is
Italy in Abyssinia, and England in Egypt, and France in Algiers----"

"France!" cried Monsieur Fardet. "Algiers belongs to France. You laugh,
monsieur. I have the honour to wish you a very good-night." He rose from
his seat, and walked off, rigid with outraged patriotism, to his cabin.




CHAPTER II

The young American hesitated for a little, debating in his mind whether
he should not go down and post up the daily record of his impressions
which he kept for his home-staying sister. But the cigars of Colonel
Cochrane and of Cecil Brown were still twinkling in the far corner of
the deck, and the student was acquisitive in the search of information.
He did not quite know how to lead up to the matter, but the Colonel very
soon did it for him.

"Come on, Headingly," said he, pushing a camp-stool in his direction.
"This is the place for an antidote. I see that Fardet has been pouring
politics into your ear."

"I can always recognise the confidential stoop of his shoulders when he
discusses _la haute politique_" said the dandy diplomatist. "But what
a sacrilege upon a night like this! What a nocturne in blue and silver
might be suggested by that moon rising above the desert. There is a
movement in one of Mendelssohn's songs which seems to embody it
all,--a sense of vastness, of repetition, the cry of the wind over an
interminable expanse. The subtler emotions which cannot be translated
into words are still to be hinted at by chords and harmonies."

"It seems wilder and more savage than ever to-night," remarked the
American. "It gives me the same feeling of pitiless force that the
Atlantic does upon a cold, dark, winter day. Perhaps it is the knowledge
that we are right there on the very edge of any kind of law and
order. How far do you suppose that we are from any Dervishes, Colonel
Cochrane?"

"Well, on the Arabian side," said the Colonel, "we have the Egyptian
fortified camp of Sarras about forty miles to the south of us. Beyond
that are sixty miles of very wild country before you would come to the
Dervish post at Akasheh. On this other side, however, there is nothing
between us and them."

"Abousir is on this side, is it not?"

"Yes. That is why the excursion to the Abousir Rock has been forbidden
for the last year. But things are quieter now."

"What is to prevent them from coming down on that side?"

"Absolutely nothing," said Cecil Brown, in his listless voice.

"Nothing, except their fears. The coming, of course, would be absolutely
simple. The difficulty would lie in the return. They might find it hard
to get back if their camels were spent and the Haifa garrison with their
beasts fresh got on their track. They know it as well as we do, and it
has kept them from trying."

"It isn't safe to reckon upon a Dervish's fears," remarked Brown. "We
must always bear in mind that they are not amenable to the same motives
as other people. Many of them are anxious to meet death, and all of
them are absolute, uncompromising believers in destiny. They exist as a
_reductio ad absurdum_ of all bigotry,--a proof of how surely it leads
towards blank barbarism."

"You think these people are a real menace to Egypt?" asked the American.
"There seems from what I have heard to be some difference of opinion
about it. Monsieur Fardet, for example, does not seem to think that the
danger is a very pressing one."

"I am not a rich man," Colonel Cochrane answered, after a little pause,
"but I am prepared to lay all I am worth that within three years of
the British officers being withdrawn, the Dervishes would be upon the
Mediterranean. Where would the civilisation of Egypt be? where would the
hundreds of millions be which have been invested in this country? where
the monuments which all nations look upon as most precious memorials of
the past?"

"Come now, Colonel," cried Headingly, laughing, "surely you don't mean
that they would shift the pyramids?"

"You cannot foretell what they would do. There is no iconoclast in the
world like an extreme Mohammedan. Last time they overran this country
they burned the Alexandrian library. You know that all representations
of the human features are against the letter of the Koran. A statue is
always an irreligious object in their eyes. What do these fellows care
for the sentiment of Europe? The more they could offend it the more
delighted they would be. Down would go the Sphinx, the Colossi, the
Statues of Abou-Simbel,--as the saints went down in England before
Cromwell's troopers."

"Well now," said Headingly, in his slow, thoughtful fashion, "suppose I
grant you that the Dervishes could overrun Egypt, and suppose also that
you English are holding them out, what I'm never done asking is, what
reason have you for spending all these millions of dollars and the lives
of so many of your men? What do you get out of it, more than France
gets, or Germany, or any other country, that runs no risk and never lays
out a cent?"

"There are a good many Englishmen who are asking themselves that
question," remarked Cecil Brown. "It's my opinion that we have been the
policemen of the world long enough. We policed the seas for pirates and
slavers. Now we police the land for Dervishes and brigands and every
sort of danger to civilisation. There is never a mad priest or a witch
doctor, or a firebrand of any sort on this planet, who does not report
his appearance by sniping the nearest British officer. One tires of it
at last. If a Kurd breaks loose in Asia Minor, the world wants to know
why Great Britain does not keep him in order. If there is a military
mutiny in Egypt, or a Jehad in the Soudan, it is still Great Britain who
has to set it right. And all to an accompaniment of curses such as the
policeman gets when he seizes a ruffian among his pals. We get hard
knocks and no thanks, and why should we do it? Let Europe do its own
dirty work."

"Well," said Colonel Cochrane, crossing his legs and leaning forward
with the decision of a man who has definite opinions, "I don't at all
agree with you, Brown, and I think that to advocate such a course is
to take a very limited view of our national duties. I think that behind
national interests and diplomacy and all that there lies a great guiding
force,--a Providence, in fact,--which is for ever getting the best out
of each nation and using it for the good of the whole. When a nation
ceases to respond, it is time that she went into hospital for a few
centuries, like Spain or Greece,--the virtue has gone out of her. A man
or a nation is not here upon this earth merely to do what is pleasant
and profitable. It is often called upon to carry out what is unpleasant
and unprofitable; but if it is obviously right, it is mere shirking not
to undertake it."

Headingly nodded approvingly.

"Each has its own mission. Germany is predominant in abstract thought;
France in literature, art, and grace. But we and you,--for the
English-speakers are all in the same boat, however much the _New York
Sun_ may scream over it,--we and you have among our best men a higher
conception of moral sense and public duty than is to be found in any
other people. Now, these are the two qualities which are needed for
directing a weaker race. You can't help them by abstract thought or by
graceful art, but only by that moral sense which will hold the scales of
Justice even, and keep itself free from every taint of corruption. That
is how we rule India. We came there by a kind of natural law, like air
rushing into a vacuum. All over the world, against our direct interests
and our deliberate intentions, we are drawn into the same thing. And
it will happen to you also. The pressure of destiny will force you to
administer the whole of America from Mexico to the Horn."

Headingly whistled.

"Our Jingoes would be pleased to hear you, Colonel Cochrane," said he.
"They'd vote you into our Senate and make you one of the Committee on
Foreign Relations."

"The world is small, and it grows smaller every day. It's a single
organic body, and one spot of gangrene is enough to vitiate the
whole. There's no room upon it for dishonest, defaulting, tyrannical,
irresponsible Governments. As long as they exist they will always be
centres of trouble and of danger. But there are many races which appear
to be so incapable of improvement that we can never hope to get a good
Government out of them. What is to be done, then? The former device of
Providence in such a case was extermination by some more virile stock.
An Attila or a Tamerlane pruned off the weaker branch. Now, we have a
more merciful substitution of rulers, or even of mere advice from a more
advanced race. That is the case with the Central Asian Khanates and with
the protected States of India. If the work has to be done, and if we are
the best fitted for the work, then I think that it would be a cowardice
and a crime to shirk it."

"But who is to decide whether it is a fitting case for your
interference?" objected the American. "A predatory country could grab
every other land in the world upon such a pretext."

"Events--inexorable, inevitable events--will decide it. Take this
Egyptian business as an example. In 1881 there was nothing in this world
further from the minds of our people than any interference with Egypt;
and yet 1882 left us in possession of the country. There was never any
choice in the chain of events. A massacre in the streets of Alexandria,
and the mounting of guns to drive out our fleet--which was there, you
understand, in fulfilment of solemn treaty obligations--led to the
bombardment. The bombardment led to a landing to save the city from
destruction. The landing caused an extension of operations--and here we
are, with the country upon our hands. At the time of trouble we begged
and implored the French or any one else to come and help us to set the
thing to rights, but they all deserted us when there was work to be
done, though they are ready enough to scold and to impede us now. When
we tried to get out of it, up came this wild Dervish movement, and we
had to sit tighter than ever. We never wanted the task; but, now that it
has come, we must put it through in a workmanlike manner. We've brought
justice into the country, and purity of administration, and protection
for the poor man. It has made more advance in the last twelve years than
since the Moslem invasion in the seventh century. Except the pay of a
couple of hundred men, who spend their money in the country, England has
neither directly nor indirectly made a shilling out of it, and I
don't believe you will find in history a more successful and more
disinterested bit of work."

Headingly puffed thoughtfully at his cigarette.

"There is a house near ours, down on the Back Bay at Boston, which just
ruins the whole prospect," said he. "It has old chairs littered about
the stoop, and the shingles are loose, and the garden runs wild; but I
don't know that the neighbours are exactly justified in rushing in, and
stamping around, and running the thing on their own lines."

"Not if it were on fire?" asked the Colonel.

Headingly laughed, and rose from his camp-stool.

"Well, it doesn't come within the provisions of the Monroe Doctrine,
Colonel," said he. "I'm beginning to think, that modern Egypt is every
bit as interesting as ancient, and that Rameses the Second wasn't the
last live man in the country."

The two Englishmen rose and yawned.

"Yes, it's a whimsical freak of fortune which has sent men from a little
island in the Atlantic to administer the land of the Pharaohs. We shall
pass away and never leave a trace among the successive races who have
held the country, for it is an Anglo-Saxon custom to write their deeds
upon rocks. I dare say that the remains of a Cairo drainage system will
be our most permanent record, unless they prove a thousand years hence
that it was the work of the Hyksos kings," remarked Cecil Brown. "But
here is the shore party come back."

Down below they could hear the mellow Irish accents of Mrs. Belmont and
the deep voice of her husband, the iron-grey rifleshot. Mr. Stuart, the
fat Birmingham clergyman, was thrashing out a question of piastres
with a noisy donkey-boy, and the others were joining in with chaff and
advice. Then the hubbub died away, the party from above came down the
ladder, there were "good-nights," the shutting of doors, and the little
steamer lay silent, dark, and motionless in the shadow of the high Haifa
bank. And beyond this one point of civilisation and of comfort there
lay the limitless, savage, unchangeable desert, straw-coloured and
dream-like in the moonlight, mottled over with the black shadows of the
hills.




CHAPTER III

"Stoppa! Backa!" cried the native pilot to the European engineer.

The bluff bows of the stern-wheeler had squelched into the soft brown
mud, and the current had swept the boat alongside the bank. The long
gangway was thrown across, and the six tall soldiers of the Soudanese
escort filed along it, their light-blue, gold-trimmed zouave uniforms
and their jaunty yellow and red forage caps showing up bravely in the
clear morning light.

[Illustration: The Soudanese escort filed along p54]

Above them, on the top of the bank, was ranged the line of donkeys, and
the air was full of the clamour of the boys. In shrill, strident voices
each was crying out the virtues of his own beast, and abusing that of
his neighbour.

Colonel Cochrane and Mr. Belmont stood together in the bows, each
wearing the broad white puggareed hat of the tourist. Miss Adams and her
niece leaned against the rail beside them.

"Sorry your wife isn't coming, Belmont," said the Colonel.

"I think she had a touch of the sun yesterday. Her head aches very
badly."

His voice was strong and thick like his figure.

"I should stay to keep her company, Mr. Belmont," said the little
American old maid; "but I learn that Mrs. Shlesinger finds the ride too
long for her, and has some letters which she must mail to-day, so Mrs.
Belmont will not be lonesome."

"You're very good, Miss Adams. We shall be back, you know, by two
o'clock."

"Is that certain?"

"It must be certain, for we are taking no lunch with us, and we shall be
famished by then."

"Yes, I expect we shall be ready for a hock and seltzer, at any rate,"
said the Colonel. "This desert dust gives a flavour to the worst wine."

"Now, ladies and gentlemen!" cried Mansoor, the dragoman, moving
forward with something of the priest in his flowing garments and smooth,
clean-shaven face. "We must start early that we may return before the
meridial heat of the weather." He ran his dark eyes over the little
group of his tourists with a paternal expression. "You take your green
glasses, Miss Adams, for glare very great out in the desert. Ah, Mr.
Stuart, I set aside very fine donkey for you,--prize donkey, sir, always
put aside for the gentleman of most weight. Never mind to take your
monument ticket to-day. Now, ladies and gentlemen, if _you_ please!"

Like a grotesque frieze the party moved one by one along the plank
gangway and up the brown crumbling bank. Mr. Stephens led them, a thin,
dry, serious figure, in an English straw hat. His red "Baedeker" gleamed
under his arm, and in one hand he held a little paper of notes, as if it
were a brief. He took Miss Sadie by one arm and her aunt by the other
as they toiled up the bank, and the young girl's laughter rang frank
and clear in the morning air as "Baedeker" came fluttering down at their
feet. Mr. Belmont and Colonel Cochrane followed, the brims of their
sun-hats touching as they discussed the relative advantages of the
Mauser, the Lebel, and the Lee-Metford. Behind them walked Cecil Brown,
listless, cynical, self-contained. The fat clergyman puffed slowly up
the bank, with many gasping witticisms at his own defects. "I'm one of
those men who carry everything before them," said he, glancing ruefully
at his rotundity, and chuckling wheezily at his own little joke. Last
of all came Headingly, slight and tall, with the student stoop about his
shoulders, and Fardet, the good-natured, fussy, argumentative Parisian.

"You see we have an escort to-day," he whispered to his companion.

"So I observed."

"Pah!" cried the Frenchman, throwing out his arms in derision; "as well
have an escort from Paris to Versailles. This is all part of the play,
Monsieur Headingly. It deceives no one, but it is part of the play.

_Pourquoi ces drôles de militaires, dragoman, hein?_"

It was the dragoman's _rôle_ to be all things to all men, so he looked
cautiously round before he answered to make sure that the English were
mounted and out of earshot.

"_C'est ridicule, monsieur!_" said he, shrugging his fat shoulders.
"_Mais que voulez-vous? C'est l'ordre officiel Egyptien._"

"_Egyptien! Pah, Anglais, Anglais--toujours Anglais!_" cried the angry
Frenchman.

The frieze now was more grotesque than ever, but had changed suddenly to
an equestrian one, sharply outlined against the deep-blue Egyptian sky.
Those who have never ridden before have to ride in Egypt, and when the
donkeys break into a canter, and the Nile Irregulars are at full charge,
such a scene of flying veils, clutching hands, huddled swaying figures,
and anxious faces is nowhere to be seen. Belmont, his square figure
balanced upon a small white donkey, was waving his hat to his wife, who
had come out upon the saloon-deck of the _Korosko_. Cochrane sat very
erect with a stiff military seat, hands low, head high, and heels down,
while beside him rode the young Oxford man, looking about him with
drooping eyelids as if he thought the desert hardly respectable, and had
his doubts about the Universe. Behind them the whole party was
strung along the bank in varying stages of jolting and discomfort, a
brown-faced, noisy donkey-boy running after each donkey. Looking back,
they could see the little lead-coloured stern-wheeler, with the gleam of
Mrs. Belmont's handkerchief from the deck. Beyond ran the broad, brown
river, winding down in long curves to where, five miles off, the square,
white block-houses upon the black, ragged hills marked the outskirts of
Wady Haifa, which had been their starting-point that morning.

"Isn't it just too lovely for anything?" cried Sadie, joyously. "I've
got a donkey that runs on casters, and the saddle is just elegant. Did
you ever see anything so cunning as these beads and things round his
neck? You must make a memo, _re_ donkey, Mr. Stephens. Isn't that
correct legal English?"

Stephens looked at the pretty, animated, boyish face looking up at
him from under the coquettish straw hat, and he wished that he had the
courage to tell her in her own language that she was just too sweet for
anything. But he feared above all things lest he should offend her,
and so put an end to their present pleasant intimacy. So his compliment
dwindled into a smile.

"You look very happy," said he.

"Well, who could help feeling good with this dry, clear air, and the
blue sky and the crisp, yellow sand, and a superb donkey to carry you.
I've just got everything in the world to make me happy."

"Everything?"

"Well, everything that I have any use for just now."

"I suppose you never know what it is to be sad?"

"Oh, when I _am_ miserable I am just too miserable for words. I've sat
and cried for days and days at Smith's College, and the other girls were
just crazy to know what I was crying about, and guessing what the reason
was that I wouldn't tell, when all the time the real true reason was
that I didn't know myself. You know how it comes like a great dark
shadow over you, and you don't know why or wherefore, but you've just
got to settle down to it and be miserable."

"But you never had any real cause?"

"No, Mr. Stephens, I've had such a good time all my life, that I don't
think, when I look back, that I ever had any real cause for sorrow."

"Well, Miss Sadie, I hope with all my heart that you will be able to
say the same when you are the same age as your Aunt. Surely I hear her
calling!"

"I wish, Mr. Stephens, you would strike my donkey-boy with your whip
if he hits the donkey again," cried Miss Adams, jogging up on a high,
raw-Boned beast. "Hi, dragoman, Mansoor, you tell this boy that I won't
have the animals ill used, and that he ought to be ashamed of himself.
Yes, you little rascal, you ought! He's grinning at me like an
advertisement for a tooth paste. Do you think, Mr. Stephens, that if I
were to knit that black soldier a pair of woollen stockings he would be
allowed to wear them? The poor creature has bandages round his legs."

"Those are his putties, Miss Adams," said Colonel Cochrane, looking back
at her. "We have found in India that they are the best support to the
leg in marching. They are very much better than any stocking."

"Well, you don't say! They remind me mostly of a sick horse. But it's
elegant to have the soldiers with us, though Monsieur Fardet tells me
there's nothing for us to be scared about."

"That is only my opinion, Miss Adams," said the Frenchman, hastily. "It
may be that Colonel Cochrane thinks otherwise."

"It is Monsieur Fardet's opinion against that of the officers who have
the responsibility of caring for the safety of the frontier," said the
Colonel, coldly. "At least we will all agree that they have the effect
of making the scene very much more picturesque."

The desert upon their right lay in long curves of sand, like the dunes
which might have fringed some forgotten primeval sea. Topping them they
could see the black, craggy summits of the curious volcanic hills which
rise upon the Libyan side. On the crest of the low sand-hills they would
catch a glimpse every now and then of a tall, sky-blue soldier, walking
swiftly, his rifle at the trail. For a moment the lank, warlike figure
would be sharply silhouetted against the sky. Then he would dip into a
hollow and disappear, while some hundred yards off another would show
for an instant and vanish.

"Wherever are they raised?" asked Sadie, watching the moving figures.
"They look to me just about the same tint as the hotel boys in the
States."

"I thought some question might arise about them," said Mr. Stephens, who
was never so happy as when he could anticipate some wish of the pretty
American. "I made one or two references this morning in the ship's
library. Here it is--_re_--that's to say, about black soldiers. I have
it on my notes that they are from the 10th Soudanese battalion of the
Egyptian army. They are recruited from the Dinkas and the Shilluks--two
negroid tribes living to the south of the Dervish country, near the
Equator."

"How can the recruits come through the Dervishes, then?" asked
Headingly, sharply.

"I dare say there is no such very great difficulty over that," said
Monsieur Fardet, with a wink at the American.

"The older men are the remains of the old black battalions. Some of them
served with Gordon at Khartoum and have his medal to show. The others
are many of them deserters from the Mahdi's army," said the Colonel.

"Well, so long as they are not wanted, they look right elegant in those
blue jackets," Miss Adams observed. "But if there was any trouble, I
guess we would wish they were less ornamental and a bit whiter."

"I am not so sure of that, Miss Adams," said the Colonel. "I have seen
these fellows in the field, and I assure you that I have the utmost
confidence in their steadiness."

"Well, I'll take your word without trying," said Miss Adams, with a
decision which made every one smile.

So far their road had lain along the side of the river, which was
swirling down upon their left hand deep and strong from the cataracts
above. Here and there the rush of the current was broken by a black
shining boulder over which the foam was spouting. Higher up they could
see the white gleam of the rapids, and the banks grew into rugged
cliffs, which were capped by a peculiar, outstanding, semicircular rock.
It did not require the dragoman's aid to tell the party that this was
the famous landmark to which they were bound. A long, level stretch lay
before them, and the donkeys took it at a canter. At the farther side
were scattered rocks, black upon orange; and in the midst of them rose
some broken shafts of pillars and a length of engraved wall, looking in
its greyness and its solidity more like some work of Nature than of
man. The fat, sleek dragoman had dismounted, and stood waiting in his
petticoats and his cover-coat for the stragglers to gather round him.

[Illustration: He pointed up with his donkey-whip p66]

"This temple, ladies and gentlemen," he cried, with the air of an
auctioneer who is about to sell it to the highest bidder, "very fine
example from the eighteenth dynasty. Here is the cartouche of Thotmes
the Third," he pointed up with his donkey-whip at the rude, but deep,
hieroglyphics upon the wall above him. "He live sixteen hundred years
before Christ, and this is made to remember his victorious exhibition
into Mesopotamia. Here we have his history from the time that he was
with his mother, until he return with captives tied to his chariot.
In this you see him crowned with Lower Egypt, and with Upper Egypt
offering up sacrifice in honour of his victory to the God Ammon-ra. Here
he bring his captives before him, and he cut off each his right hand. In
this corner you see little pile--all right hands."

"My sakes, I shouldn't have liked to be here in those days," said Miss
Adams.

"Why, there's nothing altered," remarked Cecil Brown. "The East is still
the East. I've no doubt that within a hundred miles, or perhaps a good
deal less, from where you stand--"

"Shut up!" whispered the Colonel, and the party shuffled on down
the line of the wall with their faces up and their big hats thrown
backwards. The sun behind them struck the old grey masonry with a brassy
glare, and carried on to it the strange black shadows of the tourists,
mixing them up with the grim, high-nosed, square-shouldered warriors,
and the grotesque, rigid deities who lined it. The broad shadow of the
Reverend John Stuart, of Birmingham, smudged out both the heathen King
and the god whom he worshipped.

"What's this?" he was asking in his wheezy voice, pointing up with a
yellow Assouan cane.

"That is a hippopotamus," said the dragoman; and the tourists all
tittered, for there was just a suspicion of Mr. Stuart himself in the
carving.

"But it isn't bigger than a little pig," he protested. "You see that the
King is putting his spear through it with ease."

"They make it small to show that it was a very small thing to the King,"
said the dragoman. "So you see that all the King's prisoners do not
exceed his knee--which is not because he was so much taller, but so much
more powerful. You see that he is bigger than his horse, because he is a
king and the other is only a horse. The same way, these small women whom
you see here and there are just his trivial little wives."

"Well, now!" cried Miss Adams, indignantly. "If they had sculped that
King's soul it would have needed a lens to see it. Fancy his allowing
his wives to be put in like that."

"If he did it now, Miss Adams," said the Frenchman, "he would have more
fighting than ever in Mesopotamia. But time brings revenge. Perhaps the
day will soon come when we have the picture of the big, strong wife and
the trivial little husband--_hein?_"

Cecil Brown and Headingly had dropped behind, for the glib comments
of the dragoman, and the empty, light-hearted chatter of the tourists
jarred upon their sense of solemnity. They stood in silence watching the
grotesque procession, with its sun-hats and green veils, as it passed in
the vivid sunshine down the front of the old grey wall. Above them two
crested hoopoes were fluttering and calling amid the ruins of the pylon.

"Isn't it a sacrilege?" said the Oxford man, at last.

"Well, now, I'm glad you feel that about it, because it's how it always
strikes me," Headingly answered, with feeling. "I'm not quite clear in
my own mind how these things should be approached,--if they are to be
approached at all,--but I am sure this is not the way. On the whole, I
prefer the ruins that I have not seen to those which I have."

The young diplomatist looked up with his peculiarly bright smile, which
faded away too soon into his languid, _blasé_ mask.

"I've got a map," said the American, "and sometimes far away from
anything in the very midst of the waterless, trackless desert, I see
'ruins' marked upon it--or 'remains of a temple,' perhaps. For example,
the temple of Jupiter Ammon, which was one of the most considerable
shrines in the world, was hundreds of miles from anywhere. Those are the
ruins, solitary, unseen, unchanging through the centuries, which appeal
to one's imagination. But when I present a check at the door, and go
in as if it were Barnum's show, all the subtle feeling of romance goes
right out of it."

"Absolutely!" said Cecil Brown, looking over the desert with his dark,
intolerant eyes. "If one could come wandering here alone--stumble upon
it by chance, as it were--and find one's self in absolute solitude in
the dim light of the temple, with these grotesque figures all around, it
would be perfectly overwhelming. A man would be prostrated with wonder
and awe. But when Belmont is puffing his bulldog pipe, and Stuart is
wheezing, and Miss Sadie Adams is laughing----"

"And that jay of a dragoman speaking his piece," said Headingly; "I want
to stand and think all the time, and I never seem to get the chance.
I was ripe for manslaughter when I stood before the Great Pyramid, and
couldn't get a quiet moment because they would boost me on to the top.
I took a kick at one man which would have sent _him_ to the top in one
jump if I had hit meat. But fancy travelling all the way from America to
see the pyramid, and then finding nothing better to do than to kick an
Arab in front of it!"

The Oxford man laughed in his gentle, tired fashion.

"They are starting again," said he, and the two hastened forwards to
take their places at the tail of the absurd procession.

Their route ran now among large, scattered boulders, and between stony,
shingly hills. A narrow, winding path curved in and out amongst the
rocks. Behind them their view was cut off by similar hills, black and
fantastic, like the slag-heaps at the shaft of a mine. A silence fell
upon the little company, and even Sadie's bright face reflected the
harshness of Nature. The escort had closed in, and marched beside them,
their boots scrunching among the loose black rubble. Colonel Cochrane
and Belmont were still riding together in the van.

[Illustration: A silence fell upon the little company p72]

"Do you know, Belmont," said the Colonel, in a low voice, "you may think
me a fool, but I don't like this one little bit."

Belmont gave a short gruff laugh.

"It seemed all right in the saloon of the _Korosko_, but now that we are
here we _do_ seem rather up in the air," said he. "Still, you know, a
party comes here every week, and nothing has ever yet gone wrong."

"I don't mind taking my chances when I am on the war-path," the Colonel
answered. "That's all straightforward and in the way of business. But
when you have women with you, and a helpless crowd like this, it becomes
really dreadful. Of course, the chances are a hundred to one that we
have no trouble; but if we should have--well, it won't bear thinking
about. The wonderful thing is their complete unconsciousness that there
is any danger whatever."

"Well, I like the English tailor-made dresses well enough for walking,
Mr. Stephens," said Miss Sadie from behind them. "But for an afternoon
dress, I think the French have more style than the English. Your
milliners have a more severe cut, and they don't do the cunning little
ribbons and bows and things in the same way."

The Colonel smiled at Belmont.

"_She_ is quite serene in her mind, at any rate," said he. "Of course, I
wouldn't say what I drink to any one but you, and I dare say it will all
prove to be quite unfounded."

"Well, I could imagine parties of Dervishes on the prowl," said Belmont.
"But what I cannot imagine is that they should just happen to come to
the pulpit rock on the very morning when we are due there."

"Considering that our movements have been freely advertised, and that
every one knows a week beforehand what our programme is, and where
we are to be found, it does not strike me as being such a wonderful
coincidence."

"It is a very remote chance," said Belmont, stoutly, but he was glad in
his heart that his wife was safe and snug on board the steamer.

And now they were clear of the rocks again, with a fine stretch of firm
yellow sand extending to the very base of the conical hill which lay
before them. "Ay-ah! Ayah!" cried the boys, and whack came their sticks
upon the flanks of the donkeys, which broke into a gallop, and away they
all streamed over the plain. It was not until they had come to the end
of the path which curves up the hill that the dragoman called a halt.

"Now, ladies and gentlemen, we are arrived for the so famous pulpit
rock of Abousir. From the summit you will presently enjoy a panorama
of remarkable fertility. But first you will observe that over the rocky
side of the hill are everywhere cut the names of great men who have
passed it in their travels, and some of these names are older than the
time of Christ."

"Got Moses?" asked Miss Adams.

"Auntie, I'm surprised at you!" cried Sadie.

"Well, my dear, he was in Egypt, and he was a great man, and he may have
passed this way."

"Moses's name very likely there, and the same with Herodotus," said
the dragoman, gravely. "Both have been long worn away. But there on
the brown rock you will see Belzoni. And up higher is Gordon. There is
hardly a name famous in the Soudan which you will not find, if you like.
And now, with your permission, we shall take good-bye of our donkeys
and walk up the path, and you will see the river and the desert from the
summit of the top."

A minute or two of climbing brought them out upon the semicircular
platform which crowns the rock. Below them on the far side was a
perpendicular black cliff, a hundred and fifty feet high, with the
swirling, foam-streaked river roaring past its base. The swish of the
water and the low roar as it surged over the mid-stream boulders boomed
through the hot, stagnant air. Far up and far down they could see the
course of the river, a quarter of a mile in breadth, and running very
deep and strong, with sleek black eddies and occasional spoutings of
foam. On the other side was a frightful wilderness of black, scattered
rocks, which were the _débris_ carried down by the river at high flood.
In no direction were there any signs of human beings or their dwellings.

"On the far side," said the dragoman, waving his donkey-whip towards the
east, "is the military line which conducts Wady Haifa to Sarras. Sarras
lies to the south, under that black hill. Those two blue mountains which
you see very far away are in Dongola, more than a hundred miles from
Sarras. The railway there is forty miles long, and has been much annoyed
by the Dervishes, who are very glad to turn the rails into spears. The
telegraph wires are also much appreciated thereby. Now, if you will
kindly turn round, I will explain, also, what we see upon the other
side."

It was a view which, when once seen, must always haunt the mind. Such an
expanse of savage and unrelieved desert might be part of some cold and
burned-out planet rather than of this fertile and bountiful earth. Away
and away it stretched to die into a soft, violet haze in the extremest
distance. In the foreground the sand was of a bright golden yellow,
which was quite dazzling in the sunshine. Here and there in a scattered
cordon stood the six trusty negro soldiers leaning motionless upon their
rifles, and each throwing a shadow which looked as solid as himself. But
beyond this golden plain lay a low line of those black slag-heaps,
with yellow sand-valleys winding between them. These in their turn were
topped by higher and more fantastic hills, and these by others, peeping
over each other's shoulders until they blended with that distant violet
haze. None of these hills were of any height,--a few hundred feet at the
most,--but their savage, saw-toothed crests and their steep scarps of
sun-baked stone gave them a fierce character of their own.

"The Libyan desert," said the dragoman, with a proud wave of his hand.
"The greatest desert in the world. Suppose you travel right west from
here, and turn neither to the north nor to the south, the first houses
you would come to would be in America. That make you homesick, Miss
Adams, I believe?"

But the American old maid had her attention drawn away by the conduct
of Sadie, who had caught her arm by one hand and was pointing over the
desert with the other.

"Well, now, if that isn't too picturesque for anything!" she cried,
with a flush of excitement upon her pretty face. "Do look, Mr. Stephens!
That's just the one only thing we wanted to make it just perfectly
grand. See the men upon the camels coming out from between those hills!"

[Illustration: Long string of red-turbaned riders, Frontispiece p78]

They all looked at the long string of red-turbaned riders who were
winding out of the ravine, and there fell such a hush that the buzzing
of the flies sounded quite loud upon their ears. Colonel Cochrane had
lit a match, and he stood with it in one hand and the unlit cigarette
in the other until the flame licked round his fingers. Belmont whistled.
The dragoman stood staring with his mouth half-open, and a curious slaty
tint in his full, red lips. The others looked from one to the other with
an uneasy sense that there was something wrong. It was the Colonel who
broke the silence.

"By George, Belmont, I believe the hundred-to-one chance has come off!"
said he.




CHAPTER IV

"What's the meaning of this, Mansoor?" cried Belmont, harshly. "Who are
these people, and why are you standing staring as if you had lost your
senses?"

The dragoman made an effort to compose himself, and licked his dry lips
before he answered.

"I do not know who they are," said he, in a quavering voice. "I did not
expect to see any Arabs in this part."

"Who they are?" cried the Frenchman. "You can see who they are. They are
armed men upon camels, Ababdeh, Bishareen--Bedouins, in short, such as
are employed by the Government upon the frontier."

"By Jove, he may be right, Cochrane," said Belmont, looking inquiringly
at the Colonel. "Why shouldn't it be as he says? why shouldn't these
fellows be friendlies?"

"There are no friendlies upon this side of the river," said the Colonel,
abruptly; "I am perfectly certain about that. There is no use in mincing
matters. We must prepare for the worst."

But in spite of his words, they stood stock-still, in a huddled group,
staring out over the plain. Their nerves were numbed by the sudden
shock, and to all of them it was like a scene in a dream, vague,
impersonal, and unreal. The men upon the camels had streamed out from a
gorge which lay a mile or so distant on the side of the path along which
they had travelled. Their retreat, therefore, was entirely cut off. It
appeared, from the dust and the length of the line, to be quite an army
which was emerging from the hills, for seventy men upon camels cover
a considerable stretch of ground. Having reached the sandy plain, they
very deliberately formed to the front, and then at the harsh call of
a bugle they trotted forward in line, the parti-coloured figures all
swaying and the sand smoking in a rolling yellow cloud at the heels of
their camels. At the same moment the six black soldiers doubled in
from the front with their Martinis at the trail, and snuggled down like
well-trained skirmishers behind the rocks upon the haunch of the hill.
Their breech-blocks all snapped together as their corporal gave them the
order to load.

And now suddenly the first stupor of the excursionists passed away, and
was succeeded by a frantic and impotent energy. They all ran about upon
the plateau of rock in an aimless, foolish flurry, like frightened fowls
in a yard. They could not bring themselves to acknowledge that there was
no possible escape for them. Again and again they rushed to the edge
of the great cliff which rose from the river, but the youngest and most
daring of them could never have descended it. The two women clung one
on each side of the trembling Mansoor, with a feeling that he was
officially responsible for their safety. When he ran up and down in his
desperation, his skirts and theirs all fluttered together. Stephens,
the lawyer, kept close to Sadie Adams, muttering mechanically, "Don't be
alarmed, Miss Sadie. Don't be at all alarmed!" though his own limbs were
twitching with agitation. Monsieur Fardet stamped about with a guttural
rolling of r's, glancing angrily at his companions, as if they had in
some way betrayed him, while the fat clergyman stood with his umbrella
up, staring stolidly with big, frightened eyes at the camel-men.
Cecil Brown curled his small, prim moustache, and looked white but
contemptuous. The Colonel, Belmont, and the young Harvard graduate were
the three most cool-headed and resourceful members of the party.

"Better stick together," said the Colonel. "There's no escape for us, so
we may as well remain united."

"They've halted," said Belmont. "They are reconnoitring us. They know
very well that there is no escape from them, and they are taking their
time. I don't see what we can do."

"Suppose we hide the women," Headingly suggested. "They can't know how
many of us are here. When they have taken us, the women can come out of
their hiding-place and make their way back to the boat."

"Admirable!" cried Colonel Cochrane. "Admirable! This way, please, Miss
Adams. Bring the ladies here, Mansoor. There is not an instant to be
lost."

There was a part of the plateau which was invisible from the plain, and
here in feverish haste they built a little cairn. Many flaky slabs of
stone were lying about, and it did not take long to prop the largest
of these against a rock, so as to make a lean-to, and then to put two
side-pieces to complete it. The slabs were of the same colour as the
rock, so that to a casual glance the hiding-place was not very visible.
The two ladies were squeezed into this, and they crouched together,
Sadie's arms thrown round her aunt. When they had walled them up, the
men turned with lighter hearts to see what was going on. As they did
so there rang out the sharp, peremptory crack of a rifleshot from the
escort, followed by another and another, but these isolated shots were
drowned in the long, spattering roll of an irregular volley from the
plain, and the air was full of the phit-phit-phit of the bullets.
The tourists all huddled behind the rocks, with the exception of the
Frenchman, who still stamped angrily about, striking his sun-hat with
his clenched hand. Belmont and Cochrane crawled down to where the
Soudanese soldiers were firing slowly and steadily, resting their rifles
upon the boulders in front of them.

The Arabs had halted about five hundred yards away, and it was evident
from their leisurely movements that they were perfectly aware that there
was no possible escape for the travellers. They had paused to ascertain
their number before closing in upon them. Most of them were firing from
the backs of their camels, but a few had dismounted and were kneeling
here and there,--little shimmering white spots against the golden
background. Their shots came sometimes singly in quick, sharp throbs,
and sometimes in a rolling volley, with a sound like a boy's stick drawn
across iron railings. The hill buzzed like a bee-hive, and the bullets
made a sharp, crackling sound as they struck against the rocks.

[Illustration: You do no good by exposing yourself p86]

"You do no good by exposing yourself," said Belmont, drawing Colonel
Cochrane behind a large jagged boulder, which already furnished a
shelter for three of the Soudanese.

"A bullet is the best we have to hope for," said Cochrane, grimly. "What
an infernal fool I have been, Belmont, not to protest more energetically
against this ridiculous expedition! I deserve whatever I get, but it
_is_ hard on these poor souls who never knew the danger."

"I suppose there's no help for us?"

"Not the faintest."

"Don't you think this firing might bring the troops up from Haifa?"

"They'll never hear it. It is a good six miles from here to the steamer.
From that to Haifa would be another five."

"Well, when we don't return, the steamer will give the alarm."

"And where shall we be by that time?"

"My poor Norah! My poor little Norah!" muttered Belmont, in the depths
of his grizzled moustache.

"What do you suppose that they will do with us, Cochrane," he asked
after a pause.

"They may cut our throats, or they may take us as slaves to Khartoum.
I don't know that there is much to choose. There's one of us out of his
troubles, anyhow."

The soldier next them had sat down abruptly, and leaned forward over
his knees. His movement and attitude were so natural that it was hard to
realise that he had been shot through the head. He neither stirred nor
groaned. His comrades bent over him for a moment, and then, shrugging
their shoulders, they turned their dark faces to the Arabs once more.
Belmont picked up the dead man's Martini and his ammunition-pouch.

"Only three more rounds, Cochrane," said he, with the little brass
cylinders upon the palm of his hand. "We've let them shoot too soon, and
too often. We should have waited for the rush."

"You're a famous shot, Belmont," cried the Colonel. "I've heard of you
as one of the cracks. Don't, you think you could pick off their leader?"
"Which is he?"

"As far as I can make out, it is that one on the white camel on their
right front. I mean the fellow who is peering at us from under his two
hands."

Belmont thrust in his cartridge and altered the sights. "It's a shocking
bad light for judging distance," said he. "This is where the low
point-blank trajectory of the Lee-Metford comes in useful. Well, we'll
try him at five hundred." He fired, but there was no change in the white
camel or the peering rider.

"Did you see any sand fly?"

"No; I saw nothing." "I fancy I took my sight a trifle too full." "Try
him again." Man and rifle and rock were equally steady, but again the
camel and chief remained unharmed. The third shot must have been
nearer, for he moved a _few_ paces to the right, as if he were becoming
restless.

Belmont threw the empty rifle down with an exclamation of disgust.

"It's this confounded light," he cried, and his cheeks flushed with
annoyance. "Think of my wasting three cartridges in that fashion! If I
had him at Bisley I'd shoot the turban off him, but this vibrating glare
means refraction. What's the matter with the Frenchman?"

Monsieur Fardet was stamping about the plateau with the gestures of a
man who has been stung by a wasp. "_S'cré nom! S'cré nom!_" he shouted,
showing his strong white teeth under his black waxed moustache. He wrung
his right hand violently, and as he did so he sent a little spray of
blood from his finger-tips. A bullet had chipped his wrist. Headingly
ran out from the cover where he had been crouching, with the intention
of dragging the demented Frenchman into a place of safety, but he had
not taken three paces before he was himself hit in the loins, and fell
with a dreadful crash among the stones. He staggered to his feet, and
then fell again in the same place, floundering up and down like a horse
which has broken its back. "I'm done!" he whispered, as the Colonel ran
to his aid, and then he lay still, with his china-white cheek against
the black stones. When, but a year before, he had wandered under the
elms of Cambridge, surely the last fate upon this earth which he could
have predicted for himself would be that he should be slain by the
bullet of a fanatical Mohammedan in the wilds of the Libyan desert.

Meanwhile the fire of the escort had ceased, for they had shot away
their last cartridge. A second man had been killed, and a third --who
was the corporal in charge--had received a bullet in his thigh. He sat
upon a stone, tying up his injury with a grave, preoccupied look upon
his wrinkled black face, like an old woman piecing together a broken
plate. The three others fastened their bayonets with a determined
metallic rasp and snap, and the air of men who intended to sell their
lives dearly.

"They're coming!" cried Belmont, looking over the plain.

"Let them come!" the Colonel answered, putting his hands into his
trouser-pockets. Suddenly he pulled one fist out, and shook it furiously
in the air. "Oh, the cads! die confounded cads!" he shouted, and his
eyes were congested with rage.

It was the fate of the poor donkey-boys which had carried the
self-contained soldier out of his usual calm. During the firing they had
remained huddled, a pitiable group, among the rocks at the base of the
hill. Now upon the conviction that the charge of the Dervishes must
come first upon them, they had sprung upon their animals with shrill,
inarticulate cries of fear, and had galloped off across the plain. A
small flanking-party of eight or ten camel-men had worked round while
the firing had been going on, and these dashed in among the flying
donkey-boys, hacking and hewing with a cold-blooded, deliberate
ferocity. One little boy, in a flapping Galabeeah, kept ahead of his
pursuers for a time, but the long stride of the camels ran him down,
and an Arab thrust his spear into the middle of his stooping back. The
small, white-clad corpses looked like a flock of sheep trailing over the
desert.

But the people upon the rock had no time to think of the cruel fate of
the donkey-boys. Even the Colonel, after that first indignant outburst,
had forgotten all about them. The advancing camel-men had trotted to the
bottom of the hill, had dismounted, and, leaving their camels kneeling,
had rushed furiously onward. Fifty of them were clambering up the path
and over the rocks together, their red turbans appearing and vanishing
again as they scrambled over the boulders. Without a shot or a pause
they surged over the three black soldiers, killing one and stamping
the other two down under their hurrying feet. So they burst on to the
plateau at the top, where an unexpected resistance checked them for an
instant.

The travellers, nestling up against one another, had awaited, each after
his own fashion, the coming of the Arabs. The Colonel, with his hands
back in his trouser-pockets, tried to whistle out of his dry lips.
Belmont folded his arms and leaned against a rock, with a sulky frown
upon his lowering face. So strangely do our minds act that his three
successive misses and the tarnish to his reputation as a marksman was
troubling him more than his impending fate. Cecil Brown stood erect, and
plucked nervously at the upturned points of his little prim moustache.
Monsieur Fardet groaned over his wounded wrist. Mr. Stephens, in sombre
impotence, shook his head slowly, the living embodiment of prosaic
law and order. Mr. Stuart stood, his umbrella still over him, with no
expression upon his heavy face or in his staring brown eyes. Headingly
lay with that china-white cheek resting motionless upon the stones.
His sun-hat had fallen off, and he looked quite boyish with his ruffled
yellow hair and his unlined, clean-cut face. The dragoman sat upon a
stone and played nervously with his donkey-whip. So the Arabs found them
when they reached the summit of the hill.

And then, just as the foremost rushed to lay hands upon them, a most
unexpected incident arrested them. From the time of the first appearance
of the Dervishes the fat clergyman of Birmingham had looked like a man
in a cataleptic trance. He had neither moved nor spoken. But now he
suddenly woke at a bound into strenuous and heroic energy. It may have
been the mania of fear, or it may have been the blood of some Berserk
ancestor which stirred suddenly in his veins; but he broke into a wild
shout, and, catching up a stick, he struck right and left among the
Arabs with a fury which was more savage than their own. One who helped
to draw up this narrative has left it upon record that of all the
pictures which have been burned into his brain, there is none so clear
as that of this man, his large face shining with perspiration, and his
great body dancing about with unwieldy agility, as he struck at the
shrinking, snarling savages.

[Illustration: He struck at the snarling savages p 94]

Then a spear-head flashed from behind a rock with a quick, vicious
upward thrust, the clergyman fell upon his hands and knees, and the
horde poured over him to seize their unresisting victims. Knives
glimmered before their eyes, rude hands clutched at their wrists and at
their throats, and then, with brutal and unreasoning violence, they were
hauled and pushed down the steep, winding path to where the camels were
waiting below. The Frenchman waved his unwounded hand as he walked.
"Vive le Khalifa! Vive le Madhi!" he shouted, until a blow from behind
with the butt-end of a Remington beat him into silence.

And now they were herded in at the base of the Abousir Rock, this
little group of modern types who had fallen into the rough clutch of the
seventh century,--for in all save the rifles in their hands there was
nothing to distinguish these men from the desert warriors who first
carried the crescent flag out of Arabia. The East does not change, and
the Dervish raiders were not less brave, less cruel, or less fanatical
than their forebears. They stood in a circle, leaning upon their guns
and spears, and looking with exultant eyes at the dishevelled group
of captives. They were clad in some approach to a uniform, red turbans
gathered around the neck as well as the head, so that the fierce face
looked out of a scarlet frame; yellow, untanned shoes, and white tunics
with square, brown patches let into them. All carried rifles, and one
had a small, discoloured bugle slung over his shoulder. Half of them
were negroes--fine, muscular men, with the limbs of a jet Hercules; and
the other half were Baggara Arabs--small, brown, and wiry, with little,
vicious eyes, and thin, cruel lips. The chief was also a Baggara, but
he was a taller man than the others, with a black beard which came down
over his chest, and a pair of hard, cold eyes, which gleamed like
glass from under his thick, black brows. They were fixed now upon his
captives, and his features were grave with thought. Mr. Stuart had been
brought down, his hat gone, his face still flushed with anger, and his
trousers sticking in one part to his leg. The two surviving Soudanese
soldiers, their black faces and blue coats blotched with crimson, stood
silently at attention upon one side of this forlorn group of castaways.

The chief stood for some minutes, stroking his black beard, while his
fierce eyes glanced from one pale face to another along the miserable
line of his captives. In a harsh, imperious voice he said something
which brought Mansoor, the dragoman, to the front, with bent back and
outstretched, supplicating palms. To his employers there had always
seemed to be something comic in that flapping skirt and short cover-coat
above it; but now, under the glare of the mid-day sun, with those faces
gathered round them, it appeared rather to add a grotesque horror to
the scene. The dragoman salaamed like some ungainly, automatic doll, and
then, as the chief rasped out a curt word or two, he fell suddenly upon
his face, rubbing his forehead into the sand, and flapping upon it with
his hands.

[Illustration: Fell suddenly upon his face p97]

"What's that, Cochrane?" asked Belmont. "Why is he making an exhibition
of himself?"

"As far as I can understand, it is all up with us," the Colonel
answered.

"But this is absurd," cried the Frenchman, excitedly; "why should these
people wish any harm to me? I have never injured them. On the other
hand, I have always been their friend. If I could but speak to them, I
would make them comprehend. Hola, dragoman, Mansoor!"

The excited gestures of Monsieur Fardet drew the sinister eyes of the
Baggara chief upon him. Again he asked a curt question, and Mansoor,
kneeling in front of him, answered it.

"Tell him that I am a Frenchman, dragoman. Tell him that I am a friend
of the Khalifa. Tell him that my countrymen have never had any quarrel
with him, but that his enemies are also ours."

"The chief asks what religion you call your own," said Mansoor. "The
Khalifa, he says, has no necessity for any friendship from those who are
infidels and unbelievers."

"Tell him that in France we look upon all religions as good."

"The chief says that none but a blaspheming dog and the son of a dog
would say that all religions are one as good as the other. He says that
if you are indeed the friend of the Khalifa, you will accept the Koran
and become a true believer upon the spot. If you will do so, he will
promise on his side to send you alive to Khartoum."

"And if not?"

"You will fare in the same way as the others."

"Then you may make my compliments to monsieur the chief, and tell him
that it is not the custom for Frenchmen to change their religion under
compulsion."

The chief said a few words, and then turned to consult with a short,
sturdy Arab at his elbow.

"He says, Monsieur Fardet," said the dragoman, "that if you speak again
he will make a trough out of you for the dogs to feed from. Say nothing
to anger him, sir, for he is now talking what is to be done with us."

"Who is he?" asked the Colonel.

"It is Ali Wad Ibrahim, the same who raided last year, and killed all of
the Nubian village."

"I've heard of him," said the Colonel.

"He has the name of being one of the boldest and the most fanatical
of all the Khalifa's leaders. Thank God that the women are out of his
clutches."

The two Arabs had been talking in that stern, restrained fashion which
comes so strangely from a southern race. Now they both turned to the
dragoman, who was still kneeling upon the sand. They plied him with
questions, pointing first to one and then to another of their prisoners.
Then they conferred together once more, and finally said something to
Mansoor, with a contemptuous wave of the hand to indicate that he might
convey it to the others.

"Thank Heaven, gentlemen, I think that we are saved for the present
time," said Mansoor, wiping away the sand which had stuck to his
perspiring forehead. "Ali Wad Ibrahim says that though an unbeliever
should have only the edge of the sword from one of the sons of the
Prophet, yet it might be of more profit to the beit-el-mal at Omdurman
if it had the gold which your people will pay for you. Until it comes
you can work as the slaves of the Khalifa; unless he should decide to
put you to death. You are to mount yourselves upon the spare; camels and
to ride with the party."

The chief had waited for the end of the explanation. Now he gave a brief
order, and a negro stepped forward with a long, dull-coloured sword in
his hand. The dragoman squealed like a rabbit who sees a ferret, and
threw himself frantically down upon the sand once more.

"What is it, Cochrane?" asked Cecil Brown,--for the Colonel had served
in the East, and was the only one of the travellers who had a smattering
of Arabic.

"As far as I can make out, he says there is no use keeping the dragoman,
as no one would trouble to pay a ransom for him, and he is too fat to
make a good slave."

"Poor devil!" cried Brown. "Here, Cochrane, tell them to let him go. We
can't let him be butchered like this in front of us. Say that we will
find the money amongst us. I will be answerable for any reasonable sum."

"I'll stand in as far as my means will allow," cried Belmont.

"We will sign a joint bond or indemnity," said, the lawyer. "If I had
a paper and pencil I could throw it into shape in an instant, and the
chief could rely upon its being perfectly correct and valid."

But the Colonel's Arabic was insufficient, and Mansoor himself was too
maddened by fear to understand the offer which was being made for him.
The negro looked a question at the chief, and then his long black arm
swung upwards and his sword hissed over his shoulder. But the dragoman
had screamed out something which arrested the blow, and which brought
the chief and the lieutenant to his side with a new interest upon their
swarthy faces. The others crowded in also, and formed a dense circle
around the grovelling, pleading man.

The Colonel had not understood this sudden change, nor had the others
fathomed the reason of it, but some instinct flashed it upon Stephens's
horrified perceptions.

"Oh, you villain!" he cried, furiously.

"Hold your tongue, you miserable creature! Be silent! Better die--a
thousand times better die!"

But it was too late, and already they could all see the base design by
which the coward hoped to save his own life. He was about to betray the
women. They saw the chief, with a brave man's contempt upon his stern
face, make a sign of haughty assent, and then Mansoor spoke rapidly and
earnestly, pointing up the hill. At a word from the Baggara, a dozen of
the raiders rushed up the path and were lost to view upon the top. Then
came a shrill cry, a horrible, strenuous scream of surprise and terror,
and an instant later the party streamed into sight again, dragging the
women in their midst. Sadie, with her young, active limbs, kept up with
them as they sprang down the slope, encouraging her aunt all the while
over her shoulder. The older lady, struggling amid the rushing white
figures, looked with her thin limbs and open mouth like a chicken being
dragged from a coop.

[Illustration: The party streamed into sight again p103]

The chief's dark eyes glanced indifferently at Miss Adams, but gazed
with a smouldering fire at the younger woman. Then he gave an abrupt
order, and the prisoners were hurried in a miserable, hopeless drove
to the cluster of kneeling camels. Their pockets had already been
ransacked, and the contents thrown into one of the camel-food bags, the
neck of which was tied up by Ali Wad Ibrahim's own hands.

"I say, Cochrane," whispered Belmont, looking with smouldering eyes at
the wretched Mansoor, "I've got a little hip revolver which they have
not discovered. Shall I shoot that cursed dragoman for giving away the
women?"

The Colonel shook his head.

"You had better keep it," said he, with a sombre face. "The women may
find some other use for it before all is over."




CHAPTER V

The camels, some brown and some white, were kneeling in a long line,
their champing jaws moving rhythmically from side to side, and their
gracefully poised heads turning to right and left in a mincing,
self-conscious fashion. Most of them were beautiful creatures, true
Arabian trotters, with the slim limbs and finely turned necks which mark
the breed; but amongst them were a few of the slower, heavier beasts,
with un-groomed skins, disfigured by the black scars of old firings.
These were loaded with the doora and the water-skins of the raiders, but
a few minutes sufficed to redistribute their loads and to make place for
the prisoners. None of these had been bound with the exception of Mr.
Stuart,--for the Arabs, understanding that he was a clergyman, and
accustomed to associate religion with violence, had looked upon his
fierce outburst as quite natural, and regarded him now as the most
dangerous and enterprising of their captives. His hands were therefore
tied together with a plaited camel-halter, but the others, including the
dragoman and the two wounded blacks, were allowed to mount without any
precaution against their escape, save that which was afforded by the
slowness of their beasts. Then, with a shouting of men and a roaring
of camels, the creatures were jolted on to their legs, and the long,
straggling procession set off with its back to the homely river, and its
face to the shimmering, violet haze, which hung round the huge sweep of
beautiful, terrible desert, striped tiger-fashion with black rock and
with golden sand.

None of the white prisoners with the exception of Colonel Cochrane had
ever been upon a camel before. It seemed an alarming distance to the
ground when they looked down, and the curious swaying motion, with
the insecurity of the saddle, made them sick and frightened. But their
bodily discomfort was forgotten in the turmoil of bitter thoughts
within. What a chasm gaped between their old life and their new! And yet
how short was the time and space which divided them! Less than an hour
ago they had stood upon the summit of that rock and had laughed and
chattered, or grumbled at the heat and flies, becoming peevish at small
discomforts. Headingly had been hypercritical over the tints of Nature.
They could not forget his own tint as he lay with his cheek upon the
black stone. Sadie had chattered about tailor-made dresses and Parisian
chiffons. Now she was clinging, half-crazy, to the pommel of a wooden
saddle, with suicide rising as a red star of hope in her mind. Humanity,
reason, argument,--all were gone, and there remained the brutal
humiliation of force. And all the time, down there by the second rocky
point, their steamer was waiting for them,--their saloon, with the white
napery and the glittering glasses, the latest novel, and the London
papers. The least imaginative of them could see it so clearly: the white
awning, Mrs. Shlesinger with her yellow sun-hat, Mrs. Belmont lying back
in the canvas chair. There it lay almost in sight of them, that little
floating chip broken off from home, and every silent, ungainly step of
the camels was carrying them more hopelessly away from it. That very
morning how beneficent Providence had appeared, how pleasant was
life!--a little commonplace, perhaps, but so soothing and restful, And
now!

The red head-gear, patched jibbehs, and yellow boots had already shown
to the Colonel that these men were no wandering party of robbers, but a
troop from the regular army of the Khalifa. Now, as they struck across
the desert, they showed that they possessed the rude discipline which
their work demanded. A mile ahead, and far out on either flank, rode
their scouts, dipping and rising among the yellow sand-hills. Ali Wad
Ibrahim headed the caravan, and his short, sturdy lieutenant brought up
the rear. The main party straggled over a couple of hundred yards, and
in the middle was the little, dejected clump of prisoners. No attempt
was made to keep them apart, and Mr. Stephens soon contrived that his
camel should be between those of the two ladies.

"Don't be down-hearted, Miss Adams," said he. "This is a most
indefensible outrage, but there can be no question that steps will be
taken in the proper quarter to set the matter right. I am convinced that
we shall be subjected to nothing worse than a temporary inconvenience.
If it had not been for that villain Mansoor, you need not have appeared
at all."

It was shocking to see the change in the little Bostonian lady, for she
had shrunk to an old woman in an hour. Her swarthy cheeks had fallen in,
and her eyes shone wildly from sunken, darkened sockets. Her frightened
glances were continually turned upon Sadie. There is surely some wrecker
angel which can only gather her best treasures in moments of disaster.
For here were all these worldlings going to their doom, and already
frivolity and selfishness had passed away from them, and each was
thinking and grieving only for the other. Sadie thought of her aunt, her
aunt thought of Sadie, the men thought of the women, Belmont thought of
his wife,--and then he thought of something else also, and he kicked his
camel's shoulder with his heel until he found himself upon the near side
of Miss Adams.

"I've got something for you here," he whispered. "We may be separated
soon, so it is as well to make our arrangements."

"Separated!" wailed Miss Adams.

"Don't speak loud, for that infernal Mansoor may give us away again.
I hope it won't be so, but it might. We must be prepared for the worst.
For example, they might determine to get rid of us men and to keep you."

Miss Adams shuddered.

"What am I to do? For God's sake, tell me what I am to do, Mr. Belmont!
I am an old woman. I have had my day. I could stand it if it was only
myself. But Sadie--I am clean crazed when I think of her. There's her
mother waiting at home, and I----" She clasped her thin hands together
in the agony of her thoughts.

"Put your hand out under your dust-cloak," said Belmont, sidling his
camel up against hers. "Don't miss your grip of it. There! Now hide it
in your dress, and you'll always have a key to unlock any door."

[Illustration: Don't miss your grip of it p111]

Miss Adams felt what it was which he had slipped into her hand, and she
looked at him for a moment in bewilderment. Then she pursed up her
lips and shook her stern, brown face in disapproval. But she pushed the
little pistol into its hiding-place, all the same, and she rode with her
thoughts in a whirl. Could this indeed be she, Eliza Adams, of Boston,
whose narrow, happy life had oscillated between the comfortable house in
Commonwealth Avenue and the Tremont Presbyterian Church? Here she was,
hunched upon a camel, with her hand upon the butt of a pistol, and
her mind weighing the justifications of murder. Oh, life, sly, sleek,
treacherous life, how are we ever to trust you? Show us your worst and
we can face it, but it is when you are sweetest and smoothest that we
have most to fear from you.

"At the worst, Miss Sadie, it will only be a question of ransom," said
Stephens, arguing against his own convictions. "Besides, we are still
close to Egypt, far away from the Dervish country. There is sure to be
an energetic pursuit. You must try not to lose your courage, and to hope
for the best."

"No, I am not scared, Mr. Stephens," said Sadie, turning towards him
a blanched face which belied her words. "We're all in God's hands, and
surely He won't be cruel to us. It is easy to talk about trusting Him
when things are going well, but now is the real test. If He's up there
behind that blue heaven----"

"He is," said a voice behind them, and they found that the Birmingham
clergyman had joined the party. His tied hands clutched on to his
Makloofa saddle, and his fat body swayed dangerously from side to side
with every stride of the camel. His wounded leg was oozing with blood
and clotted with flies, and the burning desert sun beat down upon his
bare head, for he had lost both hat and umbrella in the scuffle. A
rising fever flecked his large, white cheeks with a touch of colour, and
brought a light into his brown ox-eyes. He had always seemed a somewhat
gross and vulgar person to his fellow-travellers. Now, this bitter
healing draught of sorrow had transformed him. He was purified,
spiritualised, exalted. He had become so calmly strong that he made the
others feel stronger as they looked upon him. He spoke of life and of
death, of the present, and their hopes of the future; and the black
cloud of their misery began to show a golden rift or two. Cecil
Brown shrugged his shoulders, for he could not change in an hour the
convictions of his life; but the others, even Fardet, the Frenchman,
were touched and strengthened. They all took off their hats when he
prayed. Then the Colonel made a turban out of his red silk cummerbund,
and insisted that Mr. Stuart should wear it. With his homely dress and
gorgeous head-gear, he looked like a man who has dressed up to amuse the
children.

And now the dull, ceaseless, insufferable torment of thirst was added to
the aching weariness which came from the motion of the camels. The sun
glared down upon them, and then up again from the yellow sand, and the
great plain shimmered and glowed until they felt as if they were riding
over a cooling sheet of molten metal. Their lips were parched and dried,
and their tongues like tags of leather. They lisped curiously in their
speech, for it was only the vowel sounds which would come without an
effort. Miss Adams's chin had dropped upon her chest, and her great hat
concealed her face.

"Auntie will faint if she does not get water," said Sadie. "Oh, Mr.
Stephens, is there nothing we could do?"

The Dervishes riding near were all Baggara with the exception of
one negro,--an uncouth fellow with a face pitted with smallpox. His
expression seemed good-natured when compared with that of his Arab
comrades, and Stephens ventured to touch his elbow and to point to his
water-skin, and then to the exhausted lady. The negro shook his head
brusquely, but at the same time he glanced significantly towards
the Arabs, as if to say that, if it were not for them, he might act
differently. Then he laid his black forefinger upon the breast of his
jibbeh.

"Tippy Tilly," said he.

"What's that?" asked Colonel Cochrane.

"Tippy Tilly," repeated the negro, sinking his voice as if he wished
only the prisoners to hear him.

The Colonel shook his head.

"My Arabic won't bear much strain. I don't know what he is saying," said
he.

"Tippy Tilly. Hicks Pasha," the negro repeated.

"I believe the fellow is friendly to us, but I can't quite make him
out," said Cochrane to Belmont. "Do you think that he means that his
name is Tippy Tilly, and that he killed Hicks Pasha?"

The negro showed his great white teeth at hearing his own words coming
back to him. "Aiwa!" said he. "Tippy Tilly--Bimbashi Mormer--Bourn!"

"By Jove, I got it!" cried Belmont.

"He's trying to speak English. Tippy Tilly is as near as he can get
to Egyptian Artillery. He has served in the Egyptian Artillery under
Bimbashi Mortimer. He was taken prisoner when Hicks Pasha was destroyed,
and had to turn Dervish to save his skin. How's that?"

The Colonel said a few words of Arabic and received a reply, but two of
the Arabs closed up, and the negro quickened his pace and left them.

"You are quite right," said the Colonel. "The fellow is friendly to us,
and would rather fight for the Khedive than for the Khalifa. I don't
know that he can do us any good, but I've been in worse holes than
this, and come out right side up. After all, we are not out of reach of
pursuit, and won't be for another forty-eight hours."

Belmont calculated the matter out in his slow, deliberate fashion.

"It was about twelve that we were on the rock," said he. "They would
become alarmed aboard the steamer if we did not appear at two."

"Yes," the Colonel interrupted, "that was to be our lunch hour. I
remember saying that when I came back I would have----Oh, Lord, it's
best not to think about it!"

"The reis was a sleepy old crock," Belmont continued; "but I have
absolute confidence in the promptness and decision of my wife. She would
insist upon an immediate alarm being given. Suppose they started back at
two-thirty, they should be at Haifa by three, since the journey is down
stream. How long did they say that it took to turn out the Camel Corps?"

"Give them an hour."

"And another hour to get them across the river. They would be at the
Abousir Rock and pick up the tracks by six o'clock. After that it is a
clear race. We are only four hours ahead, and some of these beasts are
very spent. We may be saved yet, Cochrane!"

"Some of us may. I don't expect to see the padre alive to-morrow, nor
Miss Adams either. They are not made for this sort of thing, either of
them. Then, again, we must not forget that these people have a trick of
murdering their prisoners when they think that there is a chance of a
rescue. See here, Belmont, in case you get back and I don't, there's a
matter of a mortgage that I want you to set right for me." They rode
on with their shoulders inclined to each other, deep in the details of
business.

The friendly negro who had talked of himself as Tippy Tilly had managed
to slip a piece of cloth soaked in water into the hand of Mr. Stephens,
and Miss Adams had moistened her lips with it. Even the few drops had
given her renewed strength, and, now that the first crushing shock was
over, her wiry, elastic, Yankee nature began to reassert itself.

"These people don't look as if they would harm us, Mr. Stephens," said
she. "I guess they have a working religion of their own, such as it is,
and that what's wrong to us is wrong to them."

Stephens shook his head in silence. He had seen the death of the
donkey-boys, and she had not.

"Maybe we are sent to guide them into a better path," said the old lady.
"Maybe we are specially singled out for a good work among them."

If it were not for her niece her energetic and enterprising temperament
was capable of glorying in the chance of evangelising Khartoum, and
turning Omdurman into a little well-drained, broad-avenued replica of a
New England town.

"Do you know what I am thinking of all the time?" said Sadie. "You
remember that temple that we saw,--when was it? Why, it was this
morning."

They gave an exclamation of surprise, all three of them. Yes, it
had been this morning; and it seemed away and away in some dim past
experience of their lives, so vast was the change, so new and so
overpowering the thoughts which had come between them. They rode in
silence, full of this strange expansion of time, until at last Stephens
reminded Sadie that she had left her remark unfinished.

"Oh, yes; it was the wall picture on that temple that I was thinking of.
Do you remember the poor string of prisoners who are being dragged
along to the feet of the great king,--how dejected they looked among the
warriors who led them? Who could,--who _could_ have thought that within
three hours the same fate should be our own? And Mr. Headingly----,"
she turned her face away and began to cry.

"Don't take on, Sadie," said her aunt; "remember what the minister said
just now, that we are all right there in the hollow of God's hand. Where
do you think we are going, Mr. Stephens?"

The red edge of his Baedeker still projected from the lawyer's pocket,
for it had not been worth their captor's while to take it. He glanced
down at it.

"If they will only leave me this, I will look up a few references when
we halt. I have a general idea of the country, for I drew a small map
of it the other day. The river runs from south to north, so we must be
travelling almost due west. I suppose they feared pursuit if they kept
too near the Nile bank. There is a caravan route, I remember, which runs
parallel to the river, about seventy miles inland. If we continue in
this direction for a day we ought to come to it. There is a line of
wells through which it passes. It comes out at Assiout, if I remember
right, upon the Egyptian side. On the other side, it leads away into the
Dervish country,--so, perhaps----"

His words were interrupted by a high, eager voice which broke suddenly
into a torrent of jostling words, words without meaning, pouring
strenuously out in angry assertions and foolish repetitions. The pink
had deepened to scarlet upon Mr. Stuart's cheeks, his eyes were vacant
but brilliant, and he gabbled, gabbled, gabbled as he rode. Kindly
mother Nature! she will not let her children be mishandled too far.
"This is too much," she says; "this wounded leg, these crusted lips,
this anxious, weary mind. Come away for a time, until your body becomes
more habitable." And so she coaxes the mind away into the Nirvana of
delirium, while the little cell-workers tinker and toil within to get
things better for its home-coming. When you see the veil of cruelty
which nature wears, try and peer through it, and you will sometimes
catch a glimpse of a very homely, kindly face behind.

The Arab guards looked askance at this sudden outbreak of the clergyman,
for it verged upon lunacy, and lunacy is to them a fearsome and
supernatural thing. One of them rode forward and spoke with the Emir.
When he returned he said something to his comrades, one of whom closed
in upon each side of the minister's camel, so as to prevent him from
falling. The friendly negro sidled his beast up to the Colonel, and
whispered to him.

"We are going to halt presently, Belmont," said Cochrane.

"Thank God! They may give us some water. We can't go on like this."

"I told Tippy Tilly that, if he could help us, we would turn him into a
Bimbashi when we got him back into Egypt. I think he's willing enough if
he only had the power. By Jove, Belmont, do look back at the river."

Their route, which had lain through sand-strewn khors with jagged, black
edges,--places up which one would hardly think it possible that a
camel could climb,--opened out now on to a hard, rolling plain, covered
thickly with rounded pebbles, dipping and rising to the violet hills
upon the horizon. So regular were the long, brown pebble-strewn curves,
that they looked like the dark rollers of some monstrous ground-swell.
Here and there a little straggling sage-green tuft of camel-grass
sprouted up between the stones. Brown plains and violet hills,--nothing
else in front of them! Behind lay the black jagged rocks through which
they had passed with orange slopes of sand, and then far away a thin
line of green to mark the course of the river. How cool and beautiful
that green looked in the stark, abominable wilderness! On one side they
could see the high rock,--the accursed rock which had tempted them to
their ruin. On the other the river curved, and the sun gleamed upon the
water. Oh, that liquid gleam, and the insurgent animal cravings, the
brutal primitive longings, which for the instant took the soul out of
all of them! They had lost families, countries, liberty, everything, but
it was only of water, water, water, that they could think. Mr. Stuart,
in his delirium, began roaring for oranges, and it was insufferable
for them to have to listen to him. Only the rough, sturdy Irishman rose
superior to that bodily craving. That gleam of river must be somewhere
near Haifa, and his wife might be upon the very water at which he
looked. He pulled his hat over his eyes, and rode in gloomy silence,
biting at his strong, iron-grey moustache.

[Illustration: Looking for some landmark p124]

Slowly the sun sank towards the west, and their shadows began to trail
along the path where their hearts would go. It was cooler, and a desert
breeze had sprung up, whispering over the rolling, stone-strewed plain.
The Emir at their head had called his lieutenant to his side, and the
pair had peered about, their eyes shaded by their hands, looking for
some landmark. Then, with a satisfied grunt, the chiefs camel had seemed
to break short off at its knees, and then at its hocks, going down in
three curious, broken-jointed jerks until its stomach was stretched upon
the ground. As each succeeding camel reached the spot it lay down also,
until they were all stretched in one long line. The riders sprang off,
and laid out the chopped tibbin upon cloths in front of them, for no
well-bred camel will eat from the ground. In their gentle eyes, their
quiet, leisurely way of eating, and their condescending, mincing manner,
there was something both feminine and genteel, as though a party of prim
old maids had foregathered in the heart of the Libyan desert.

There was no interference with the prisoners, either male or female, for
how could they escape in the centre of that huge plain? The Emir came
towards them once, and stood combing out his blue-black beard with his
fingers, and looking thoughtfully at them out of his dark, sinister
eyes. Miss Adams saw with a shudder that it was always upon Sadie that
his gaze was fixed. Then, seeing their distress, he gave an order, and a
negro brought a water-skin, from which he gave each of them about half
a tumblerful. It was hot and muddy and tasted of leather, but, oh, how
delightful it was to their parched palates! The Emir said a few abrupt
words to the dragoman and left.

"Ladies and gentlemen," Mansoor began, with something of his old
consequential manner; but a glare from the Colonel's eyes struck the
words from his lips, and he broke away into a long, whimpering excuse
for his conduct.

"How could I do anything otherwise," he wailed, "with the very knife at
my throat?"

"You will have the very rope round your throat if we all see Egypt
again," growled Cochrane, savagely. "In the meantime--"

"That's all right, Colonel," said Belmont. "But for our own sakes we
ought to know what the chief has said."

"For my part I'll have nothing to do with the blackguard."

"I think that that is going too far. We are bound to hear what he has to
say."

Cochrane shrugged his shoulders. Privations had made him irritable, and
he had to bite his lip to keep down a bitter answer. He walked slowly
away, with his straight-legged military stride.

"What did he say then?" asked Belmont, looking at the dragoman with an
eye which was as stern as the Colonel's.

"He seems to be in a somewhat better manner than before. He said that
if he had more water you should have it, but that he is himself short in
supply. He said that tomorrow we shall come to the wells of Selimah, and
everybody shall have plenty--and the camels too."

"Did he say how long we stopped here?"

"Very little rest, he said, and then forwards! Oh, Mr. Belmont----"

"Hold your tongue!" snapped the Irishman, and began once more to count
times and distances. If it all worked out as he expected, if his wife
had insisted upon the indolent reis giving an instant alarm at Haifa,
then the pursuers should be already upon their track. The Camel Corps or
the Egyptian Horse would travel by moonlight better and faster than in
the daytime. He knew that it was the custom at Haifa to keep at least a
squadron of them all ready to start at any instant. He had dined at
the mess, and the officers had told him how quickly they could take
the field. They had shown him the water-tanks and the food beside each
beast, and he had admired the completeness of the arrangements, with
little thought as to what it might mean to him in the future. It would
be at least an hour before they would all get started again from their
present halting-place. That would be a clear hour gained. Perhaps by
next morning----

And then, suddenly, his thoughts were terribly interrupted. The Colonel,
raving like a madman, appeared upon the crest of the nearest slope, with
an Arab hanging on to each of his wrists. His face was purple with
rage and excitement, and he tugged and bent and writhed in his furious
efforts to get free. "You cursed murderers!" he shrieked, and then,
seeing the others in front of him, "Belmont," he cried, "they've killed
Cecil Brown."

What had happened was this. In his conflict with his own ill-humour,
Cochrane had strolled over this nearest crest, and had found a group of
camels in the hollow beyond, with a little knot of angry, loud-voiced
men beside them. Brown was the centre of the group, pale, heavy-eyed,
with his upturned, spiky moustache and listless manner. They had
searched his pockets before, but now they were determined to tear off
all his clothes in the hope of finding something which he had secreted.
A hideous negro, with silver bangles in his ears, grinned and jabbered
in the young diplomatist's impassive face. There seemed to the Colonel
to be something heroic and almost inhuman in that white calm, and those
abstracted eyes. His coat was already open, and the negro's great black
paw flew up to his neck and tore his shirt down to the waist. And at
the sound of that r-r-rip, and at the abhorrent touch of those coarse
fingers, this man about town, this finished product of the nineteenth
century, dropped his life-traditions and became a savage facing a
savage.

His face flushed, his lips curled back, he chattered, his teeth like
an ape, and his eyes --those indolent eyes which had always twinkled so
placidly--were gorged and frantic. He threw himself upon the negro, and
struck him again and again, feebly but viciously, in his broad, black
face. He hit like a girl, round arm, with an open palm. The man winced
away for an instant, appalled by this sudden blaze of passion. Then with
an impatient, snarling cry he slid a knife from his long loose sleeve
and struck upwards under the whirling arm. Brown sat down at the blow
and began to cough--to cough as a man coughs who has choked at dinner,
furiously, ceaselessly, spasm after spasm. Then the angry red cheeks
turned to a mottled pallor, there were liquid sounds in his throat, and,
clapping his hand to his mouth, he rolled over on to his side.

[Illustration: He rolled over on to his side p130]

The negro, with a brutal grunt of contempt, slid his knife up his sleeve
once more, while the Colonel, frantic with impotent anger, was seized
by the bystanders, and dragged, raving with fury, back to his forlorn
party. His hands were lashed with a camel-halter, and he lay at last, in
bitter silence, beside the delirious Nonconformist.

So Headingly was gone, and Cecil Brown was gone, and their haggard eyes
were turned from one pale face to another, to know which they should
lose next of that frieze of light-hearted riders who had stood out so
clearly against the blue morning sky, when viewed from the deck-chairs
of the _Korosko_. Two gone out of ten, and a third out of his mind. The
pleasure trip was drawing to its climax.

Fardet, the Frenchman, was sitting alone with his chin resting upon his
hands, and his elbows upon his knees, staring miserably out over the
desert, when Belmont saw him start suddenly and prick up his head like
a dog who hears a strange step. Then, with clenched fingers, he bent his
face forward and stared fixedly towards the black eastern hills through
which they had passed. Belmont followed his gaze, and, yes--yes--there
was something moving there! He saw the twinkle of metal, and the sudden
gleam and flutter of some white garment.

A Dervish vedette upon the flank turned his camel twice round as a
danger signal, and discharged his rifle in the air. The echo of the
crack had hardly died away before they were all in their saddles, Arabs
and negroes. Another instant, and the camels were on their feet and
moving slowly towards the point of alarm. Several armed men surrounded
the prisoners, slipping cartridges into their Remingtons as a hint to
them to remain still.

"By Heaven, they are men on camels!" cried Cochrane, his troubles all
forgotten as he strained his eyes to catch sight of these new-comers.
"I do believe that it is our own people." In the confusion he had tugged
his hands free from the halter which bound them.

"They've been smarter than I gave them credit for," said Belmont, his
eyes shining from under his thick brows. "They are here a long two hours
before we could have reasonably expected them. Hurrah, Monsieur Fardet,
_ça va bien, n'est ce pas?_"

"Hurrah, hurrah! _merveilleusement bien! Vivent les Anglais! Vivent
les Anglais!_" yelled the excited Frenchman, as the head of a column of
camelry began to wind out from among the rocks.

"See here, Belmont," cried the Colonel. "These fellows will want to
shoot us if they see it is all up. I know their ways, and we must be
ready for it. Will you be ready to jump on the fellow with the blind
eye, and I'll take the big nigger, if I can get my arms around him.
Stephens, you must do what you can. You, Fardet, _comprenez vous? Il
est nécessaire_ to plug these Johnnies before they can hurt us.
You, dragoman, tell those two Soudanese soldiers that they must be
ready--but, but----" his words died into a murmur and he swallowed once
or twice. "These are Arabs," said he, and it sounded like another voice.

Of all the bitter day, it was the very bitterest moment. Happy Mr.
Stuart lay upon the pebbles with his back against the ribs of his
camel, and chuckled consumedly at some joke which those busy little
cell-workers had come across in their repairs.

His fat face was wreathed and creased with merriment. But the others,
how sick, how heart-sick, were they all! The women cried. The men turned
away in that silence which is beyond tears. Monsieur Fardet fell upon
his face, and shook with dry sobbings.

The Arabs were firing their rifles as a welcome to their friends, and
the others as they trotted their camels across the open returned the
salutes and waved their rifles and lances in the air. They were a
smaller band than the first one,--not more than thirty,--but dressed in
the same red head-gear and patched jibbehs. One of them carried a small
white banner with a scarlet text scrawled across it. But there was
something there which drew the eyes and the thoughts of the tourists
away from everything else. The same fear gripped at each of their
hearts, and the same impulse kept each of them silent. They stared at a
swaying white figure half seen amidst the ranks of the desert warriors.

"What's that they have in the middle of them?" cried Stephens at last.
"Look, Miss Adams! Surely it is a woman!"

There was something there upon a camel, but it was difficult to catch
a glimpse of it. And then suddenly, as the two bodies met, the riders
opened out, and they saw it plainly. "It's a white woman!" "The steamer
has been taken!" Belmont gave a cry that sounded high above everything.

[Illustration: Norah, darling, keep your heart up p135]

"Norah, darling," he shouted, "keep your heart up! I'm here, and it is
all well!"




CHAPTER VI

So the _Korosko_ had been taken, and the chances of rescue upon which
they had reckoned--all those elaborate calculations of hours and
distances--were as unsubstantial as the mirage which shimmered upon the
horizon. There would be no alarm at Haifa until it was found that the
steamer did not return in the evening. Even now, when the Nile was only
a thin green band upon the farthest horizon, the pursuit had probably
not begun. In a hundred miles or even less they would be in the Dervish
country. How small, then, was the chance that the Egyptian forces could
overtake them. They all sank into a silent, sulky despair, with the
exception of Belmont, who was held back by the guards as he strove to go
to his wife's assistance.

The two bodies of camel-men had united, and the Arabs, in their grave,
dignified fashion, were exchanging salutations and experiences,
while the negroes grinned, chattered, and shouted, with the careless
good-humour which even the Koran has not been able to alter. The leader
of the new-comers was a greybeard, a worn, ascetic, high-nosed old
man, abrupt and fierce in his manner, and soldierly in his bearing. The
dragoman groaned when he saw him, and flapped his hands miserably with
the air of a man who sees trouble accumulating upon trouble.

"It is the Emir Abderrahman," said he. "I fear now that we shall never
come to Khartoum alive."

The name meant nothing to the others, but Colonel Cochrane had heard of
him as a monster of cruelty and fanaticism, a red-hot Moslem of the
old fighting, preaching dispensation, who never hesitated to carry the
fierce doctrines of the Koran to their final conclusions. He and the
Emir Wad Ibrahim conferred gravely together, their camels side by side,
and their red turbans inclined inwards, so that the black beard mingled
with the white one. Then they both turned and stared long and fixedly at
the poor, head-hanging huddle of prisoners. The younger man pointed and
explained, while his senior listened with a sternly impassive face.

"Who's that nice-looking old gentleman in the white beard?" asked Miss
Adams, who had been the first to rally from the bitter disappointment.

"That is their leader now," Cochrane answered.

"You don't say that he takes command over that other one?"

"Yes, lady," said the dragoman; "he is now the head of all."

"Well, that's good for us. He puts me in mind of Elder Mathews, who
was at the Presbyterian Church in minister Scott's time. Anyhow, I had
rather be in his power than in the hands of that black-haired one with
the flint eyes. Sadie, dear, you feel better now its cooler, don't you?"

"Yes, Auntie; don't you fret about me. How are you yourself?"

"Well, I'm stronger in faith than I was.

"They haven't hurt you, Norah, have they?"

"I set you a poor example, Sadie, for I was clean crazed at first at the
suddenness of it all, and at thinking of what your mother, who trusted
you to me, would think about it. My land, there'll be some headlines in
the _Boston Herald_ over this! I guess somebody will have to suffer for
it."

"Poor Mr. Stuart!" cried Sadie, as the monotonous, droning voice of the
delirious man came again to their ears. "Come, Auntie, and see if we
cannot do something to relieve him."

"I'm uneasy about Mrs. Shlesinger and the child," said Colonel Cochrane.
"I can see your wife, Belmont, but I can see no one else."

"They are bringing her over," cried he. "Thank God! We shall hear all
about it. They haven't hurt you, Norah, have they?" He ran forward to
grasp and kiss the hand which his wife held down to him as he helped her
from the camel.

[Illustration: They haven't hurt you, Norah, have they p139]

The kind, grey eyes and calm, sweet face of the Irishwoman brought
comfort and hope to the whole party. She was a devout Roman Catholic,
and it is a creed which forms an excellent prop in hours of danger.
To her, to the Anglican Colonel, to the Nonconformist minister, to the
Presbyterian American, even to the two Pagan black riflemen, religion in
its various forms was fulfilling the same beneficent office,--whispering
always that the worst which the world can do is a small thing, and that,
however harsh the ways of Providence may seem, it is, on the whole, the
wisest and best thing for us that we should go cheerfully whither the
Great Hand guides us. They had not a dogma in common, these fellows in
misfortune, but they held the intimate, deep-lying spirit, the calm,
essential fatalism which is the world-old framework of religion, with
fresh crops of dogmas growing like ephemeral lichens upon its granite
surface.

"You poor things," she said. "I can see that you have had a much worse
time than I have. No, really, John, dear, I am quite well,--not even
very thirsty, for our party filled their waterskins at the Nile, and
they let me have as much as I wanted. But I don't see Mr. Headingly and
Mr. Brown. And poor Mr. Stuart,--what a state he has been reduced to!"

"Headingly and Brown are out of their troubles," her husband answered.
"You don't know how often I have thanked God to-day, Norah, that you
were not with us. And here you are, after all."

"Where should I be but by my husband's side? I had much, _much_ rather
be here than safe at Haifa."

"Has any news gone to the town?" asked the Colonel.

"One boat escaped. Mrs. Shlesinger and her child and maid were in it. I
was downstairs in my cabin when the Arabs rushed on to the vessel. Those
on deck had time to escape, for the boat was alongside. I don't know
whether any of them were hit. The Arabs fired at them for some time."

"Did they?" cried Belmont, exultantly, his responsive Irish nature
catching the sunshine in an instant. "Then, be Jove, we'll do them yet,
for the garrison must have heard the firing. What d'ye think, Cochrane?
They must be full cry upon our scent this four hours. Any minute we
might see the white puggaree of a British officer coming over that
rise."

But disappointment had left the Colonel cold and sceptical.

"They need not come at all unless they come strong," said he. "These
fellows are picked men with good leaders, and on their own ground they
will take a lot of beating." Suddenly he paused and looked at the Arabs.
"By George!" said he, "that's a sight worth seeing!"

[Illustration: Hour of Arab prayer p142]

The great red sun was down with half its disc slipped behind the violet
bank upon the horizon. It was the hour of Arab prayer. An older and more
learned civilisation would have turned to that magnificent thing upon
the skyline and adored _that_. But these wild children of the desert
were nobler in essentials than the polished Persian. To them the ideal
was higher than the material, and it was with their backs to the sun and
their faces to the central shrine of their religion that they prayed.
And how they prayed, these fanatical Moslems! Wrapt, absorbed, with
yearning eyes and shining faces, rising, stooping, grovelling with their
foreheads upon their praying carpets. Who could doubt, as he watched
their strenuous, heart-whole devotion, that here was a great living
power in the world, reactionary but tremendous, countless millions all
thinking as one from Cape Juby to the confines of China? Let a common
wave pass over them, let a great soldier or organiser arise among them
to use the grand material at his hand, and who shall say that this may
not be the besom with which Providence may sweep the rotten, decadent,
impossible, half-hearted south of Europe, as it did a thousand years
ago, until it makes room for a sounder stock?

And now as they rose to their feet the bugle rang out, and the prisoners
understood that, having travelled all day, they were fated to travel
all night also. Belmont groaned, for he had reckoned upon the pursuers
catching them up before they left this camp. But the others had already
got into the way of accepting the inevitable. A flat Arab loaf had been
given to each of them--what effort of the _chef_ of the post-boat had
ever tasted like that dry brown bread?--and then, luxury of luxuries,
they had a second ration of a glass of water, for the fresh-filled bags
of the new-comers had provided an ample supply. If the body would but
follow the lead of the soul as readily as the soul does that of the
body, what a heaven the earth might be! Now, with their base material
wants satisfied for the instant, their spirits began to sing within
them, and they mounted their camels with some sense of the romance of
their position. Mr. Stuart remained babbling upon the ground, and the
Arabs made no effort to lift him into his saddle. His large, white,
upturned face glimmered through the gathering darkness.

"Hi, dragoman, tell them that they are forgetting Mr. Stuart," cried the
Colonel.

"No use, sir," said Mansoor. "They say that he is too fat, and that they
will not take him any farther. He will die, they say, and why should
they trouble about him?"

"Not take him!" cried Cochrane. "Why, the man will perish of hunger and
thirst. Where's the Emir? Hi!" he shouted, as the black-bearded Arab
passed, with a tone like that in which he used to summon a dilatory
donkey-boy. The chief did not deign to answer him, but said something
to one of the guards, who dashed the butt of his Remington into the
Colonel's ribs.

[Illustration: The old soldier fell forward gasping p145]

The old soldier fell forward gasping, and was carried on half senseless,
clutching at the pommel of his saddle. The women began to cry, and the
men with muttered curses and clenched hands writhed in that hell of
impotent passion, where brutal injustice and ill-usage have to go
without check or even remonstrance. Belmont gripped at his hip-pocket
for his little revolver, and then remembered that he had already given
it to Miss Adams. If his hot hand had clutched it, it would have meant
the death of the Emir and the massacre of the party.

And now as they rode onwards they saw one of the most singular of
the phenomena of the Egyptian desert in front of them, though the ill
treatment of their companion had left them in no humour for appreciating
its beauty. When the sun had sunk, the horizon had remained of a
slaty-violet hue. But now this began to lighten and to brighten until a
curious false dawn developed, and it seemed as if a vacillating sun was
coming back along the path which it had just abandoned. A rosy pink hung
over the west, with beautifully delicate sea-green tints along the upper
edge of it. Slowly these faded into slate again, and the night had come.
It was but twenty-four hours since they had sat in their canvas chairs
discussing politics by starlight on the saloon deck of the _Korosko_;
only twelve since they had breakfasted there and had started spruce and
fresh upon their last pleasure trip. What a world of fresh impressions
had come upon them since then! How rudely they had been jostled out of
their take-it-for-granted complacency! The same shimmering silver stars
as they had looked upon last night, the same thin crescent of moon--but
they, what a chasm lay between that old pampered life and this!

The long line of camels moved as noiselessly as ghosts across the
desert. Before and behind were the silent swaying white figures of the
Arabs. Not a sound anywhere, not the very faintest sound, until far
away behind them they heard a human voice singing in a strong, droning,
unmusical fashion. It had the strangest effect, this far-away voice,
in that huge inarticulate wilderness. And then there came a well-known
rhythm into that distant chant, and they could almost hear the words: We
nightly pitch our moving tent A day's march nearer home.

Was Mr. Stuart in his right mind again, or was it some coincidence of
his delirium, that he should have chosen this for his song? With moist
eyes his friends looked back through the darkness, for well they knew
that home was very near to this wanderer. Gradually the voice died away
into a hum, and was absorbed once more into the masterful silence of the
desert.

"My dear old chap, I hope you're not hurt?" said Belmont, laying his
hand upon Cochrane's knee.

The Colonel had straightened himself, though he still gasped a little in
his breathing.

"I am all right again, now. Would you kindly show me which was the man
who struck me?"

"It was the fellow in front there--with his camel beside Fardet's."

"The young fellow with the moustache--I can't see him very well in this
light, but I think I could pick him out again. Thank you, Belmont!"

"But I thought some of your ribs were gone."

"No; it only knocked the wind out of me."

"You must be made of iron. It was a frightful blow. How could you rally
from it so quickly?"

The Colonel cleared his throat and hummed and stammered.

"The fact is, my dear Belmont--I'm sure you would not let it go
further--above all not to the ladies; but I am rather older than I used
to be, and rather than lose the military carriage which has always been
dear to me, I----"

"Stays, be Jove!" cried the astonished Irishman.

"Well, some slight artificial support," said the Colonel, stiffly, and
switched the conversation off to the chances of the morrow.

It still comes back in their dreams to those who are left, that long
night's march in the desert. It was like a dream itself, the silence of
it as they were borne forward upon those soft, shuffling sponge feet,
and the flitting, flickering figures which oscillated upon every side of
them. The whole universe seemed to be hung as a monstrous time-dial in
front of them. A star would glimmer like a lantern on the very level
of their path. They looked again, and it was a hand's-breadth up, and
another was shining beneath it. Hour after hour the broad stream flowed
sedately across the deep blue background, worlds and systems drifting
majestically overhead, and pouring over the dark horizon. In their
vastness and their beauty there was a vague consolation to the prisoners
for their own fate, and their own individuality seemed trivial and
unimportant amid the play of such tremendous forces. Slowly the grand
procession swept across the heaven, first climbing, then hanging long
with little apparent motion, and then sinking grandly downwards, until
away in the east the first cold grey glimmer appeared, and their own
haggard faces shocked each other's sight.

The day had tortured them with its heat, and now the night had brought
the even more intolerable discomfort of cold. The Arabs swathed
themselves in their gowns and wrapped up their heads. The prisoners beat
their hands together and shivered miserably. Miss Adams felt it most,
for she was very thin, with the impaired circulation of age. Stephens
slipped off his Norfolk jacket and threw it over her shoulders. He rode
beside Sadie, and whistled and chatted to make her believe that her aunt
was really relieving him by carrying his jacket for him, but the attempt
was too boisterous not to be obvious. And yet it was so far true that he
probably felt the cold less than any of the party, for the old, old fire
was burning in his heart, and a curious joy was inextricably mixed with
all his misfortunes, so that he would have found it hard to say if this
adventure had been the greatest evil or the greatest blessing of his
lifetime. Aboard the boat, Sadie's youth, her beauty, her intelligence
and humour, all made him realise that she could at the best only be
expected to charitably endure him. But now he felt that he was really of
some use to her, that every hour she was learning to turn to him as one
turns to one's natural protector; and above all, he had begun to find
himself--to understand that there really was a strong, reliable man
behind all the tricks of custom which had built up an artificial nature,
which had imposed even upon himself. A little glow of self-respect began
to warm his blood. He had missed his youth when he was young, and now in
his middle age it was coming up like some beautiful belated flower.

"I do believe that you are all the time enjoying it, Mr. Stephens," said
Sadie, with some bitterness.

"I would not go so far as to say that," he answered. "But I am quite
certain that I would not leave you here."

[Illustration: Certain that I would not leave you here p152]

It was the nearest approach to tenderness which he had ever put into a
speech, and the girl looked at him in surprise.

"I think I've been a very wicked girl all my life," she said, after a
pause. "Because I have had a good time myself, I never thought of those
who were unhappy. This has struck me serious. If ever I get back I shall
be a better woman--a more earnest woman--in the future."

"And I a better man. I suppose it is just for that that trouble comes
to us. Look how it has brought out the virtues of all our friends. Take
poor Mr. Stuart, for example. Should we ever have known what a noble,
constant man he was? And see Belmont and his wife, in front of us,
there, going fearlessly forward, hand in hand, thinking only of each
other. And Cochrane, who always seemed on board the boat to be a rather
stand-offish, narrow sort of man! Look at his courage, and his unselfish
indignation when any one is ill used. Fardet, too, is as brave as a
lion. I think misfortune has done us all good."

Sadie sighed.

"Yes, if it would end right here one might say so. But if it goes on and
on for a few weeks or months of misery, and then ends in death, I don't
know where we reap the benefit of those improvements of character which
it brings. Suppose you escape, what will you do'?"

The lawyer hesitated, but his professional instincts were still strong.

"I will consider whether an action lies, and against whom. It should
be with the organisers of the expedition for taking us to the Abousir
Rock--or else with the Egyptian Government for not protecting their
frontiers. It will be a nice legal question. And what will you do,
Sadie?"

It was the first time that he had ever dropped the formal Miss, but the
girl was too much in earnest to notice it.

"I will be more tender to others," she said. "I will try to make some
one else happy in memory of the miseries which I have endured."

"You have done nothing all your life but made others happy. You cannot
help doing it," said he. The darkness made it more easy for him to break
through the reserve which was habitual with him. "You need this rough
schooling far less than any of us. How could your character be changed
for the better?"

"You show how little you know me. I have been very selfish and
thoughtless."

"At least you had no need for all these strong emotions. You were
sufficiently alive without them. Now it has been different with me."

"Why did you need emotions, Mr. Stephens'?"

"Because anything is better than stagnation. Pain is better than
stagnation. I have only just begun to live. Hitherto I have been
a machine upon the earth's surface. I was a one-ideaed man, and a
one-ideaed man is only one remove from a dead man. That is what I
have only just begun to realise. For all these years I have never been
stirred, never felt a real throb of human emotion pass through me. I had
no time for it. I had observed it in others, and I had vaguely wondered
whether there was some want in me which prevented my sharing the
experience of my fellow-mortals. But now these last few days have
taught me how keenly I can live--that I can have warm hopes and deadly
fears--that I can hate and that I can--well, that I can have every
strong feeling which the soul can experience. I have come to life. I
may be on the brink of the grave, but at least I can say now that I have
lived."

"And why did you lead this soul-killing life in England?"

"I was ambitious--I wanted to get on. And then there were my mother and
my sisters to be thought of. Thank Heaven, here is the morning coming.
Your aunt and you will soon cease to feel the cold."

"And you without your coat?"

"Oh, I have a very good circulation. I can manage very well in my
shirt-sleeves."

And now the long, cold, weary night was over, and the deep blue-black
sky had lightened to a wonderful mauve-violet, with the larger stars
still glinting brightly out of it. Behind them the grey line had
crept higher and higher, deepening into a delicate rose-pink, with the
fan-like rays of the invisible sun shooting and quivering across it.
Then, suddenly, they felt its warm touch upon their backs, and there
were hard black shadows upon the sand in front of them. The Dervishes
loosened their cloaks and proceeded to talk cheerily among themselves.
The prisoners also began to thaw, and eagerly ate the doora which was
served out for their breakfasts. A short halt had been called, and a cup
of water handed to each.

"Can I speak to you, Colonel Cochrane?" asked the dragoman.

"No, you can't," snapped the Colonel.

"But it is very important--all our safety may come from it."

The Colonel frowned and pulled at his moustache.

"Well, what is it?" he asked, at last.

"You must trust to me, for it is as much to me as to you to get back to
Egypt. My wife and home, and children, are on one part, and a slave for
life upon the other. You have no cause to doubt it."

"Well, go on!"

"You know the black man who spoke with you--the one who had been with
Hicks?"

"Yes, what of him?"

"He has been speaking with me during the night. I have had a long talk
with him. He said that he could not very well understand you, nor you
him, and so he came to me."

"What did he say?"

"He said that there were eight Egyptian soldiers among the Arabs--six
black and two fellaheen. He said that he wished to have your promise
that they should all have very good reward if they helped you to
escape."

"Of course they shall."

"They asked for one hundred Egyptian pounds each."

"They shall have it."

"I told him that I would ask you, but that I was sure that you would
agree to it."

"What do they purpose to do?"

"They could promise nothing, but what they thought best was that they
should ride their camels not very far from you, so that if any chance
should come they would be ready to take advantage."

"Well, you can go to him and promise two hundred pounds each if they
will help us. You do not think we could buy over some Arabs?"

Mansoor shook his head. "Too much danger to try," said he. "Suppose you
try and fail, then that will be the end to all of us. I will go tell
what you have said." He strolled off to where the old negro gunner was
grooming his camel and waiting for his reply.

The Emirs had intended to halt for a half-hour at the most, but the
baggage-camels which bore the prisoners were so worn out with the long,
rapid march, that it was clearly impossible that they should move for
some time. They had laid their long necks upon the ground, which is
the last symptom of fatigue. The two chiefs shook their heads when they
inspected them, and the terrible old man looked with his hard-lined,
rock features at the captives. Then he said something to Mansoor, whose
face turned a shade more sallow as he listened.

"The Emir Abderrahman says that if you do not become Moslem, it is not
worth while delaying the whole caravan in order to carry you upon the
baggage-camels. If it were not for you, he says that we could travel
twice as fast. He wishes to know therefore, once for ever, if you
will accept the Koran." Then in the same tone, as if he were still
translating, he continued: "You had far better consent, for if you do
not he will most certainly put you all to death."

The unhappy prisoners looked at each other in despair. The two Emirs
stood gravely watching them.

"For my part," said Cochrane, "I had as soon die now as be a slave in
Khartoum!"

"What do you say, Norah?" asked Belmont.

"If we die together, John, I don't think I shall be afraid."

"It is absurd that I should die for that in which I have never had
belief," said Fardet. "And yet it is not possible for the honour of a
Frenchman that he should be converted in this fashion." He drew himself
up, with his wounded wrist stuck into the front of his jacket, "_Je suis
Chrétien. J'y reste,_" he cried, a gallant falsehood in each sentence.

"What do you say, Mr. Stephens?" asked Mansoor, in a beseeching voice.
"If one of you would change, it might place them in a good humour. I
implore you that you do what they ask."

"No, I can't," said the lawyer, quietly.

"Well then, you, Miss Sadie? You, Miss Adams? It is only just to say it
once, and you will be saved."

"Oh, Auntie, do you think we might?" whimpered the frightened girl.
"Would it be so very wrong if we said it?"

The old lady threw her arms round her.

"No, no, my own dear little Sadie," she whispered. "You'll be strong!
You would just hate yourself for ever after. Keep your grip of me, dear,
and pray if you find your strength is leaving you. Don't forget that
your old aunt Eliza has you all the time by the hand."

For an instant they were heroic, this line of dishevelled, bedraggled
pleasure-seekers. They were all looking Death in the face, and the
closer they looked the less they feared him. They were conscious rather
of a feeling of curiosity, together with the nervous tingling with which
one approaches a dentist's chair. The dragoman made a motion of
his hands and shoulders, as one who has tried and failed. The Emir
Abderrahman said something to a negro, who hurried away.

"What does he want a scissors for?" asked the Colonel.

"He is going to hurt the women," said Mansoor, with the same gesture of
impotence.

A cold chill fell upon them all. They stared about them in helpless
horror. Death in the abstract was one thing, but these insufferable
details were another. Each had been braced to endure any evil in his own
person, but their hearts were still soft for each other. The women said
nothing, but the men were all buzzing together.

"There's the pistol, Miss Adams," said Belmont.

"Give it here! We won't be tortured! We won't stand it!"

"Offer them money, Mansoor! Offer them anything!" cried Stephens. "Look.
here, I'll turn Mohammedan if they'll promise to leave the women alone.
After all, it isn't binding--it's under compulsion. But I can't see the
women hurt."

"No, wait a bit, Stephens!" said the Colonel. "We mustn't lose our
heads. I think I see a way out. See here, dragoman! You tell that
grey-bearded old devil that we know nothing about his cursed tinpot
religion. Put it smooth when you translate it. Tell him that he cannot
expect us to adopt it until we know what particular brand of rot it is
that he wants us to believe. Tell him that if he will instruct us, we
are perfectly willing to listen to his teaching, and you can add that
any creed which turns out such beauties as him, and that other bounder
with the black beard, must claim the attention of every one."

With bows and suppliant sweepings of his hands the dragoman explained
that the Christians were already full of doubt, and that it needed but
a little more light of knowledge to guide them on to the path of Allah.
The two Emirs stroked their beards and gazed suspiciously at them. Then
Abderrahman spoke in his crisp, stern fashion to the dragoman, and the
two strode away together. An instant later the bugle rang out as a
signal to mount.

"What he says is this," Mansoor explained, as he rode in the middle of
the prisoners. "We shall reach the wells by mid-day, and there will be a
rest. His own Moolah, a very good and learned man, will come to give you
an hour of teaching. At the end of that time you will choose one way or
the other. When you have chosen, it will be decided whether you are to
go to Khartoum or to be put to death. That is his last word."

"They won't take ransom?"

"Wad Ibrahim would, but the Emir Abderrahman is a terrible man. I
advise you to give in to him."

"What have you done yourself? You are a Christian, too."

Mansoor blushed as deeply as his complexion would allow.

"I was yesterday morning. Perhaps I will be to-morrow morning. I serve
the Lord as long as what He ask seem reasonable; but this is very
otherwise."

He rode onwards amongst the guards with a freedom which showed that his
change of faith had put him upon a very different footing to the other
prisoners.

So they were to have a reprieve of a few hours, though they rode in that
dark shadow of death which was closing in upon them.

What is there in life that we should cling to it so? It is not the
pleasures, for those whose hours are one long pain shrink away screaming
when they see merciful Death holding his soothing arms out for them. It
is not the associations, for we will change all of them before we walk
of our own free wills down that broad road which every son and daughter
of man must tread. Is it the fear of losing the I, that dear, intimate
I, which we think we know so well, although it is eternally doing things
which surprise us? Is it that which makes the deliberate suicide cling
madly to the bridge-pier as the river sweeps him by? Or is it that
Nature is so afraid that all her weary workmen may suddenly throw down
their tools and strike, that she has invented this fashion of keeping
them constant to their present work? But there it is, and all these
tired, harassed, humiliated folk rejoiced in the few more hours of
suffering which were left to them.




CHAPTER VII

There was nothing to show them as they journeyed onwards that they were
not on the very spot that they had passed at sunset upon the evening
before. The region of fantastic black hills and orange sand which
bordered the river had long been left behind, and everywhere now was the
same brown, rolling, gravelly plain, the ground-swell with the shining
rounded pebbles upon its surface, and the occasional little sprouts of
sage-green camel-grass. Behind and before it extended, to where far away
in front of them it sloped upwards towards a line of violet hills. The
sun was not high enough yet to cause the tropical shimmer, and the wide
landscape, brown with its violet edging, stood out with a hard clearness
in that dry, pure air. The long caravan straggled along at the slow
swing of the baggage-camels. Far out on the flanks rode the vedettes,
halting at every rise, and peering backwards with their hands shading
their eyes. In the distance their spears and rifles seemed to stick out
of them, straight and thin, like needles in knitting.

"How far do you suppose we are from the Nile?" asked Cochrane. He rode
with his chin on his shoulder and his eyes straining wistfully to the
eastern sky-line.

"A good fifty miles," Belmont answered.

"Not so much as that," said the Colonel. "We could not have been moving
more than fourteen or fifteen hours, and a camel seldom goes more than
two and a half miles an hour unless he is trotting. That would give
about forty miles, but still it is, I fear, rather far for a rescue. I
don't know that we are much the better for this postponement. What have
we to hope for? We may just as well take our gruel."

"Never say die!" cried the cheery Irishman. "There's plenty of time
between this and mid-day. Hamilton and Hedley of the Camel Corps are
good boys, and they'll be after us like a streak. They'll have no
baggage-camels to hold them back, you can lay your life on that! Little
did I think, when I dined with them at mess that last night, and they
were telling me all their precautions against a raid, that I should
depend upon them for our lives."

"Well, we'll play the game out, but I'm not very hopeful," said
Cochrane. "Of course, we must keep the best face we can before the
women. I see that Tippy Tilly is as good as his word, for those five
niggers and the two brown Johnnies must be the men he speaks of. They
all ride together and keep well up, but I can't see how they are going
to help us."

"I've got my pistol back," whispered Belmont, and his square chin and
strong mouth set like granite. "If they try any games on the women, I
mean to shoot them all three with my own hand, and then we'll die with
our minds easy."

"Good man!" said Cochrane, and they rode on in silence. None of them
spoke much. A curious, dreamy, irresponsible feeling crept over them.
It was as if they had all taken some narcotic drug--the merciful anodyne
which Nature uses when a great crisis has fretted the nerves too
far. They thought of their friends and of their past lives in the
comprehensive way in which one views that which is completed. A subtle
sweetness mingled with the sadness of their fate. They were filled with
the quiet serenity of despair.

"It's devilish pretty," said the Colonel, looking about him. "I always
had an idea that I should like to die in a real, good, yellow London
fog. You couldn't change for the worse."

"I should have liked to have died in my sleep," said Sadie. "How
beautiful to wake up and find yourself in the other world! There was a
piece that Hetty Smith used to say at the college, 'Say not good-night,
but in some brighter world wish me good-morning.'"

The Puritan aunt shook her head at the idea. "It's a terrible thing to
go unprepared into the presence of your Maker," said she.

"It's the loneliness of death that is terrible," said Mrs. Belmont. "If
we and those whom we loved all passed over simultaneously, we should
think no more of it than of changing our house."

"If the worst comes to the worst, we won't be lonely," said her husband.
"We'll all go together, and we shall find Brown and Headingly and Stuart
waiting on the other side."

The Frenchman shrugged his shoulders. He had no belief in survival after
death, but he envied the two Catholics the quiet way in which they took
things for granted. He chuckled to think of what his friends in the Café
Cubat would say if they learned that he had laid down his life for the
Christian faith. Sometimes it amused and sometimes it maddened him, and
he rode onwards with alternate gusts of laughter and of fury, nursing
his wounded wrist all the time like a mother with a sick baby.

Across the brown of the hard, pebbly desert there had been visible for
some time a single long, thin, yellow streak, extending north and south
as far as they could see. It was a band of sand not more than a few
hundred yards across, and rising at the highest to eight or ten feet.
But the prisoners were astonished to observe that the Arabs pointed at
this with an air of the utmost concern, and they halted when they came
to the edge of it like men upon the brink of an unfordable river. It
was very light, dusty sand, and every wandering breath of wind sent it
dancing into the air like a whirl of midges. The Emir Abderrahman tried
to force his camel into it, but the creature, after a step or two, stood
still and shivered with terror.

[Illustration: The creature, stood still p171]

The two chiefs talked for a little, and then the whole caravan trailed
off with their heads for the north, and the streak of sand upon their
left.

"What is it?" asked Belmont, who found the dragoman riding at his elbow.
"Why are we going out of our course?"

"Drift sand," Mansoor answered. "Every sometimes the wind bring it all
in one long place like that. To-morrow, if a wind comes, perhaps there
will not be one grain left, but all will be carried up into the air
again. An Arab will sometimes have to go fifty or a hundred miles to go
round a drift. Suppose he tries to cross, his camel breaks its legs, and
he himself is sucked in and swallowed."

"How long will this be?"

"No one can say."

"Well, Cochrane, it's all in our favour. The longer the chase the better
chance for the fresh camels!" and for the hundredth time he looked
back at the long, hard skyline behind them. There was the great, empty,
dun-coloured desert, but where the glint of steel or the twinkle of
white helmet for which he yearned?

And soon they cleared the obstacle in their front. It spindled away into
nothing, as a streak of dust would which has been blown across an empty
room. It was curious to see that when it was so narrow that one could
almost jump it, the Arabs would still go for many hundreds of yards
rather than risk the crossing. Then, with good, hard country before them
once more, the tired beasts were whipped up, and they ambled on with a
double-jointed jog-trot, which set the prisoners nodding and bowing in
grotesque and ludicrous misery. It was fun at first, and they smiled
at each other, but soon the fun had become tragedy as the terrible
camel-ache seized them by spine and waist, with its deep, dull throb,
which rises gradually to a splitting agony.

"I can't stand it, Sadie," cried Miss Adams, suddenly. "I've done my
best. I'm going to fall."

"No, no, Auntie, you'll break your limbs if you do. Hold up, just a
little, and maybe they'll stop."

"Lean back, and hold your saddle behind," said the Colonel. "There,
you'll find that will ease the strain." He took the puggaree from his
hat, and, tying the ends together, he slung it over her front pommel.
"Put your foot in the loop," said he. "It will steady you like a
stirrup."

The relief was instant, so Stephens did the same for Sadie. But
presently one of the weary doora camels came down with a crash, its
limbs starred out as if it had split asunder, and the caravan had to
come down to its old sober gait.

"Is this another belt of drift sand?" asked the Colonel, presently.

"No, it's white," said Belmont. "Here, Mansoor, what is that in front of
us?"

But the dragoman shook his head.

"I don't know what it is, sir. I never saw the same thing before."

Right across the desert, from north to south, there was drawn a white
line, as straight and clear as if it had been slashed with chalk across
a brown table. It was very thin, but it extended without a break from
horizon to horizon. Tippy Tilly said something to the dragoman.

"It's the great caravan route," said Mansoor.

[Illustration: The great caravan route p 174]

"What makes it white, then?"

"The bones."

It seemed incredible, and yet it was true, for as they drew nearer they
saw that it was indeed a beaten track across the desert, hollowed out by
long usage, and so covered with bones that they gave the impression of
a continuous white ribbon. Long, snouty heads were scattered everywhere,
and the lines of ribs were so continuous that it looked in places like
the framework of a monstrous serpent. The endless road gleamed in the
sun as if it were paved with ivory. For thousands of years this had been
the highway over the desert, and during all that time no animal of all
those countless caravans had died there without being preserved by the
dry, antiseptic air. No wonder, then, that it was hardly possible to
walk down it now without treading upon their skeletons.

"This must be the route I spoke of," said Stephens. "I remember marking
it upon the map I made for you, Miss Adams. Baedeker says that it has
been disused on account of the cessation of all trade which followed the
rise of the Dervishes, but that it used to be the main road by which the
skins and gums of Darfur found their way down to Lower Egypt."

They looked at it with a listless curiosity, for there was enough to
engross them at present in their own fates. The caravan struck to the
south along the old desert track, and this Golgotha of a road seemed to
be a fitting avenue for that which awaited them at the end of it. Weary
camels and weary riders dragged on together towards their miserable
goal.

And now, as the critical moment approached which was to decide their
fate, Colonel Cochrane, weighed down by his fears lest something
terrible should befall the women, put his pride aside to the extent of
asking the advice, of the renegade dragoman. The fellow was a villain
and a coward, but at least he was an Oriental, and he understood the
Arab point of view. His change of religion had brought him into closer
contact with the Dervishes, and he had overheard their intimate talk.
Cochrane's stiff, aristocratic nature fought hard before he could bring
himself to ask advice from such a man, and when he at last did so, it
was in the gruffest and most unconciliatory voice.

"You know the rascals, and you have the same way of looking at things,"
said he. "Our object is to keep things going for another twenty-four
hours. After that it does not much matter what befalls us, for we shall
be out of the reach of rescue. But how can we stave them off for another
day?"

"You know my advice," the dragoman answered; "I have already answered it
to you. If you will all become as I have, you will certainly be
carried to Khartoum alive. If you do not, you will never leave our next
camping-place alive."

The Colonel's well-curved nose took a higher tilt, and an angry flush
reddened his thin cheeks. He rode in silence for a little, for his
Indian service had left him with a curried-prawn temper, which had had
an extra touch of cayenne added to it by his recent experiences. It was
some minutes before he could trust himself to reply.

"We'll set that aside," said he, at last.

"Some things are possible and some are not. This is not."

"You need only pretend."

"That's enough," said the Colonel, abruptly.

Mansoor shrugged his shoulders.

"What is the use of asking me, if you become angry when I answer? If you
do not wish to do what I say, then try your own attempt. At least you
cannot say that I have not done all I could to save you."

"I'm not angry," the Colonel answered, after a pause, in a more
conciliatory voice, "but this is climbing down rather farther than we
care to go. Now, what I thought is this. You might, if you chose, give
this priest, or Moolah, who is coming to us, a hint that we really are
softening a bit upon the point. I don't think, considering the hole that
we are in, that there can be very much objection to that. Then, when
he comes, we might play up and take an interest and ask for more
instruction, and in that way hold the matter over for a day or two.
Don't you think that would be the best game?"

"You will do as you like," said Mansoor. "I have told you once for ever
what I think. If you wish that I speak to the Moolah, I will do so.
It is the fat, little man with the grey beard, upon the brown camel in
front there. I may tell you that he has a name among them for converting
the infidel, and he has a great pride in it, so that he would certainly
prefer that you were not injured if he thought that he might bring you
into Islam."

"Tell him that our minds are open then," said the Colonel. "I don't
suppose the _padre_ would have gone so far, but now that he is dead I
think we may stretch a point. You go to him, Mansoor, and if you work it
well we will agree to forget what is past. By the way, has Tippy Tilly
said anything?"

"No, sir. He has kept his men together, but he does not understand yet
how he can help you."

"Neither do I. Well, you go to the Moolah, and I'll tell the others what
we have agreed."

The prisoners all acquiesced in the Colonel's plan, with the exception
of the old New England lady, who absolutely refused even to show any
interest in the Mohammedan creed. "I guess I am too old to bow the knee
to Baal," she said. The most that she would concede was that she would
not openly interfere with anything which her companions might say or do.

"And who is to argue with the priest?" asked Fardet, as they all rode
together, talking the matter over. "It is very important that it should
be done in a natural way, for if he thought that we were only trying to
gain time he would refuse to have any more to say to us."

"I think Cochrane should do it, as the proposal is his," said Belmont.

"Pardon me!" cried the Frenchman. "I will not say a word against our
friend the Colonel, but it is not possible that a man should be fitted
for everything. It will all come to nothing if he attempts it. The
priest will see through the Colonel."

"Will he?" said the Colonel, with dignity.

"Yes, my friend, he will, for like most of your countrymen, you are very
wanting in sympathy for the ideas of other people, and it is the great
fault which I find with you as a nation."

"Oh, drop the politics!" cried Belmont, impatiently.

"I do not talk politics. What I say is very practical. How can Colonel
Cochrane pretend to this priest that he is really interested in his
religion when, in effect, there is no religion in the world to him
outside some little church in which he has been born and bred? I
will say this for the Colonel, that I do not believe he is at all a
hypocrite, and I am sure that he could not act well enough to deceive
such a man as this priest."

The Colonel sat with a very stiff back and the blank face of a man who
is not quite sure whether he is being complimented or insulted.

"You can do the talking yourself if you like," said he at last. "I
should be very glad to be relieved of it."

"I think that I am best fitted for it, since I am equally interested in
all creeds. When I ask for information, it is because in verity I desire
it, and not because I am playing a part."

"I certainly think that it would be much better if Monsieur Fardet would
undertake it," said Mrs. Belmont, with decision, and so the matter was
arranged.

The sun was now high, and it shone with dazzling brightness upon the
bleached bones which lay upon the road. Again the torture of thirst
fell upon the little group of survivors, and again, as they rode
with withered tongues and crusted lips, a vision of the saloon of the
_Korosko_ danced like a mirage before their eyes, and they saw the white
napery, the wine-cards by the places, the long necks of the bottles,
the siphons upon the sideboard. Sadie, who had borne up so well, became
suddenly hysterical, and her shrieks of senseless laughter jarred
horribly upon their nerves. Her aunt on one side of her and Mr. Stephens
on the other did all they could to soothe her, and at last the weary,
over-strung girl relapsed into something between a sleep and a faint,
hanging limp over her pommel, and only kept from falling by the friends
who clustered round her. The baggage-camels were as weary as their
riders, and again and again they had to jerk at their nose-ropes to
prevent them from lying down. From horizon to horizon stretched that one
hugh arch of speckless blue, and up its monstrous concavity crept the
inexorable sun, like some splendid but barbarous deity, who claimed a
tribute of human suffering as his immemorial right.

Their course still lay along the old trade route, but their progress was
very slow, and more than once the two Emirs rode back together and shook
their heads as they looked at the weary baggage-camels on which the
prisoners were perched. The greatest laggard of all was one which was
ridden by a wounded Soudanese soldier. It was limping badly with a
strained tendon, and it was only by constant prodding that it could be
kept with the others. The Emir Wad Ibraham raised his Remington, as the
creature hobbled past, and sent a bullet through its brain. The wounded
man flew forwards out of the high saddle, and fell heavily upon the hard
track. His companions in misfortune, looking back, saw him stagger to
his feet with a dazed face. At the same instant a Baggara slipped down
from his camel with a sword in his hand.

[Illustration: Sword in his hand p184]

"Don't look! don't look!" cried Belmont to the ladies, and they all rode
on with their faces to the south. They heard no sound, but the Baggara
passed them a few minutes afterwards. He was cleaning his sword upon the
hairy neck of his camel, and he glanced at them with a quick, malicious
gleam of his teeth as he trotted by. But those who are at the lowest
pitch of human misery are at least secured against the future. That
vicious, threatening smile which might once have thrilled them left them
now unmoved--or stirred them at most to vague resentment.

There were many things to interest them in this old trade route, had
they been in a condition to take notice of them. Here and there along
its course were the crumbling remains of ancient buildings, so old
that no date could be assigned to them, but designed in some far-off
civilisation to give the travellers shade from the sun or protection
from the ever-lawless children of the desert. The mud bricks with which
these refuges were constructed showed that the material had been carried
over from the distant Nile. Once, upon the top of a little knoll, they
saw the shattered plinth of a pillar of red Assouan granite, with the
wide-winged symbol of the Egyptian god across it, and the cartouche of
the second Rameses beneath. After three thousand years one cannot get
away from the ineffaceable footprints of the warrior-king. It is surely
the most wonderful survival of history that one should still be able to
gaze upon him, high-nosed and masterful, as he lies with his powerful
arms crossed upon his chest, majestic even in decay, in the Gizeh
Museum. To the captives, the cartouche was a message of hope, as a sign
that they were not outside the sphere of Egypt. "They've left their
card here once, and they may again," said Belmont, and they all tried to
smile.

And now they came upon one of the most satisfying sights on which the
human eye can ever rest. Here and there, in the depressions at either
side of the road, there had been a thin scurf of green, which meant that
water was not very far from the surface. And then, quite suddenly, the
track dipped down into a bowl-shaped hollow, with a most dainty group
of palm-trees, and a lovely greensward at the bottom of it. The sun
gleaming upon that brilliant patch of clear, restful colour, with the
dark glow of the bare desert around it, made it shine like the purest
emerald in a setting of burnished copper. And then it was not its beauty
only, but its promise for the future: water, shade, all that weary
travellers could ask for. Even Sadie was revived by the cheery sight,
and the spent camels snorted and stepped out more briskly, stretching
their long necks and sniffing the air as they went. After the unhomely
harshness of the desert, it seemed to all of them that they had never
seen anything more beautiful than this. They looked below at the
greensward with the dark, starlike shadows of the palm-crowns, and then
they looked up at those deep green leaves against the rich blue of the
sky, and they forgot their impending death in the beauty of that Nature
to whose bosom they were about to return.

The wells in the centre of the grove consisted of seven large and two
small saucerlike cavities filled with peat-coloured water enough to form
a plentiful supply for any caravan. Camels and men drank it greedily,
though it was tainted by the all-pervading natron. The camels were
picketed, the Arabs threw their sleeping-mats down in the shade, and
the prisoners, after receiving a ration of dates and of doora, were told
that they might do what they would during the heat of the day, and that
the Moolah would come to them before sunset. The ladies were given the
thicker shade of an acacia tree, and the men lay down under the palms.
The great green leaves swished slowly above them; they heard the low hum
of the Arab talk, and the dull champing of the camels, and then in an
instant, by that most mysterious and least understood of miracles, one
was in a green Irish valley, and another saw the long straight line
of Commonwealth Avenue, and a third was dining at a little round table
opposite to the bust of Nelson in the Army and Navy Club, and for
him the swishing of the palm branches had been transformed into the
long-drawn hum of Pall Mall. So the spirits went their several ways,
wandering back along strange, untraced tracks of the memory, while the
weary, grimy bodies lay senseless under the palm-trees in the Oasis of
the Libyan Desert.

[Illustration: Grimy bodies lay senseless under the palm-trees p188]




CHAPTER VIII

Colonel Cochrane was awakened from his slumber by some one pulling at
his shoulder. As his eyes opened they fell upon the black, anxious face
of Tippy Tilly, the old Egyptian gunner. His crooked finger was laid
upon his thick, liver-coloured lips, and his dark eyes glanced from left
to right with ceaseless vigilance.

"Lie quiet! Do not move!" he whispered, in Arabic. "I will lie here
beside you, and they cannot tell me from the others. You can understand
what I am saying?"

"Yes, if you will talk slowly."

"Very good. I have no great trust in this black man, Mansoor. I had
rather talk direct with the Miralai."

"What have you to say?"

"I have waited long, until they should all be asleep, and now in another
hour we shall be called to evening prayer. First of all, here is a
pistol, that you may not say that you are without arms."

It was a clumsy, old-fashioned thing, but the Colonel saw the glint of a
percussion-cap upon the nipple, and knew that it was loaded. He slipped
it into the inner pocket of his Norfolk jacket.

"Thank you," said he; "speak slowly, so that I may understand you."

"There are eight of us who wish to go to Egypt. There are also four
men in your party. One of us, Mehemet Ali, has fastened twelve camels
together, which are the fastest of all save only those which are ridden
by the Emirs. There are guards upon watch, but they are scattered in all
directions. The twelve camels are close beside us here,--those twelve
behind the acacia-tree. If we can only get mounted and started, I do not
think that many can overtake us, and we shall have our rifles for them.
The guards are not strong enough to stop so many of us. The waterskins
are all filled, and we may see the Nile again by to-morrow night."

The Colonel could not follow it all, "That is excellent," said he. "But
what are we to do about the three ladies?"

The black soldier shrugged his shoulders.

"Mefeesh!" said he. "One of them is old, and in any case there are
plenty more women if we get back to Egypt. These will not come to any
hurt, but they will be placed in the harem of the Khalija."

"What you say is nonsense," said the Colonel, sternly. "We shall take
our women with us, or we shall not go at all."

"I think it is rather you who talk the thing without sense," the black
man answered, angrily. "How can you ask my companions and me to do that
which must end in failure? For years we have waited for such a chance
as this, and now that it has come, you wish us to throw it away owing to
this foolishness about the women."

He understood enough to set a little spring of hope bubbling in his
heart. The last terrible day had left its mark in his livid face and his
hair, which was turning rapidly to grey. He might have been the father
of the spruce, well-preserved soldier who had paced with straight back
and military stride up and down the saloon deck of the _Korosko_.

"What have we promised you if we come back to Egypt?" asked Cochrane.

"Two hundred Egyptian pounds and promotion in the army,--all upon the
word of an Englishman."

"Very good. Then you shall have three hundred each if you can make some
new plan by which you can take the women with you."

Tippy Tilly scratched his woolly head in his perplexity.

"We might, indeed, upon some excuse, bring three more of the faster
camels round to this place. Indeed, there are three very good camels
among those which are near the cooking-fire. But how are we to get the
women upon them?--and if we had them upon them, we know very well that
they would fall off when they began to gallop. I fear that you men will
fall off, for it is no easy matter to remain upon a galloping camel; but
as to the women, it is impossible. No, we shall leave the women, and if
you will not leave the women, then we shall leave all of you and start
by ourselves."

"Very good! Go!" said the Colonel, abruptly, and settled down as if to
sleep once more. He knew that with Orientals it is the silent man who is
most likely to have his way.

The negro turned and crept away for some little distance, where he was
met by one of his fellaheen comrades, Mehemet Ali, who had charge of the
camels. The two argued for some little time,--for those three hundred
golden pieces were not to be lightly resigned. Then the negro crept back
to Colonel Cochrane.

"Mehemet Ali has agreed," said he. "He has gone to put the nose-rope
upon three more of the camels. But it is foolishness, and we are all
going to our death. Now come with me, and we shall awaken the women and
tell them."

The Colonel shook his companions and whispered to them what was in the
wind. Belmont and Fardet were ready for any risk. Stephens, to whom the
prospect of a passive death presented little terror, was seized with a
convulsion of fear when he thought of any active exertion to avoid
it, and shivered in all his long, thin limbs. Then he pulled out his
Baedeker and began to write his will upon the fly-leaf, but his hand
twitched so that he was hardly legible. By some strange gymnastic of the
legal mind, a death, even by violence, if accepted quietly, had a place
in the established order of things, while a death which overtook
one galloping frantically over a desert was wholly irregular and
discomposing. It was not dissolution which he feared, but the
humiliation and agony of a fruitless struggle against it.

Colonel Cochrane and Tippy Tilly had crept together under the shadow of
the great acacia tree to the spot where the women were lying. Sadie and
her aunt lay with their arms round each other, the girl's head pillowed
upon the old woman's bosom. Mrs. Belmont was awake, and entered into the
scheme in an instant.

"But you must leave me," said Miss Adams, earnestly. "What does it
matter at my age, anyhow?"

"No, no, Aunt Eliza; I won't move without you! Don't you think it!"
cried the girl. "You've got to come straight away, or else we both stay
right here where we are."

"Come, come, ma'am, there is no time for arguing," said the Colonel,
roughly. "Our lives all depend upon your making an effort, and we cannot
possibly leave you behind."

"But I will fall off."

"I'll tie you on with my puggaree. I wish I had the cummerbund which I
lent poor Stuart. Now, Tippy, I think we might make a break for it!"

But the black soldier had been staring with a disconsolate face out over
the desert, and he turned upon his heel with an oath.

"There!" said he, sullenly. "You see what comes of all your foolish
talking! You have ruined our chances as well as your own!"

Half a dozen mounted camel-men had appeared suddenly over the lip of the
bowl-shaped hollow, standing out hard and clear against the evening
sky, where the copper basin met its great blue lid. They were travelling
fast, and waved their rifles as they came. An instant later the bugle
sounded an alarm, and the camp was up with a buzz like an overturned
bee-hive. The Colonel ran back to his companions, and the black soldier
to his camel. Stephens looked relieved, and Belmont sulky, while
Monsieur Fardet raved, with his one uninjured hand in the air.

"Sacred name of a dog!" he cried. "Is there no end to it, then? Are we
never to come out of the hands of these accursed Dervishes?"

"Oh, they really are Dervishes, are they?" said the Colonel, in an acid
voice. "You seem to be altering your opinions. I thought they were an
invention of the British Government."

The poor fellows' tempers were getting frayed and thin. The Colonel's
sneer was like a match to a magazine, and in an instant the Frenchman
was dancing in front of him with a broken torrent of angry words. His
hand was clutching at Cochrane's throat before Belmont and Stephens
could pull him off.

"If it were not for your grey hairs----" he said.

"Damn your impudence!" cried the Colonel.

"If we have to die, let us die like gentlemen, and not like so many
corner-boys," said Belmont, with dignity.

"I only said I was glad to see that Monsieur Fardet had learned
something from his adventures," the Colonel sneered.

"Shut up, Cochrane! What do you want to aggravate him for?" cried the
Irishman.

"Upon my word, Belmont, you forget yourself! I do not permit people to
address me in this fashion."

"You should look after your own manners, then."

"Gentlemen, gentlemen, here are the ladies!" cried Stephens, and the
angry, overstrained men relapsed into a gloomy silence, pacing up and
down, and jerking viciously at their moustaches. It is a very catching
thing, ill-temper, for even Stephens began to be angry at their anger,
and to scowl at them as they passed him. Here they were at a crisis in
their fate, with the shadow of death above them, and yet their minds
were all absorbed in some personal grievance so slight that they could
hardly put it into words. Misfortune brings the human spirit to a rare
height, but the pendulum still swings.

But soon their attention was drawn away to more important matters. A
council of war was being held beside the wells, and the two Emirs, stern
and composed, were listening to a voluble report from the leader of the
patrol. The prisoners noticed that, though the fierce, old man stood
like a graven image, the younger Emir passed his hand over his beard
once or twice with a nervous gesture, the thin, brown fingers twitching
among the long, black hair.

"I believe the Gippies are after us," said Belmont. "Not very far off
either, to judge by the fuss they are making."

"It looks like it. Something has scared them."

"Now he's giving orders. What can it be? Here, Mansoor, what is the
matter?"

The dragoman came running up with the light of hope shining upon his
brown face.

"I think they have seen something to frighten them. I believe that
the soldiers are behind us. They have given the order to fill the
waterskins, and be ready for a start when the darkness comes. But I am
ordered to gather you together, for the Moolah is coming to convert
you all. I have already told him that you are all very much inclined to
think the same with him."

How far Mansoor may have gone with his assurances may never be known,
but the Mussulman preacher came walking towards them at this moment with
a paternal and contented smile upon his face, as one who has a pleasant
and easy task before him. He was a one-eyed man, with a fringe of
grizzled beard and a face which was fat, but which looked as if it had
once been fatter, for it was marked with many folds and creases. He had
a green turban upon his head, which marked him as a Mecca pilgrim. In
one hand he carried a small brown carpet, and in the other a parchment
copy of the Koran. Laying his carpet upon the ground, he motioned
Mansoor to his side, and then gave a circular sweep of his arm to
signify that the prisoners should gather round him, and a downward wave
which meant that they should be seated. So they grouped themselves round
him, sitting on the short green sward under the palm-tree, these seven
forlorn representatives of an alien creed, and in the midst of them sat
the fat little preacher, his one eye dancing from face to face as he
expounded the principles of his newer, cruder, and more earnest faith.
They listened attentively and nodded their heads as Mansoor translated
the exhortation, and with each sign of their acquiescence the Moolah
became more amiable in his manner and more affectionate in his speech.

"For why should you die, my sweet lambs, when all that is asked of you
is that you should set aside that which will carry you to everlasting
Gehenna, and accept the law of Allah as written by His prophet, which
will assuredly bring you unimaginable joys, as is promised in the Book
of the Camel? For what says the chosen one?"--and he broke away into
one of those dogmatic texts which pass in every creed as an argument.
"Besides, is it not clear that God is with us, since from the beginning,
when we had but sticks against the rifles of the Turks, victory has
always been with us? Have we not taken El Obeid, and taken Khartoum, and
destroyed Hicks and slain Gordon, and prevailed against every one who
has come against us? How, then, can it be said that the blessing of
Allah does not rest upon us?"

The Colonel had been looking about him during the long exhortation of
the Moolah, and he had observed that the Dervishes were cleaning their
guns, counting their cartridges, and making all the preparations of men
who expected that they might soon be called upon to fight. The two Emirs
were conferring together with grave faces, and the leader of the patrol
pointed, as he spoke to them, in the direction of Egypt. It was evident
that there was at least a chance of a rescue if they could only keep
things going for a few more hours. The camels were not recovered yet
from their long march, and the pursuers, if they were indeed close
behind, were almost certain to overtake them.

"For God's sake, Fardet, try and keep him in play," said he. "I believe
we have a chance if we can only keep the ball rolling for another hour
or so."

But a Frenchman's wounded dignity is not so easily appeased. Monsieur
Fardet sat moodily with his back against the palm-tree, and his black
brows drawn down. He said nothing, but he still pulled at his thick,
strong moustache.

"Come on, Fardet! We depend upon you," said Belmont.

"Let Colonel Cochrane do it," the Frenchman answered, snappishly. "He
takes too much upon himself, this Colonel Cochrane."

"There! there!" said Belmont, soothingly, as if he were speaking to
a fractious child. "I am quite sure that the Colonel will express his
regret at what has happened, and will acknowledge that he was in the
wrong----"

"I'll do nothing of the sort," snapped the Colonel.

"Besides, that is merely a personal quarrel," Belmont continued,
hastily. "It is for the good of the whole party that we wish you to
speak with the Moolah, because we all feel that you are the best man for
the job."

But the Frenchman only shrugged his shoulders and relapsed into a deeper
gloom.

The Moolah looked from one to the other, and the kindly expression began
to fade away from his large, baggy face. His mouth drew down at the
corners, and became hard and severe.

"Have these infidels been playing with us, then?" said he to the
dragoman. "Why is it that they talk among themselves and have nothing to
say to me?"

"He is getting impatient about it," said Cochrane. "Perhaps I had better
do what I can, Belmont, since this damned fellow has left us in the
lurch."

But the ready wit of a woman saved the situation.

"I am sure, Monsieur Fardet," said Mrs. Belmont, "that you, who are a
Frenchman, and therefore a man of gallantry and honour, would not permit
your own wounded feelings to interfere with the fulfilment of your
promise and your duty towards three helpless ladies."

Fardet was on his feet in an instant, with his hand over his heart.

"You understand my nature, madame," he cried. "I am incapable of
abandoning a lady. I will do all that I can in this matter. Now,
Mansoor, you may tell the holy man that I am ready to discuss through
you the high matters of his faith with him."

And he did it with an ingenuity which amazed his companions. He took
the tone of a man who is strongly attracted, and yet has one single
remaining shred of doubt to hold him back. Yet as that one shred was
torn away by the Moolah, there was always some other stubborn little
point which prevented his absolute acceptance of the faith of Islam.
And his questions were all so mixed up with personal compliments to the
priest and self-congratulations that they should have come under the
teachings of so wise a man and so profound a theologian, that the
hanging pouches under the Moolah's eyes quivered with his satisfaction,
and he was led happily and hopefully onwards from explanation to
explanation, while the blue overhead turned into violet, and the green
leaves into black, until the great serene stars shone out once more
between the crowns of the palm-trees.

"As to the learning of which you speak, my lamb," said the Moolah,
in answer to some argument of Fardet's, "I have myself studied at the
University of El Azhar at Cairo, and I know that to which you allude.
But the learning of the faithful is not as the learning of the
unbeliever, and it is not fitting that we pry too deeply into the ways
of Allah. Some stars have tails, O my sweet lamb, and some have not; but
what does it profit us to know which are which? For God made them all,
and they are very safe in His hands. Therefore, my friend, be not puffed
up by the foolish learning of the West, and understand that there is
only one wisdom, which consists in following the will of Allah as His
chosen prophet has laid it down for us in this book. And now, my lambs,
I see that you are ready to come into Islam, and it is time, for that
bugle tells that we are about to march, and it was the order of the
excellent Emir Abderrahman that your choice should be taken, one way or
the other, before ever we left the wells."

"Yet, my father, there are other points upon which I would gladly have
instruction," said the Frenchman, "for, indeed, it is a pleasure to hear
your clear words after the cloudy accounts which we have had from other
teachers."

But the Moolah had risen, and a gleam of suspicion twinkled in his
single eye.

"This further instruction may well come afterwards," said he, "since we
shall travel together as far as Khartoum, and it will be a joy to me to
see you grow in wisdom and in virtue as we go." He walked over to the
fire, and stooping down, with the pompous slowness of a stout man, he
returned with two half-charred sticks, which he laid crosswise upon
the ground. The Dervishes came clustering over to see the new converts
admitted into the fold. They stood round in the dim light, tall and
fantastic, with the high necks and supercilious heads of the camels
swaying above them.

"Now," said the Moolah, and his voice had lost its conciliatory and
persuasive tone, "there is no more time for you. Here upon the ground I
have made out of two sticks the foolish and superstitious symbol of your
former creed. You will trample upon it, as a sign that you renounce it,
and you will kiss the Koran, as a sign that you accept it, and what more
you need in the way of instruction shall be given to you as you go."

They stood up, the four men and the three women, to meet the crisis of
their fate. None of them, except perhaps Miss Adams and Mrs. Belmont,
had any deep religious convictions. All of them were children of this
world, and some of them disagreed with everything which that symbol upon
the earth represented. But there was the European pride, the pride of
the white race which swelled within them, and held them to the faith of
their countrymen. It was a sinful, human, un-Christian motive, and yet
it was about to make them public martyrs to the Christian creed. In
the hush and tension of their nerves low sounds grew suddenly loud
upon their ears. Those swishing palm-leaves above them were like
a swift-flowing river, and far away they could hear the dull, soft
thudding of a galloping camel.

"There's something coming," whispered Cochrane. "Try and stave them off
for five minutes longer, Fardet."

The Frenchman stepped out with a courteous wave of his uninjured arm,
and the air of a man who is prepared to accommodate himself to anything.

"You will tell this holy man that I am quite ready to accept his
teaching, and so I am sure are all my friends," said he to the dragoman.
"But there is one thing which I should wish him to do in order to set
at rest any possible doubts which may remain in our hearts. Every true
religion can be told by the miracles which those who profess it can
bring about. Even I, who am but a humble Christian, can, by virtue of
my religion, do some of these. But you, since your religion is superior,
can no doubt do far more, and so I beg you to give us a sign that we
may be able to say that we know that the religion of Islam is the more
powerful."

Behind all his dignity and reserve, the Arab has a good fund of
curiosity. The hush among the listening Arabs showed how the words of
the Frenchman as translated by Mansoor appealed to them.

"Such things are in the hands of Allah," said the priest. "It is not
for us to disturb His laws. But if you have yourself such powers as you
claim, let us be witnesses to them."

[Illustration: Took a large, shining date out of the Moolah's beard
p210]

The Frenchman stepped forward, and raising his hand he took a
large, shining date out of the Moolah's beard. This he swallowed and
immediately produced once more from his left elbow. He had often
given his little conjuring entertainment on board the boat, and his
fellow-passengers had had some good-natured laughter at his expense,
for he was not quite skilful enough to deceive the critical European
intelligence. But now it looked as if this piece of obvious palming
might be the point upon which all their fates would hang. A deep hum of
surprise rose from the ring of Arabs, and deepened as the Frenchman drew
another date from the nostril of a camel and tossed it into the air,
from which, apparently, it never descended. That gaping sleeve was
obvious enough to his companions, but the dim light was all in favour
of the performer. So delighted and interested was the audience that they
paid little heed to a mounted camel-man who trotted swiftly between the
palm trunks. All might have been well had not Fardet, carried away by
his own success, tried to repeat his trick once more, with the result
that the date fell out of his palm and the deception stood revealed.
In vain he tried to pass on at once to another of his little stock. The
Moolah said something, and an Arab struck Fardet across the shoulders
with the thick shaft of his spear.

"We have had enough child's play," said the angry priest. "Are we men or
babes, that you should try to impose upon us in this manner? Here is the
cross and the Koran--which shall it be?"

Fardet looked helplessly round at his companions.

"I can do no more; you asked for five minutes. You have had them," said
he to Colonel Cochrane.

"And perhaps it is enough," the soldier answered. "Here are the Emirs."

The camel-man, whose approach they had heard from afar, had made for the
two Arab chiefs, and had delivered a brief report to them, stabbing
with his forefinger in the direction from which he had come. There was a
rapid exchange of words between the Emirs, and then they strode forward
together to the group around the prisoners. Bigots and barbarians, they
were none the less two most majestic men, as they advanced through the
twilight of the palm grove. The fierce old greybeard raised his hand
and spoke swiftly in short, abrupt sentences, and his savage followers
yelped to him like hounds to a huntsman. The fire that smouldered in his
arrogant eyes shone back at him from a hundred others. Here were to
be read the strength and danger of the Mahdi movement; here in these
convulsed faces, in that fringe of waving arms, in these frantic,
red-hot souls, who asked nothing better than a bloody death, if their
own hands might be bloody when they met it.

"Have the prisoners embraced the true faith?" asked the Emir
Abderrahman, looking at them with his cruel eyes.

The Moolah had his reputation to preserve, and it was not for him to
confess to a failure.

"They were about to embrace it, when----"

"Let it rest for a little time, O Moolah." He gave an order, and the
Arabs all sprang for their camels. The Emir Wad Ibrahim filed off at
once with nearly half the party. The others were mounted and ready, with
their rifles unslung.

"What's happened?" asked Belmont.

"Things are looking up," cried the Colonel. "By George, I think we are
going to come through all right. The Gippy Camel Corps are hot on our
trail."

"How do you know?"

"What else could have scared them?"

"O Colonel, do you really think we shall be saved?" sobbed Sadie. The
dull routine of misery through which they had passed had deadened all
their nerves until they seemed incapable of any acute sensation, but now
this sudden return of hope brought agony with it like the recovery of
a frostbitten limb. Even the strong, self-contained Belmont was filled
with doubts and apprehensions. He had been hopeful when there was no
sign of relief, and now the approach of it set him trembling.

"Surely they wouldn't come very weak," he cried. "Be Jove, if the
Commandant let them come weak, he should be court-martialled."

"Sure, we're in God's hands, anyway," said his wife, in her soothing,
Irish voice. "Kneel down with me, John, dear, if it's the last time, and
pray that, earth or heaven, we may not be divided."

"Don't do that! Don't!" cried the Colonel, anxiously, for he saw that
the eye of the Moolah was upon them. But it was too late, for the two
Roman Catholics had dropped upon their knees and crossed themselves.
A spasm of fury passed over the face of the Mussulman priest at this
public testimony to the failure of his missionary efforts. He turned and
said something to the Emir.

[Illustration: Stand up! cried Mansoor p214]

"Stand up!" cried Mansoor. "For your life's sake, stand up! He is asking
for leave to put you to death."

"Let him do what he likes!" said the obstinate Irishman; "we will rise
when our prayers are finished, and not before."

The Emir stood listening to the Moolah, with his baleful gaze upon the
two kneeling figures. Then he gave one or two rapid orders, and four
camels were brought forward. The baggage-camels which they had hitherto
ridden were standing unsaddled where they had been tethered.

"Don't be a fool, Belmont!" cried the Colonel; "everything depends upon
our humouring them. Do get up, Mrs. Belmont! You are only putting their
backs up!"

The Frenchman shrugged his shoulders as he looked at them. "_Mon Dieu!_"
he cried, "were there ever such impracticable people? _Voilà!_" he
added, with a shriek, as the two American ladies fell upon their knees
beside Mrs. Belmont. "It is like the camels--one down, all down! Was
ever anything so absurd?"

But Mr. Stephens had knelt down beside Sadie and buried his haggard face
in his long, thin hands. Only the Colonel and Monsieur Fardet remained
standing. Cochrane looked at the Frenchman with an interrogative eye.

"After all," said he, "it is stupid to pray all your life, and not to
pray now when we have nothing to hope for except through the goodness of
Providence." He dropped upon his knees with a rigid, military back, but
his grizzled, unshaven chin upon his chest. The Frenchman looked at his
kneeling companions, and then his eyes travelled onwards to the angry
faces of the Emir and Moolah.

"_Sapristi!_" he growled. "Do they suppose that a Frenchman is afraid of
them?" and so, with an ostentatious sign of the cross, he took his place
upon his knees beside the others. Foul, bedraggled, and wretched, the
seven figures knelt and waited humbly for their fate under the black
shadow of the palm-tree.

The Emir turned to the Moolah with a mocking smile, and pointed at the
results of his ministrations. Then he gave an order, and in an instant
the four men were seized.

A couple of deft turns with a camel-halter secured each of their wrists.
Fardet screamed out, for the rope had bitten into his open wound. The
others took it with the dignity of despair.

"You have ruined everything. I believe you have ruined me also!" cried
Mansoor, wringing his hands. "The women are to get upon these three
camels."

"Never!" cried Belmont. "We won't be separated!" He plunged madly, but
he was weak from privation, and two strong men held him by each elbow.

[Illustration: Don't fret, John! cried his wife p217]

"Don't fret, John!" cried his wife, as they hurried her towards the
camel. "No harm shall come to me. Don't struggle, or they'll hurt you,
dear."

The four men writhed as they saw the women dragged away from them. All
their agonies had been nothing to this. Sadie and her aunt appeared to
be half senseless from fear. Only Mrs. Belmont kept a brave face. When
they were seated the camels rose, and were led under the tree behind
where the four men were standing.

"I've a pistol in me pocket," said Belmont, looking up at his wife. "I
would give me soul to be able to pass it to you."

"Keep it, John, and it may be useful yet. I have no fears. Ever since we
prayed I have felt as if our guardian angels had their wings round us."
She was like a guardian angel herself as she turned to the shrinking
Sadie, and coaxed some little hope back into her despairing heart.

The short, thick Arab, who had been in command of Wad Ibrahim's
rearguard, had joined the Emir and the Moolah; the three consulted
together, with occasional oblique glances towards the prisoners. Then
the Emir spoke to Mansoor.

"The chief wishes to know which of you four is the richest man?" said
the dragoman. His fingers were twitching with nervousness and plucking
incessantly at the front of his cover-coat.

"Why does he wish to know?" asked the Colonel.

"I do not know."

"But it is evident," cried Monsieur Fardet.

"He wishes to know which is the best worth keeping for his ransom."

"I think we should see this thing through together," said the Colonel.
"It's really for you to decide, Stephens, for I have no doubt that you
are the richest of us."

"I don't know that I am," the lawyer answered; "but, in any case, I have
no wish to be placed upon a different footing to the others."

The Emir spoke again in his harsh, rasping voice.

"He says," Mansoor translated, "that the baggage-camels are spent, and
that there is only one beast left which can keep up. It is ready now for
one of you, and you have to decide among yourselves which is to have it.
If one is richer than the others, he will have the preference."

"Tell him that we are all equally rich."

"In that case he says that you are to choose at once which is to have
the camel."

"And the others?"

The dragoman shrugged his shoulders.

"Well," said the Colonel, "if only one of us is to escape, I think you
fellows will agree with me that it ought to be Belmont, since he is the
married man."

"Yes, yes, let it be Monsieur Belmont," cried Fardet.

"I think so also," said Stephens.

But the Irishman would not hear of it.

"No, no, share and share alike," he cried. "All sink or all swim, and
the devil take the flincher."

They wrangled among themselves until they became quite heated in this
struggle of unselfishness. Some one had said that the Colonel should go
because he was the oldest, and the Colonel was a very angry man.

"One would think I was an octogenarian," he cried. "These remarks are
quite uncalled for."

"Well, then," said Belmont, "let us all refuse to go."

"But this is not very wise," cried the Frenchman. "See, my friends! Here
are the ladies being carried off alone. Surely it would be far better
that one of us should be with them to advise them."

They looked at one another in perplexity. What Fardet said was obviously
true, but how could one of them desert his comrades? The Emir himself
suggested the solution.

"The chief says," said Mansoor, "that if you cannot settle who is to go,
you had better leave it to Allah and draw lots."

"I don't think we can do better," said the Colonel, and his three
companions nodded their assent.

It was the Moolah who approached them with four splinters of palm-bark
protruding from between his fingers.

"He says that he who draws the longest has the camel," says Mansoor.

"We must agree to abide absolutely by this," said Cochrane, and again
his companions nodded.

The Dervishes had formed a semicircle in front of them, with a fringe
of the oscillating heads of the camels. Before them was a cooking fire,
which threw its red light over the group. The Emir was standing with his
back to it, and his fierce face towards the prisoners. Behind the four
men was a line of guards, and behind them again the three women, who
looked down from their camels upon this tragedy. With a malicious smile,
the fat, one-eyed Moolah advanced with his fist closed, and the four
little brown spicules protruding from between his fingers.

It was to Belmont that he held them first. The Irishman gave an
involuntary groan, and his wife gasped behind him, for the splinter came
away in his hand. Then it was the Frenchman's turn, and his was half an
inch longer than Belmont's. Then came Colonel Cochrane, whose piece was
longer than the two others put together. Stephen's was no bigger than
Belmont's. The Colonel was the winner of this terrible lottery.

[Illustration: The Colonel was the winner of this terrible lottery p222]

"You're welcome to my place, Belmont," said he. "I've neither wife nor
child, and hardly a friend in the world. Go with your wife, and I'll
stay."

"No, indeed! An agreement is an agreement. It's all fair play, and the
prize to the luckiest."

"The Emir says that you are to mount at once," said Mansoor, and an Arab
dragged the Colonel by his wrist-rope to the waiting camel.

"He will stay with the rearguard," said the Emir to his lieutenant. "You
can keep the women with you also."

"And this dragoman dog?"

"Put him with the others."

"And they?"

"Put them all to death."




CHAPTER IX

As none of the three could understand Arabic, the order of the Emir
would have been unintelligible to them had it not been for the conduct
of Mansoor. The unfortunate dragoman, after all his treachery and all
his subservience and apostasy, found his worst fears realised when the
Dervish leader gave his curt command. With a shriek of fear the poor
wretch threw himself forward upon his face, and clutched at the Arab's
jibbeh, clawing with his brown fingers at the edge of the cotton skirt.
The Emir tugged to free himself, and then, finding that he was still
held by that convulsive grip, he turned and kicked at Mansoor with
the vicious impatience with which one drives off a pestering cur. The
dragoman's high red tarboosh flew up into the air, and he lay groaning
upon his face where the stunning blow of the Arab's horny foot had left
him.

All was bustle and movement in the camp, for the old Emir had mounted
his camel, and some of his party were already beginning to follow
their companions. The squat lieutenant, the Moolah, and about a dozen
Dervishes surrounded the prisoners. They had not mounted their camels,
for they were told off to be the ministers of death. The three men
understood as they looked upon their faces that the sand was running
very low in the glass of their lives. Their hands were still bound, but
their guards had ceased to hold them. They turned round, all three, and
said good-bye to the women upon the camels.

"All up now, Norah," said Belmont. "It's hard luck when there was a
chance of a rescue, but we've done our best."

For the first time his wife had broken down. She was sobbing
convulsively, with her face between her hands.

"Don't cry, little woman! We've had a good time together. Give my
love to all my friends at Bray! Remember me to Amy McCarthy and to the
Blessingtons. You'll find there is enough and to spare, but I would take
Rogers's advice about the investments. Mind that!"

"O John, I won't live without you!" Sorrow for her sorrow broke the
strong man down, and he buried his face in the hairy side of her camel.
The two of them sobbed helplessly together.

Stephens meanwhile had pushed his way to Sadie's beast. She saw his
worn, earnest face looking up at her through the dim light.

"Don't be afraid for your aunt and for yourself," said he. "I am
sure that you will escape. Colonel Cochrane will look after you. The
Egyptians cannot be far behind. I do hope you will have a good drink
before you leave the wells. I wish I could give your aunt my jacket, for
it will be cold tonight. I'm afraid I can't get it off. She should keep
some of the bread, and eat it in the early morning."

He spoke quite quietly, like a man who is arranging the details of a
picnic. A sudden glow of admiration for this quietly consistent man
warmed her impulsive heart.

"How unselfish you are!" she cried. "I never saw any one like you. Talk
about saints! There you stand in the very presence of death, and you
think only of us."

"I want to say a last word to you, Sadie, if you don't mind. I should
die so much happier. I have often wanted to speak to you, but I
thought that perhaps you would laugh, for you never took anything very
seriously, did you? That was quite natural, of course, with your high
spirits, but still it was very serious to me. But now I am really a dead
man, so it does not matter very much what I say."

"Oh, don't, Mr. Stephens!" cried the girl.

"I won't, if it is very painful to you. As I said, it would make me die
happier, but I don't want to be selfish about it. If I thought it would
darken your life afterwards or be a sad recollection to you I would not
say another word."

"What did you wish to say?"

"It was only to tell you how I loved you. I always loved you. From the
first I was a different man when I was with you. But of course it was
absurd, I knew that well enough. I never said anything, and I tried not
to make myself ridiculous. But I just want you to know about it now that
it can't matter one way or the other. You'll understand that I really
do love you when I tell you that, if it were not that I knew you were
frightened and unhappy, these last two days in which we have been always
together would have been infinitely the happiest of my life."

The girl sat pale and silent, looking down with wondering eyes at his
upturned face. She did not know what to do or say in the solemn presence
of this love which burned so brightly under the shadow of death. To her
child's heart it seemed incomprehensible,--and yet she understood that
it was sweet and beautiful also.

"I won't say any more," said he; "I can see that it only bothers you.
But I wanted you to know, and now you do know, so it is all right. Thank
you for listening so patiently and gently. Good-bye, little Sadie! I
can't put my hand up. Will you put yours down?"

[Illustration: Good-bye, little Sadie p229]

She did so and Stephens kissed it. Then he turned and took his place
once more between Belmont and Fardet. In his whole life of struggle and
success he had never felt such a glow of quiet contentment as suffused
him at that instant when the grip of death was closing upon him. There
is no arguing about love. It is the innermost fact of life, the one
which obscures and changes all the others, the only one which is
absolutely satisfying and complete. Pain is pleasure, and want is
comfort, and death is sweetness when once that golden mist is round
it. So it was that Stephens could have sung with joy as he faced his
murderers. He really had not time to think about them. The important,
all-engrossing, delightful thing was that she could not look upon him as
a casual acquaintance any more. Through all her life she would think of
him--she would know.

Colonel Cochrane's camel was at one side, and the old soldier, whose
wrists had been freed, had been looking down upon the scene, and
wondering in his tenacious way whether all hope must really be
abandoned. It was evident that the Arabs who were grouped round the
victims were to remain behind with them, while the others who were
mounted would guard the three women and himself. He could not understand
why the throats of his companions had not been already cut, unless it
were that with an Eastern refinement of cruelty this rearguard would
wait until the Egyptians were close to them, so that the warm bodies of
their victims might be an insult to the pursuers. No doubt that was the
right explanation. The Colonel had heard of such a trick before.

But in that case there would not be more than twelve Arabs with the
prisoners. Were there any of the friendly ones among them? If Tippy
Tilly and six of his men were there, and if Belmont could get his arms
free and his hand upon his revolver, they might come through yet. The
Colonel craned his neck and groaned in his disappointment. He could see
the faces of the guards in the firelight. They were all Baggara Arabs,
men who were beyond either pity or bribery. Tippy Tilly and the others
must have gone on with the advance. For the first time the stiff old
soldier abandoned hope.

"Good-bye, you fellows! God bless you!" he cried, as a negro pulled at
his camel's nose-ring and made him follow the others. The women came
after him, in a misery too deep for words. Their departure was a relief
to the three men who were left.

"I am glad they are gone," said Stephens, from his heart.

"Yes, yes, it is better," cried Fardet. "How long are we to wait?"

"Not very long now," said Belmont, grimly, as the Arabs closed in around
them.

The Colonel and the three women gave one backward glance when they came
to the edge of the oasis. Between the straight stems of the palms they
saw the gleam of the fire, and above the group of Arabs they caught a
last glimpse of the three white hats. An instant later, the camels began
to trot, and when they looked back once more the palm grove was only a
black clump with the vague twinkle of a light somewhere in the heart of
it. As with yearning eyes they gazed at that throbbing red point in the
darkness, they passed over the edge of the depression, and in an instant
the huge, silent, moonlit desert was round them without a sign of the
oasis which they had left. On every side the velvet, blue-black sky,
with its blazing stars, sloped downwards to the vast, dun-coloured
plain. The two were blurred into one at their point of junction.

The women had sat in the silence of despair, and the Colonel had been
silent also--for what could he say?--but suddenly all four started in
their saddles, and Sadie gave a sharp cry of dismay. In the hush of the
night there had come from behind them the petulant crack of a rifle,
then another, then several together, with a brisk rat-tat-tat, and then,
after an interval, one more.

"It may be the rescuers! It may be the Egyptians!" cried Mrs. Belmont,
with a sudden flicker of hope. "Colonel Cochrane, don't you think it may
be the Egyptians?"

"Yes, yes," Sadie whimpered. "It must be the Egyptians."

The Colonel had listened expectantly, but all was silent again. Then he
took his hat off with a solemn gesture.

"There is no use deceiving ourselves, Mrs. Belmont," said he; "we may
as well face the truth. Our friends are gone from us, but they have met
their end like brave men."

"But why should they fire their guns? They had---- they had spears." She
shuddered as she said it.

"That is true," said the Colonel. "I would not for the world take away
any real grounds of hope which you may have; but, on the other hand,
there is no use in preparing bitter disappointments for ourselves. If
we had been listening to an attack, we should have heard some reply.
Besides, an Egyptian attack would have been an attack in force. No doubt
it _is_, as you say, a little strange that they should have wasted their
cartridges,--by Jove, look at that!"

He was pointing over the eastern desert. Two figures were moving across
its expanse, swiftly and stealthily, furtive dark shadows against the
lighter ground. They saw them dimly, dipping and rising over the rolling
desert, now lost, now reappearing in the uncertain light. They were
flying away from the Arabs. And then, suddenly they halted upon the
summit of a sand-hill, and the prisoners could see them outlined plainly
against the sky. They were camel-men, but they sat their camels astride
as a horseman sits his horse.

"Gippy Camel Corps!" cried the Colonel.

"Two men," said Miss Adams, in a voice of despair.

"Only a vedette, ma'am! Throwing feelers out all over the desert. This
is one of them. Main body ten miles off, as likely as not. There they go
giving the alarm! Good old Camel Corps!"

The self-contained, methodical soldier had suddenly turned almost
inarticulate with his excitement. There was a red flash upon the top of
the sand-hill, and then another, followed by the crack of the rifles.
Then with a whisk the two figures were gone, as swiftly and silently as
two trout in a stream.

The Arabs had halted for an instant, as if uncertain whether they should
delay their journey to pursue them or not. There was nothing left to
pursue now, for amid the undulations of the sand-drift the vedettes
might have gone in any direction. The Emir galloped back along the line,
with exhortations and orders. Then the camels began to trot, and the
hopes of the prisoners were dulled by the agonies of the terrible jolt.
Mile after mile and mile after mile they sped onwards over that vast
expanse, the women clinging as best they might to the pommels, the
Colonel almost as spent as they, but still keenly on the lookout for any
sign of the pursuers.

"I think---- I think," cried Mrs. Belmont, "that something is moving in
front of us."

The Colonel raised himself upon his saddle, and screened his eyes from
the moonshine.

"By Jove, you're right there, ma'am. There are men over yonder."

They could all see them now, a straggling line of riders far ahead of
them in the desert.

"They are going in the same direction as we," cried Mrs. Belmont, whose
eyes were very much better than the Colonel's.

Cochrane muttered an oath into his moustache.

"Look at the tracks there," said he; "of course, it's our own vanguard
who left the palm grove before us. The chief keeps us at this infernal
pace in order to close up with them."

As they drew closer they could see plainly that it was indeed the other
body of Arabs, and presently the Emir Wad Ibrahim came trotting back to
take counsel with the Emir Abderrahman. They pointed in the direction in
which the vedettes had appeared, and shook their heads like men who
have many and grave misgivings. Then the raiders joined into one long,
straggling line, and the whole body moved steadily on towards the
Southern Cross, which was twinkling just over the skyline in front of
them. Hour after hour the dreadful trot continued, while the fainting
ladies clung on convulsively, and Cochrane, worn out but indomitable,
encouraged them to hold out, and peered backwards over the desert
for the first glad signs of their pursuers. The blood throbbed in his
temples, and he cried that he heard the roll of drums coming out of the
darkness. In his feverish delirium he saw clouds of pursuers at their
very heels, and during the long night he was for ever crying glad
tidings which ended in disappointment and heartache. The rise of the sun
showed the desert stretching away around them, with nothing moving upon
its monstrous face except themselves. With dull eyes and heavy hearts
they stared round at that huge and empty expanse. Their hopes thinned
away like the light morning mist upon the horizon.

It was shocking to the ladies to look at their companion and to think
of the spruce, hale old soldier who had been their fellow-passenger from
Cairo. As in the case of Miss Adams, old age seemed to have pounced upon
him in one spring. His hair, which had grizzled hour by hour during his
privations, was now of a silvery white. White stubble, too, had obscured
the firm, clean line of his chin and throat. The veins of his fare were
injected and his features were shot with heavy wrinkles. He rode
with his back arched and his chin sunk upon his breast, for the old,
time-rotted body was worn out, but in his bright, alert eyes there was
always a trace of the gallant tenant who lived in the shattered house.
Delirious, spent, and dying, he preserved his chivalrous, protecting
air as he turned to the ladies, shot little scraps of advice and
encouragement at them, and peered back continually for the help which
never came.

An hour after sunrise the raiders called a halt, and food and water
were served out to all. Then at a more moderate pace they pursued
their southern journey, their long, straggling line trailing out over
a quarter of a mile of desert. From their more careless bearing and the
way in which they chatted as they rode, it was clear that they thought
that they had shaken off their pursuers. Their direction now was east
as well as south, and it was evidently their intention after this long
detour to strike the Nile again at some point far above the Egyptian
outposts. Already the character of the scenery was changing, and they
were losing the long levels of the pebbly desert, and coming once more
upon those fantastic, sunburned black rocks and that rich orange sand
through which they had already passed. On every side of them rose
the scaly, conical hills with their loose, slaglike _débris_,
and jagged-edged khors, with sinuous streams of sand running like
watercourses down their centre. The camels followed each other, twisting
in and out among the boulders, and scrambling with their adhesive,
spongy feet over places which would have been impossible for horses.
Among the broken rocks those behind could sometimes only see the long,
undulating, darting necks of the creatures in front, as if it were some
nightmare procession of serpents. Indeed, it had much the effect of a
dream upon the prisoners, for there was no sound, save the soft, dull
padding and shuffling of the feet. The strange, wild frieze moved slowly
and silently onwards amid a setting of black stone and yellow sand, with
the one arch of vivid blue spanning the rugged edges of the ravine.

Miss Adams, who had been frozen into silence during the long cold night,
began to thaw now in the cheery warmth of the rising sun. She looked
about her, and rubbed her thin hands together.

"Why, Sadie," she remarked, "I thought I heard you in the night, dear,
and now I see that you have been crying."

"I have been thinking, Auntie." "Well, we must try and think of others,
dearie, and not of ourselves." "It's not of myself, Auntie." "Never fret
about me, Sadie." "No, Auntie, I was not thinking of you." "Was it of
any one in particular." "Of Mr. Stephens, Auntie. How gentle he was,
and how brave! To think of him fixing up every little thing for us,
and trying to pull his jacket over his poor roped-up hands, with those
murderers waiting all round his. He's my saint and hero from now ever
after."

"Well, he's out of his troubles anyhow," said Miss Adams, with that
bluntness which the years bring with them.

"Then I wish I was also."

"I don't see how that would help him."

"Well, I think he might feel less lonesome," said Sadie, and drooped her
saucy little chin upon her breast.

The four had been riding in silence for some little time, when the
Colonel clapped his hand to his brow with a gesture of dismay.

"Good God!" he cried, "I am going off my head."

Again and again they had perceived it during the night, but he had
seemed quite rational since daybreak. They were shocked, therefore, at
this sudden outbreak, and tried to calm him with soothing words.

"Mad as a hatter," he shouted. "Whatever do you think I saw?"

"Don't trouble about it, whatever it was," said Mrs. Belmont, laying her
hand soothingly upon his as the camels closed together. "It is no wonder
that you are overdone. You have thought and worked for all of us so
long. We shall halt presently, and a few hours' sleep will quite restore
you."

But the Colonel looked up again, and again he cried out in his agitation
and surprise.

"I never saw anything plainer in my life," he groaned. "It is on
the point of rock on our right front,--poor old Stuart with my red
cummerbund round his head just the same as we left him."

The ladies had followed the direction of the Colonel's frightened gaze,
and in an instant they were all as amazed as he.

[Illustration: On this pinnacle stood a motionless figure p242]

There was a black, bulging ridge like a bastion upon the right side of
the terrible khor up which the camels were winding. At one point it rose
into a small pinnacle. On this pinnacle stood a solitary, motionless
figure clad entirely in black, save for a brilliant dash of scarlet upon
his head. There could not surely be two such short, sturdy figures or
such large, colourless faces in the Libyan desert. His shoulders were
stooping forward, and he seemed to be staring intently down into
the ravine. His pose and outline were like a caricature of the great
Napoleon.

"Can it possibly be he?"

"It must be. It is!" cried the ladies. "You see he is looking towards us
and waving his hand."

"Good Heavens! They'll shoot him! Get down, you fool, or you'll
be shot!" roared the Colonel. But his dry throat would only emit a
discordant croaking.

Several of the Dervishes had seen the singular apparition upon the
hill, and had un-slung their Remingtons, but a long arm suddenly shot up
behind the figure of the Birmingham clergyman, a brown hand seized upon
his skirts, and he disappeared with a snap. Higher up the pass, just
below the spot where Mr. Stuart had been standing, appeared the tall
figure of the Emir Abderrahman. He had sprung upon a boulder, and was
shouting and waving his arms, but the shouts were drowned in a long,
rippling roar of musketry from each side of the khor. The bastion-like
cliff was fringed with gun-barrels, with red tarbooshes drooping over
the triggers. From the other lip also came the long spurts of flame
and the angry clatter of the rifles. The raiders were caught in an
ambuscade. The Emir fell, but was up again and waving. There was
a splotch of blood upon his long white beard. He kept pointing and
gesticulating, but his scattered followers could not understand what he
wanted. Some of them came tearing down the pass, and some from behind
were pushing to the front. A few dismounted and tried to climb up sword
in hand to that deadly line of muzzles, but one by one they were hit,
and came rolling from rock to rock to the bottom of the ravine. The
shooting was not very good. One negro made his way unharmed up the whole
side, only to have his brains dashed out with the butt-end of a Martini
at the top. The Emir had fallen off his rock and lay in a crumpled heap,
like a brown and white patch-work quilt at the bottom of it. And then
when half of them were down it became evident, even to those exalted
fanatical souls, that there was no chance for them, and that they must
get out of these fatal rocks and into the desert again. They galloped
down the pass, and it is a frightful thing to see a camel galloping over
broken ground. The beast's own terror, his ungainly bounds, the sprawl
of his four legs all in the air together, his hideous cries, and the
yells of his rider who is bucked high from his saddle with every spring,
make a picture which is not to be forgotten. The women screamed as
this mad torrent of frenzied creatures came pouring past them, but the
Colonel edged his camel and theirs farther and farther in among the
rocks and away from the retreating Arabs. The air was full of whistling
bullets, and they could hear them smacking loudly against the stones all
round them.

"Keep quiet, and they'll pass us," whispered the Colonel, who was all
himself again now that the hour for action had arrived. "I wish to
Heaven I could see Tippy Tilly or any of his friends. Now is the time
for them to help us." He watched the mad stream of fugitives as they
flew past upon their shambling, squattering, loose-jointed beasts, but
the black face of the Egyptian gunner was not among them.

And now it really did seem as if the whole body of them, in their
haste to get clear of the ravine, had not a thought to spend upon the
prisoners. The rush was past, and only stragglers were running the
gauntlet of the fierce fire which poured upon them from above. The
last of all, a young Baggara with a black moustache and pointed beard,
looked up as he passed and shook his sword in impotent passion at the
Egyptian riflemen. At the same instant a bullet struck his camel, and
the creature collapsed, all neck and legs, upon the ground. The young
Arab sprang off its back, and, seizing its nose-ring, he beat it
savagely with the flat of his sword to make it stand up. But the dim,
glazing eye told its own tale, and in desert warfare the death of the
beast is the death of the rider. The Baggara glared round like a lion
at bay, his dark eyes flashing murderously from under his red turban.
A crimson spot, and then another, sprang out upon his dark skin, but he
never winced at the bullet wounds. His fierce gaze had fallen upon the
prisoners, and with an exultant shout he was dashing towards them, his
broad-bladed sword gleaming above his head. Miss Adams was the nearest
to him, but at the sight of the rushing figure and the maniac face she
threw herself off the camel upon the far side. The Arab bounded on to
a rock and aimed a thrust at Mrs. Belmont, but before the point could
reach her the Colonel leaned forward with his pistol and blew the man's
head in. Yet with a concentrated rage, which was superior even to the
agony of death, the fellow lay kicking and striking, bounding about
among the loose stones like a fish upon the shingle.

[Illustration: The Colonel leaned forward with his pistol p247]

"Don't be frightened, ladies," cried the Colonel. "He is quite dead, I
assure you. I am so sorry to have done this in your presence, but the
fellow was dangerous. I had a little score of my own to settle with him,
for he was the man who tried to break my ribs with his Remington. I hope
you are not hurt, Miss Adams! One instant, and I will come down to you."

But the old Boston lady was by no means hurt, for the rocks had been so
high that she had a very short distance to fall from her saddle. Sadie,
Mrs. Belmont, and Colonel Cochrane had all descended by slipping on to
the boulders and climbing down from them. But they found Miss Adams on
her feet, and waving the remains of her green veil in triumph.

"Hurrah, Sadie! Hurrah, my own darling Sadie!" she was shrieking. "We
are saved, my girl, we are saved after all."

"By George, so we are!" cried the Colonel, and they all shouted in an
ecstasy together.

But Sadie had learned to think more about others during those terrible
days of schooling. Her arms were round Mrs. Belmont, and her cheek
against hers.

"You dear, sweet angel," she cried, "how can we have the heart to be
glad when you--when you----"

"But I don't believe it is so," cried the brave Irishwoman. "No, I'll
never believe it until I see John's body lying before me. And when I see
that, I don't want to live to see anything more."

The last Dervish had clattered down the khor, and now above them on
either cliff they could see the Egyptians--tall, thin, square-shouldered
figures, looking, when outlined against the blue sky, wonderfully
like the warriors in the ancient bas-reliefs. Their camels were in the
background, and they were hurrying to join them. At the same time others
began to ride down from the farther end of the ravine, their dark
faces flushed and their eyes shining with the excitement of victory and
pursuit. A very small Englishman, with a straw-coloured moustache and a
weary manner, was riding at the head of them. He halted his camel beside
the fugitives and saluted the ladies. He wore brown boots and brown
belts with steel buckles, which looked trim and workmanlike against his
kharki uniform.

"Had 'em that time--had 'em proper!" said he. "Very glad to have been of
any assistance, I'm Shaw. Hope you're none the worse for it all. What I
mean, it's rather rough work for ladies."

"You're from Haifa, I suppose?" asked the Colonel.

"No, we're from the other show. We're the Sarras crowd, you know. We met
in the desert, and we headed 'em off, and the other Johnnies headed
them behind. We've got 'em on toast, I tell you. Get up on that rock and
you'll see things happen. It's going to be a knockout in one round this
time."

"We left some of our people at the wells. We are very uneasy about
them," said the Colonel. "I suppose you have not heard anything of
them?"

The young officer looked serious and shook his head. "Bad job that!"
said he. "They're a poisonous crowd when you put 'em in a corner. What
I mean, we never expected to see you alive; and we're very glad to pull
any of you out of the fire. The most we hoped was that we might revenge
you."

"Any other Englishman with you?" "Archer is with the flanking party.
He'll have to come past, for I don't think there is any other way
down. We've got one of your chaps up there--a funny old bird with a
red topknot. See you later, I hope! Good day, ladies!" He touched his
helmet, tapped his camel, and trotted on after his men.

"We can't do better than stay where we are until they are all past,"
said the Colonel, for it was evident now that the men from above would
have to come round. In a broken single file they went past, black men
and brown, Soudanese and fellaheen, but all of the best, for the Camel
Corps is the _corps d'elite_ of the Egyptian army. Each had a brown
bandolier over his chest and his rifle held across his thigh. A large
man with a drooping black moustache and a pair of binoculars in his hand
was riding at the side of them.

"Hulloa, Archer!" croaked the Colonel.

The officer looked at him with the vacant, unresponsive eye of a
complete stranger.

"I'm Cochrane, you know! We travelled up together."

"Excuse me, sir, but you have the advantage of me," said the officer.
"I knew a Colonel Cochrane, but you are not the man. He was three inches
taller than you, with black hair and----"

"That's all right," cried the Colonel, testily. "You try a few days with
the Dervishes, and see if your friends will recognise you!"

"Good God, Cochrane, is it really you? I could not have believed it.
Great Scott, what you must have been through! I've heard before of
fellows going grey in a night, but, by Jove----"

"Quite so," said the Colonel, flushing. "Allow me to hint to you,
Archer, that if you could get some food and drink for these ladies,
instead of discussing my personal appearance, it would be much more
practical."

"That's all right," said Captain Archer.

"Your friend Stuart knows that you are here, and he is bringing some
stuff round for you. Poor fare, ladies, but the best we have! You're an
old soldier, Cochrane. Get up on the rocks presently, and you'll see a
lovely sight. No time to stop, for we shall be in action again in five
minutes. Anything I can do before I go?"

"You haven't got such a thing as a cigar?" asked the Colonel, wistfully.

[Illustration: You haven't got such a thing as a cigar p253]

Archer drew a thick satisfying partaga from his case and handed it down,
with half-a-dozen wax vestas. Then he cantered after his men, and the
old soldier leaned back against the rock and drew in the fragrant smoke.
It was then that his jangled nerves knew the full virtue of tobacco, the
gentle anodyne which stays the failing strength and soothes the worrying
brain. He watched the dim, blue reek swirling up from him, and he felt
the pleasant, aromatic bite upon his palate, while a restful languor
crept over his weary and harassed body. The three ladies sat together
upon a flat rock.

"Good land, what a sight you are, Sadie!" cried Miss Adams, suddenly,
and it was the first reappearance of her old self. "What _would_ your
mother say if she saw you? Why, sakes alive, your hair is full of straw
and your frock clean crazy!"

"I guess we all want some setting to right," said Sadie, in a voice
which was much more subdued than that of the Sadie of old. "Mrs.
Belmont, you look just too perfectly sweet anyhow, but if you'll allow
me, I'll fix your dress for you."

But Mrs. Belmont's eyes were far away, and she shook her head sadly as
she gently put the girl's hands aside.

"I do not care how I look. I cannot think of it," said she; "could
_you_, if you had left the man you love behind you, as I have mine?"

"I'm begin--beginning to think I have," sobbed poor Sadie, and buried
her hot face in Mrs. Belmont's motherly bosom.




CHAPTER X

The Camel Corps had all passed onwards down the khor in pursuit of the
retreating Dervishes, and for a few minutes the escaped prisoners had
been left alone. But now there came a cheery voice calling upon them,
and a red turban bobbed about among the rocks, with the large white face
of the Nonconformist minister smiling from beneath it. He had a thick
lance with which to support his injured leg, and this murderous crutch
combined with his peaceful appearance to give him a most incongruous
aspect,--as of a sheep which has suddenly developed claws. Behind him
were two negroes with a basket and a water-skin.

[Illustration: Not a word! Not a word! p255]

"Not a word! Not a word!" he cried, as he stumped up to them. "I know
exactly how you feel. I've been there myself. Bring the water, Ali! Only
half a cup, Miss Adams; you shall have some more presently. Now your
turn, Mrs. Belmont! Dear me, dear me, you poor souls, how my heart does
bleed for you! There's bread and meat in the basket, but you must be
very moderate at first." He chuckled with joy, and slapped his fat hands
together as he watched them.

"But the others?" he asked, his face turning grave again.

The Colonel shook his head. "We left them behind at the wells. I fear
that it is all over with them."

"Tut, tut!" cried the clergyman, in a boisterous voice, which could not
cover the despondency of his expression; "you thought, no doubt, that
it was all over with me, but here I am in spite of it. Never lose heart,
Mrs. Belmont. Your husband's position could not possibly be as hopeless
as mine was."

"When I saw you standing on that rock up yonder, I put it down to
delirium," said the Colonel. "If the ladies had not seen you, I should
never have ventured to believe it."

"I am afraid that I behaved very badly. Captain Archer says that I
nearly spoiled all their plans, and that I deserved to be tried by a
drumhead court-trial and shot. The fact is that, when I heard the Arabs
beneath me, I forgot myself in my anxiety to know if any of you were
left."

"I wonder that you were not shot without any drumhead court-martial,"
said the Colonel. "But how in the world did you get here?"

"The Haifa people were close upon our track at the time when I was
abandoned, and they picked me up in the desert. I must have been
delirious, I suppose, for they tell me that they heard my voice, singing
hymns, a long way off, and it was that, under the providence of God,
which brought them to me. They had a camel ambulance, and I was quite
myself again by next day. I came with the Sarras people after we met
them, because they have the doctor with them. My wound is nothing, and
he says that a man of my habit will be the better for the loss of blood.
And now, my friends,"--his big, brown eyes lost their twinkle, and
became very solemn and reverent,--"we have all been upon the very
confines of death, and our dear companions may be so at this instant.
The same power which saved us may save them, and let us pray together
that it may be so, always remembering that if, in spite of our prayers,
it should _not_ be so, then that also must be accepted as the best and
wisest thing."

So they knelt together among the black rocks, and prayed as some of them
had never prayed before. It was very well to discuss prayer and treat it
lightly and philosophically upon the deck of the _Korosko_. It was easy
to feel strong and self-confident in the comfortable deck-chair, with
the slippered Arab handing round the coffee and liqueurs. But they had
been swept out of that placid stream of existence, and dashed against
the horrible, jagged facts of life. Battered and shaken, they must have
something to cling to. A blind, inexorable destiny was too horrible a
belief. A chastening power, acting intelligently and for a purpose,--a
living, working power, tearing them out of their grooves, breaking down
their small sectarian ways, forcing them into the better path,--that
was what they had learned to realise during these days of horror.
Great hands had closed suddenly upon them and had moulded them into new
shapes, and fitted them for new uses. Could such a power be deflected
by any human supplication? It was that or nothing,--the last court of
appeal, left open to injured humanity. And so they all prayed, as lover
loves, or a poet writes, from the very inside of their souls, and
they rose with that singular, illogical feeling of inward peace and
satisfaction which prayer only can give.

"Hush!" said Cochrane. "Listen!" The sound of a volley came crackling up
the narrow khor, and then another and another. The Colonel was fidgeting
about like an old horse which hears the bugle of the hunt and the
yapping of the pack. "Where can we see what is going on?" "Come this
way! This way, if you please! There is a path up to the top. If the
ladies will come after me, they will be spared the sight of anything
painful."

The clergyman led them along the side to avoid the bodies which were
littered thickly down the bottom of the khor. It was hard walking over
the shingly, slaggy stones, but they made their way to the summit at
last. Beneath them lay the vast expanse of the rolling desert, and in
the foreground such a scene as none of them are ever likely to forget.
In that perfectly dry and clear light, with the unvarying brown tint of
the hard desert as a background, every detail stood out as clearly as
if these were toy figures arranged upon a table within hand's touch of
them.

The Dervishes--or what was left of them--were riding slowly some
little distance out in a confused crowd, their patchwork jibbehs and red
turbans swaying with the motion of their camels. They did not present
the appearance of men who were defeated, for their movements were very
deliberate, but they looked about them and changed their formation as
if they were uncertain what their tactics ought to be. It was no wonder
that they were puzzled, for upon their spent camels their situation was
as hopeless as could be conceived. The Sarras men had all emerged from
the khor, and had dismounted, the beasts being held in groups of four,
while the riflemen knelt in a long line with a woolly, curling fringe
of smoke, sending volley after volley at the Arabs, who shot back in a
desultory fashion from the backs of their camels. But it was not upon
the sullen group of Dervishes, nor yet upon the long line of kneeling
riflemen, that the eyes of the spectators were fixed. Far out upon the
desert, three squadrons of the Haifa Camel Corps were coming up in
a dense close column, which wheeled beautifully into a widespread
semicircle as it approached. The Arabs were caught between two fires.

[Illustration: Arabs were caught between two fires p261]

"By Jove!" cried the Colonel. "See that!"

The camels of the Dervishes had all knelt down simultaneously, and the
men had sprung from their backs. In front of them was a tall, stately
figure, who could only be the Emir Wad Ibrahim. They saw him kneel for
an instant in prayer. Then he rose, and taking something from his saddle
he placed it very deliberately upon the sand and stood upon it.

"Good man!" cried the Colonel. "He is standing upon his sheepskin."

"What do you mean by that?" asked Stuart.

"Every Arab has a sheepskin upon his saddle. When he recognises that his
position is perfectly hopeless, and yet is determined to fight to the
death, he takes his sheepskin off and stands upon it until he dies.
See, they are all upon their sheepskins. They will neither give nor take
quarter now."

The drama beneath them was rapidly approaching its climax. The Haifa
Corps was well up, and a ring of smoke and flame surrounded the clump
of kneeling Dervishes, who answered it as best they could. Many of them
were already down, but the rest loaded and fired with the unflinching
courage which has always made them worthy antagonists. A dozen
kharki-dressed figures upon the sand showed that it was no bloodless
victory for the Egyptians. But now there was a stirring bugle-call from
the Sarras men, and another answered it from the Haifa Corps. Their
camels were down also, and the men had formed up into a single long
curved line. One last volley and they were charging inwards with the
wild inspiriting yell which the blacks had brought with them from their
central African wilds. For a minute there was a mad vortex of rushing
figures, rifle-butts rising and falling, spearheads gleaming and darting
among the rolling dust cloud. Then the bugle rang out once more, the
Egyptians fell back and formed up with the quick precision of highly
disciplined troops, and there in the centre, each upon his sheepskin,
lay the gallant barbarian and his raiders. The nineteenth century had
been revenged upon the seventh.

The three women had stared horror-stricken and yet fascinated at
the stirring scene before them. Now Sadie and her aunt were sobbing
together. The Colonel had turned to them with some cheering words when
his eyes fell upon the face of Mrs. Belmont. It was as white and set as
if it were carved from ivory, and her large grey eyes were fixed as if
she were in a trance.

"Good Heavens, Mrs. Belmont, what _is_ the matter?" he cried.

For answer she pointed out over the desert. Far away, miles on the other
side of the scene of the fight, a small body of men were riding towards
them.

"By Jove, yes; there's some one there. Who can it be?"

They were all straining their eyes, but the distance was so great that
they could only be sure that they were camel-men and about a dozen in
number.

"It's those devils who were left behind in the palm grove," said
Cochrane. "There's no one else it can be. One consolation, they can't
get away again. They've walked right into the lion's mouth."

But Mrs. Belmont was still gazing with the same fixed intensity and the
same ivory face. Now, with a wild shriek of joy, she threw her two hands
into the air. "It's they!" she screamed. "They are saved! It's they,
Colonel, it's they! O Miss Adams, Miss Adams, it is they!" She capered
about on the top of the hill with wild eyes like an excited child.

Her companions would not believe her, for they could see nothing, but
there are moments when our mortal senses are more acute than those who
have never put their whole heart and soul into them can ever realise.
Mrs. Belmont had already run down the rocky path, on the way to her
camel, before they could distinguish that which had long before carried
its glad message to her. In the van of the approaching party, three
white dots shimmered in the sun, and they could only come from the three
European hats. The riders were travelling swiftly, and by the time their
comrades had started to meet them they could plainly see that it was
indeed Belmont, Fardet, and Stephens, with the dragoman Mansoor, and the
wounded Soudanese rifleman. As they came together they saw that their
escort consisted of Tippy Tilly and the other old Egyptian soldiers.
Belmont rushed onwards to meet his wife, but Fardet stopped to grasp the
Colonel's hand.

"_Vive la France! Vivent les Anglais!_" he was yelling. "_Tout va
bien, n'est ce pas_, Colonel? Ah, _canaille! Vivent les croix et les
Chrétiens!_" He was incoherent in his delight.

The Colonel, too, was as enthusiastic as his Anglo-Saxon standard
would permit. He could not gesticulate, but he laughed in the nervous,
crackling way which was his top-note of emotion.

"My dear boy, I am deuced glad to see you all again. I gave you up
for lost. Never was as pleased at anything in my life! How did you get
away?"

"It was all your doing."

"Mine?"

"Yes, my friend, and I have been quarrelling with you,--ungrateful
wretch that I am!"

"But how did I save you?"

"It was you who arranged with this excellent Tippy Tilly and the others
that they should have so much if they brought us alive into Egypt again.
They slipped away in the darkness and hid themselves in the grove. Then,
when we were left, they crept up with their rifles and shot the men who
were about to murder us. That cursed Moolah, I am sorry they shot him,
for I believe that I could have persuaded him to be a Christian. And
now, with your permission, I will hurry on and embrace Miss Adams, for
Belmont has his wife, and Stephens has Miss Sadie, so I think it is very
evident that the sympathy of Miss Adams is reserved for me."

A fortnight had passed away, and the special boat which had been
placed at the disposal of the rescued tourists was already far north of
Assiout. Next morning they would find themselves at Baliani, where
one takes the express for Cairo. It was, therefore, their last evening
together. Mrs. Shlesinger and her child who had escaped unhurt had
already been sent down from the frontier. Miss Adams had been very ill
after her privations, and this was the first time that she had been
allowed to come upon deck after dinner. She sat now in a lounge-chair,
thinner, sterner, and kindlier than ever, while Sadie stood beside her
and tucked the rugs around her shoulders. Mr. Stephens was carrying over
the coffee and placing it on the wicker-table beside them. On the other
side of the deck Belmont and his wife were seated together in silent
sympathy and contentment. Monsieur Fardet was leaning against the rail
and arguing about the remissness of the British Government in not taking
a more complete control of the Egyptian frontier, while the Colonel
stood very erect in front of him, with the red end of a cigar-stump
protruding from under his moustache.

But what was the matter with the Colonel? Who would have recognised him
who had only seen the broken old man in the Libyan desert? There might
be some little grizzling about the moustache, but the hair was back once
more at the fine glossy black which had been so much admired upon
the voyage up. With a stony face and an unsympathetic manner he had
received, upon his return to Haifa, all the commiserations about the
dreadful way in which his privations had blanched him, and then diving
into his cabin, he had reappeared within an hour exactly as he had been
before that fatal moment when he had been cut off from the manifold
resources of civilisation. And he looked in such a sternly questioning
manner at every one who stared at him, that no one had the moral courage
to make any remark about this modern miracle. It was observed from that
time forward that, if the Colonel had only to ride a hundred yards into
the desert, he always began his preparations by putting a small black
bottle with a pink label into the side-pocket of his coat. But those who
knew him best at times when a man may be best known, said that the old
soldier had a young man's heart and a young man's spirit,--so that if
he wished to keep a young man's colour also it was not very unreasonable
after all. It was very soothing and restful up there on the saloon deck,
with no sound but the gentle lipping of the water as it rippled against
the sides of the steamer. The red after-glow was in the western sky,
and it mottled the broad, smooth river with crimson. Dimly they could
discern the tall figures of herons standing upon the sandbanks, and
farther off the line of river-side date-palms glided past them in a
majestic procession. Once more the silver stars were twinkling out, the
same clear, placid, inexorable stars to which their weary eyes had been
so often upturned during the long nights of their desert martyrdom.

"Where do you put up in Cairo, Miss Adams?" asked Mrs. Belmont, at last.

"Shepheard's, I think."

"And you, Mr. Stephens?"

"Oh, Shepheard's, decidedly."

"We are staying at the Continental. I hope we shall not lose sight of
you."

"I don't want ever to lose sight of you, Mrs. Belmont," cried Sadie.
"Oh, you must come to the States, and we'll give you just a lovely
time."

Mrs. Belmont laughed, in her pleasant, mellow fashion.

"We have our duty to do in Ireland, and we have been too long away from
it already. My husband has his business, and I have my home, and they
are both going to rack and ruin. Besides," she added, slyly, "it is just
possible that if we did come to the States we might not find you there."

"We must all meet again," said Belmont, "if only to talk our adventures
over once more. It will be easier in a year or two. We are still too
near them."

"And yet how far away and dream-like it all seems!" remarked his wife.
"Providence is very good in softening disagreeable remembrances in
our minds. All this feels to me as if it had happened in some previous
existence."

Fardet held up his wrist with a cotton bandage still round it.

"The body does not forget as quickly as the mind. This does not look
very dreamlike or far away, Mrs. Belmont."

"How hard it is that some should be spared, and some not! If only Mr.
Brown and Mr. Headingly were with us, then I should not have one care in
the world," cried Sadie. "Why should they have been taken, and we left?"

Mr. Stuart had limped on to the deck with an open book in his hand, a
thick stick supporting his injured leg.

"Why is the ripe fruit picked, and the unripe left?" said he in answer
to the young girl's exclamation. "We know nothing of the spiritual state
of these poor dear young fellows, but the great Master Gardener plucks
His fruit according to His own knowledge. I brought you up a passage to
read to you."

There was a lantern upon the table, and he sat down beside it. The
yellow light shone upon his heavy cheek and the red edges of his book.
The strong, steady voice rose above the wash of the water.

"'Let them give thanks whom the Lord hath redeemed and delivered from
the hand of the enemy, and gathered them out of the lands, from the
east, and from the west, from the north, and from the south. They went
astray in the wilderness out of the way, and found no city to dwell in.
Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them. So they cried unto the
Lord in their trouble, and He delivered them from their distress. He led
them forth by the right way, that they might go to the city where they
dwelt. Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for His goodness, and
declare the wonders that He doeth for the children of men.'

[Illustration: He delivered them from their distress p273]

"It sounds as if it were composed for us, and yet it was written two
thousand years ago," said the clergyman, as he closed the book. "In
every age man has been forced to acknowledge the guiding hand which
leads him. For my part I don't believe that inspiration stopped
two thousand years ago. When Tennyson wrote with such fervour and
conviction,--

     'Oh, yet we trust that somehow good
     Will be the final goal of ill.'

he was repeating the message which had been given to him, just as Micah
or Ezekiel when the world was younger repeated some cruder and more
elementary lesson."

"That is all very well, Mr. Stuart," said the Frenchman; "you ask me to
praise God for taking me out of danger and pain, but what I want to know
is why, since He has arranged all things, He ever put me into that pain
and danger. I have in my opinion more occasion to blame than to praise.
You would not thank me for pulling you out of that river if it was also
I who pushed you in. The most which you can claim for your Providence is
that it has healed the wound which its own hand inflicted."

"I don't deny the difficulty," said the clergyman, slowly; "no one who
is not self-deceived _can_ deny the difficulty. Look how boldly Tennyson
faced it in that same poem, the grandest and deepest and most obviously
inspired in our language. Remember the effect which it had upon him.

     'I falter where I firmly trod,
     And falling with my weight of cares
     Upon the great world's altar stairs,
     Which slope through darkness up to God,

     'I stretch lame hands of faith and grope
     And gather dust and chaff, and call
     To what I feel is Lord of all,
     And faintly trust the larger hope.'

It is the central mystery of mysteries--the problem of sin and
suffering, the one huge difficulty which the reasoner has to solve in
order to vindicate the dealings of God with man. But take our own case
as an example. I, for one, am very clear what I have got out of our
experience. I say it with all humility, but I have a clearer view of
my duties than ever I had before. It has taught me to be less remiss in
saying what I think to be true, less indolent in doing what I feel to be
rightful."

"And I," cried Sadie. "It has taught me more than all my life put
together. I have learned so much and unlearned so much. I am a different
girl."

"I never understood my own nature before," said Stephens. "I can hardly
say that I had a nature to understand. I lived for what was unimportant,
and I neglected what was vital."

"Oh, a good shake-up does nobody any harm," the Colonel remarked. "Too
much of the feather-bed-and-four-meals-a-day life is not good for man or
woman."

"It is my firm belief," said Mrs. Belmont, gravely, "that there was not
one of us who did not rise to a greater height during those days in the
desert than ever before or since. When our sins come to be weighed, much
may be forgiven us for the sake of those unselfish days."

They all sat in thoughtful silence for a little while the scarlet
streaks turned to carmine, and the grey shadows deepened, and the
wild-fowl flew past in dark straggling V's over the dull metallic
surface of the great smooth-flowing Nile. A cold wind had sprung up from
the eastward, and some of the party rose to leave the deck. Stephens
leaned forward to Sadie.

"Do you remember what you promised when you were in the desert?" he
whispered.

"What was that?"

"You said that if you escaped you would try in future to make some one
else happy."

"Then I must do so."

"You have," said he, and their hands met under the shadow of the table.


THE END.




CHAPTER I--THE OVERTURE--ABOUT THAT DATE



These are the beginnings of some of the letters which they wrote
about that time.

Woking, May 20th.

My Dearest Maude,--You know that your mother suggested, and we
agreed, that we should be married about the beginning of September.
Don't you think that we might say the 3rd of August?  It is a
Wednesday, and in every sense suitable.  Do try to change the date,
for it would in many ways be preferable to the other.  I shall be
eager to hear from you about it.  And now, dearest Maude . . . (The
rest is irrelevant.)

St. Albans, May 22nd.

My Dearest Frank,--Mother sees no objection to the 3rd of August, and
I am ready to do anything which will please you and her.  Of course
there are the guests to be considered, and the dressmakers and other
arrangements, but I have no doubt that we shall be able to change the
date all right.  O Frank . . . (What follows is beside the point.)

Woking, May 25th.

My Dearest Maude,--I have been thinking over that change of date, and
I see one objection which had not occurred to me when I suggested it.
August the 1st is Bank holiday, and travelling is not very pleasant
about that time.  My idea now is that we should bring it off before
that date.  Fancy, for example, how unpleasant it would be for your
Uncle Joseph if he had to travel all the way from Edinburgh with a
Bank-holiday crowd.  It would be selfish of us if we did not fit in
our plans so as to save our relatives from inconvenience.  I think
therefore, taking everything into consideration, that the 20th of
July, a Wednesday, would be the very best day that we could select.
I do hope that you will strain every nerve, my darling, to get your
mother to consent to this change.  When I think . . . (A digression
follows.)

St. Albans, May 27th.

My Dearest Frank,--I think that what you say about the date is very
reasonable, and it is so sweet and unselfish of you to think about
Uncle Joseph.  Of course it would be very unpleasant for him to have
to travel at such a time, and we must strain every nerve to prevent
it.  There is only one serious objection which my mother can see.
Uncle Percival (that is my mother's second brother) comes back from
Rangoon about the end of July, and will miss the wedding (O Frank,
think of its being OUR wedding!) unless we delay it.  He has always
been very fond of me, and he might be hurt if we were married so
immediately before his arrival.  Don't you think it would be as well
to wait?  Mother leaves it all in your hands, and we shall do exactly
as you advise.  O Frank . . . (The rest is confidential.)

Woking, May 29th.

My Own Dearest,--I think that it would be unreasonable upon the part
of your Uncle Percival to think that we ought to have changed the
date of a matter so important to ourselves, simply in order that he
should be present.  I am sure that on second thoughts your mother and
yourself will see the thing in this light.  I must say, however, that
in one point I think you both show great judgment.  It would
certainly be invidious to be married IMMEDIATELY before his arrival.
I really think that he would have some cause for complaint if we did
that.  To prevent any chance of hurting his feelings, I think that it
would be far best, if your mother and you agree with me, that we
should be married upon July 7th.  I see that it is a Thursday, and in
every way suitable.  When I read your last letter . . . (The
remainder is unimportant.)

St. Albans, June 1st.

Dearest Frank,--I am sure that you are right in thinking that it
would be as well not to have the ceremony too near the date of Uncle
Percival's arrival in England.  We should be so sorry to hurt his
feelings in any way.  Mother has been down to Madame Mortimer's about
the dresses, and she thinks that everything could be hurried up so as
to be ready by July 7th.  She is so obliging, and her skirts DO hang
so beautifully.  O Frank, it is only a few weeks' time, and then . .
.

Woking, June 3rd.

My Own Darling Maude,--How good you are--and your mother also--in
falling in with my suggestions!  Please, please don't bother your
dear self about dresses.  You only want the one travelling-dress to
be married in, and the rest we can pick up as we go.  I am sure that
white dress with the black stripe--the one you were playing tennis
with at the Arlingtons'--would do splendidly.  You looked simply
splendid that day.  I am inclined to think that it is my favourite of
all your dresses, with the exception of the dark one with the light-
green front.  That shows off your figure so splendidly.  I am very
fond also of the grey Quaker-like alpaca dress.  What a little dove
you do look in it!  I think those dresses, and of course your satin
evening-dress, are my favourites.  On second thoughts, they are the
only dresses I have ever seen you in.  But I like the grey best,
because you wore it the first time I ever--you remember!  You must
NEVER get rid of those dresses.  They are too full of associations.
I want to see you in them for years, and years, and years.

What I wanted to say was that you have so many charming dresses, that
we may consider ourselves independent of Madame Mortimer.  If her
things should be late, they will come in very usefully afterwards.  I
don't want to be selfish or inconsiderate, my own dearest girlie, but
it would be rather too much if we allowed my tailor or your
dressmaker to be obstacles to our union.  I just want you--your
dainty little self--if you had only your 'wee coatie,' as Burns says.
Now look here!  I want you to bring your influence to bear upon your
mother, and so make a small change in our plans.  The earlier we can
have our honeymoon, the more pleasant the hotels will be.  I do want
your first experiences with me to be without a shadow of discomfort.
In July half the world starts for its holiday.  If we could get away
at the end of this mouth, we should just be ahead of them.  This
month, this very month!  Oh, do try to manage this, my own dearest
girl.  The 30th of June is a Tuesday, and in every way suitable.
They could spare me from the office most excellently.  This would
just give us time to have the banns three times, beginning with next
Sunday.  I leave it in your hands, dear.  Do try to work it.


St. Albans, June 4th.

My Dearest Frank,--We nearly called in the doctor after your dear old
preposterous letter.  My mother gasped upon the sofa while I read her
some extracts.  That I, the daughter of the house, should be married
in my old black and white tennis-dress, which I wore at the
Arlingtons' to save my nice one!  Oh, you are simply splendid
sometimes!  And the learned way in which you alluded to my alpaca.
As a matter of fact, it's a merino, but that doesn't matter.  Fancy
your remembering my wardrobe like that!  And wanting me to wear them
all for years!  So I shall, dear, secretly, when we are quite quite
alone.  But they are all out of date already, and if in a year or so
you saw your poor dowdy wife with tight sleeves among a roomful of
puff-shouldered young ladies, you would not be consoled even by the
memory that it was in that dress that you first . . . you know!

As a matter of fact, I MUST have my dress to be married in.  I don't
think mother would regard it as a legal marriage if I hadn't, and if
you knew how nice it will be, you would not have the heart to
interfere with it.  Try to picture it, silver-grey--I know how fond
you are of greys--a little white chiffon at neck and wrists, and the
prettiest pearl trimming.  Then the hat en suite, pale-grey lisse,
white feather and brilliant buckle.  All these details are wasted
upon you, sir, but you will like it when you see it.  It fulfils your
ideal of tasteful simplicity, which men always imagine to be an
economical method of dressing, until they have wives and milliners'
bills of their own.

And now I have kept the biggest news to the last.  Mother has been to
Madame, and she says that if she works all night, she will have
everything ready for the 30th.  O Frank, does it not seem incredible!
Next Tuesday three weeks.  And the banns!  Oh my goodness, I am
frightened when I think about it!  Dear old boy, you won't tire of
me, will you?  Whatever should I do if I thought you had tired of me!
And the worst of it is, that you don't know me a bit.  I have a
hundred thousand faults, and you arc blinded by your love and cannot
see them.  But then some day the scales will fall from your eyes, and
you will perceive the whole hundred thousand at once.  Oh, what a
reaction there will be!  You will see me as I am, frivolous, wilful,
idle, petulant, and altogether horrid.  But I do love you, Frank,
with all my heart, and soul, and mind, and strength, and you'll count
that on the other side, won't you?  Now I am so glad I have said all
this, because it is best that you should know what you should expect.
It will be nice for you to look back and to say, 'She gave me fair
warning, and she is no worse than she said.'  O Frank, think of the
30th.

P.S.--I forgot to say that I had a grey silk cape, lined with cream,
to go with the dress.  It is just sweet!

So that is how they arranged about the date.



CHAPTER II--THE OVERTURE CONTINUED--IN A MINOR KEY



Woking, June 7th.

My Own Dearest Maude,--How I wish you were here, for I have been
down, down, down, in the deepest state of despondency all day.  I
have longed to hear the sound of your voice, or to feel the touch of
your hand!  How can I be despondent, when in three weeks I shall be
the husband of the dearest girl in England?  That is what I ask
myself, and then the answer comes that it is just exactly on that
account that my wretched conscience is gnawing at me.  I feel that I
have not used you well; I owe you reparation, and I don't know what
to do.

In your last dear letter you talk about being frivolous.  YOU have
never been frivolous.  But I have been frivolous--for ever since I
have learned to love you, I have been so wrapped up in my love, with
my happiness gilding everything about me, that I have never really
faced the prosaic facts of life or discussed with you what our
marriage will really necessitate.  And now, at this eleventh hour, I
realise that I have led you on in ignorance to an act which will
perhaps take a great deal of the sunshine out of your life.  What
have I to offer you in exchange for the sacrifice which you will make
for me?  Myself, my love, and all that I have--but how little it all
amounts to!  You are a girl in a thousand, in ten thousand--bright,
beautiful, sweet, the dearest lady in all the land.  And I an average
man--or perhaps hardly that--with little to boast of in the past, and
vague ambitions for the future.  It is a poor bargain for you, a most
miserable bargain.  You have still time.  Count the cost, and if it
be too great, then draw back even now without fear of one word or
inmost thought of reproach from me.  Your whole life is at stake.
How can I hold you to a decision which was taken before you realised
what it meant?  Now I shall place the facts before you, and then,
come what may, my conscience will be at rest, and I shall be sure
that you are acting with your eyes open.

You have to compare your life as it is, and as it will be.  Your
father is rich, or at least comfortably off, and you have been
accustomed all your life to have whatever you desired.  From what I
know of your mother's kindness, I should imagine that no wish of
yours has ever remained ungratified.  You have lived well, dressed
well, a sweet home, a lovely garden, your collie, your canary, your
maid.  Above all, you have never had anxiety, never had to worry
about the morrow.  I can see all your past life so well.  In the
mornings, your music, your singing, your gardening, your reading.  In
the afternoons, your social duties, the visit and the visitor.  In
the evening, tennis, a walk, music again, your father's return from
the City, the happy family-circle, with occasionally the dinner, the
dance, and the theatre.  And so smoothly on, month after month, and
year after year, your own sweet, kindly, joyous nature, and your
bright face, making every one round you happy, and so reacting upon
your own happiness.  Why should you bother about money?  That was
your father's business.  Why should you trouble about housekeeping?
That was your mother's duty.  You lived like the birds and the
flowers, and had no need to take heed for the future.  Everything
which life could offer was yours.

And now you must turn to what is in store for you, if you are still
content to face the future with me.  Position I have none to offer.
What is the exact position of the wife of the assistant-accountant of
the Co-operative Insurance Office?  It is indefinable.  What are my
prospects?  I may become head-accountant.  If Dinton died--and I hope
he won't, for he is an excellent fellow--I should probably get his
berth.  Beyond that I have no career.  I have some aspirations after
literature--a few critical articles in the monthlies--but I don't
suppose they will ever lead to anything of consequence.

And my income, 400 pounds a year with a commission on business I
introduce.  But that amounts to hardly anything.  You have 50 pounds.
Our total, then, is certainly under 500 pounds.  Have you considered
what it will mean to leave that charming house at St. Albans--the
breakfast-room, the billiard-room, the lawn--and to live in the
little 50 pounds a year house at Woking, with its two sitting-rooms
and pokey garden?  Have I a right to ask you to do such a thing?  And
then the housekeeping, the planning, the arranging, the curtailing,
the keeping up appearances upon a limited income.  I have made myself
miserable, because I feel that you are marrying me without a
suspicion of the long weary uphill struggle which lies before you.  O
Maude, my darling Maude, I feel that you sacrifice too much for me!
If I were a man I should say to you, 'Forget me--forget it all!  Let
our relations be a closed chapter in your life.  You can do better.
I and my cares come like a great cloud-bank to keep the sunshine from
your young life.  You who are so tender and dainty!  How can I bear
to see you exposed to the drudgery and sordid everlasting cares of
such a household!  I think of your graces, your pretty little ways,
the elegancies of your life, and how charmingly you carry them off.
You are born and bred for just such an atmosphere as the one which
you breathe.  And I take advantage of my good-fortune in winning your
love to drag you down, to take the beauty and charm from your life,
to fill it with small and vulgar cares, never-ending and soul-
killing.  Selfish beast that I am, why should I allow you to come
down into the stress and worry of life, when I found you so high
above it?  And what can I offer you in exchange?'  These are the
thoughts which come back and back all day, and leave me in the
blackest fit of despondency.  I confessed to you that I had dark
humours, but never one so hopeless as this.  I do not wish my worst
enemy to be as unhappy as I have been to-day.

Write to me, my own darling Maude, and tell me all you think, your
very inmost soul, in this matter.  Am I right?  Have I asked too much
of you?  Does the change frighten you?  You will have this in the
morning, and I should have my answer by the evening post.  I shall
meet the postman.  How hard I shall try not to snatch the letter from
him, or to give myself away.  Wilson has been in worrying me with
foolish talk, while my thoughts were all of our affairs.  He worked
me up into a perfectly homicidal frame of mind, but I hope that I
kept on smiling and was not discourteous to him.  I wonder which is
right, to be polite but hypocritical, or to be inhospitable but
honest.

Good-bye, my own dearest sweetheart--all the dearer when I feel that
I may lose you.--Ever your devoted

FRANK.

St. Albans, June 8th.

Frank, tell me for Heaven's sake what your letter means!  You use
words of love, and yet you talk of parting.  You speak as if our love
were a thing which we might change or suppress.  O Frank, you cannot
take my love away from me.  You don't know what you are to me, my
heart, my life, my all.  I would give my life for you willingly,
gladly--every beat of my heart is for you.  You don't know what you
have become to me.  My every thought is yours, and has been ever
since that night at the Arlingtons'.  My love is so deep and strong,
it rules my whole life, my every action from morning to night.  It is
the very breath and heart of my life--unchangeable.  I could not
alter my love any more than I could stop my heart from beating.  How
could you, could you suggest such a thing!  I know that you really
love me just as much as I love you, or I should not open my heart
like this.  I should be too proud to give myself away.  But I feel
that pride is out of place when any mistake or misunderstanding may
mean lifelong misery to both of us.  I would only say good-bye if I
thought your love had changed or grown less.  But I know that it has
not.  O my darling, if you only knew what terrible agony the very
thought of parting is, you would never have let such an idea even for
an instant, on any pretext, enter your mind.  The very possibility is
too awful to think of.  When I read your letter just now up in my
room, I nearly fainted.  I can't write.  O Frank, don't take my love
away from me.  I can't bear it.  Oh no, it is my everything.  If I
could only see you now, I know that you would kiss these heart-
burning tears away.  I feel so lonely and tired.  I cannot follow all
your letter.  I only know that you talked of parting, and that I am
weary and miserable.

MAUDE.

(COPY OF TELEGRAM)
From Frank Crosse, to Miss Maude Selby,
The Laurels, St. Albans
Coming up eight-fifteen, arrive midnight.

June 10th.

How good of you, dear old boy, to come racing across two counties at
a minute's notice, simply in order to console me and clear away my
misunderstandings.  Of course it was most ridiculous of me to take
your letter so much to heart, but when I read any suggestion about
our parting, it upset me so dreadfully, that I was really incapable
of reasoning about anything else.  Just that one word PART seemed to
be written in letters of fire right across the page, to the exclusion
of everything else.  So then I wrote an absurd letter to my boy, and
the dear came scampering right across the South of England, and
arrived at midnight in the most demoralised state.  It was just sweet
of you to come, dear, and I shall never forget it.

I am so sorry that I have been so foolish, but you must confess, sir,
that you have been just a little bit foolish also.  The idea of
supposing that when I love a man my love can be affected by the size
of his house or the amount of his income.  It makes me smile to think
of it.  Do you suppose a woman's happiness is affected by whether she
has a breakfast-room, or a billiard-board, or a collie dog, or any of
the other luxuries which you enumerated?  But these things are all
the merest trimmings of life.  They are not the essentials.  YOU and
your love are the essentials.  Some one who will love me with all his
heart.  Some one whom I can love with all my heart.  Oh the
difference it makes in life!  How it changes everything!  It
glorifies and beautifies everything.  I always felt that I was
capable of a great love--and now I have it.

Fancy your imagining that you had come into my life in order to
darken it.  Why, you ARE my life.  If you went out of it, what would
be left?  You talk about my happiness before I met you--but oh, how
empty it all was!  I read, and played, and sang as you say, but what
a void there was!  I did it to please mother, but there really seemed
no very clear reason why I should continue to do it.  Then you came,
and everything was changed.  I read because you are fond of reading
and because I wanted to talk about books with you.  I played because
you are fond of music.  I sang in the hope that it might please you.
Whatever I did, you were always in my mind.  I tried and tried to
become a better and nobler woman, because I wanted to be worthy of
the love you bore me.  I have changed, and developed, and improved
more in the last three months than in all my life before.  And then
you come and tell me that you have darkened my life.  You know better
now.  My life has become full and rich, for Love fills my life.  It
is the keynote of my nature, the foundation, the motive power.  It
inspires me to make the most of any gift or talent that I have.  How
could I tell you all this if I did not know that your own feeling was
as deep.  I could not have given the one, great, and only love of my
life in exchange for a half-hearted affection from you.  But you will
never again make the mistake of supposing that any material
consideration can affect our love.

And now we won't be serious any longer.  Dear mother was very much
astounded by your tumultuous midnight arrival, and equally
precipitate departure next morning.  Dear old boy, it was so nice of
you!  But you won't ever have horrid black humours and think
miserable things any more, will you?  But if you must have dark days,
now is your time, for I can't possibly permit any after the 30th.--
Ever your own

MAUDE.

Woking, June 11th.

My Own Dearest Girlie,--How perfectly sweet you are!  I read and re-
read your letter, and I understand more and more how infinitely your
nature is above mine.  And your conception of love--how lofty and
unselfish it is!  How could I lower it by thinking that any worldly
thing could be weighed for an instant against it!  And yet it was
just my jealous love for you, and my keenness that you should never
be the worse through me, which led me to write in that way, so I will
not blame myself too much.  I am really glad that the cloud came, for
the sunshine is so much brighter afterwards.  And I seem to know you
so much better, and to see so much more deeply into your nature.  I
knew that my own passion for you was the very essence of my soul--oh,
how hard it is to put the extreme of emotion into the terms of human
speech!--but I did not dare to hope that your feelings were as deep.
I hardly ventured to tell even you how I really felt.  Somehow, in
these days of lawn-tennis and afternoon tea, a strong strong passion,
such a passion as one reads of in books and poems, seems out of
place.  I thought that it would surprise, even frighten you, perhaps,
if I were to tell you all that I felt.  And now you have written me
two letters, which contain all that I should have said if I had
spoken from my heart.  It is all my own inmost thought, and there is
not a feeling that I do not share.  O Maude, I may write lightly and
speak lightly, perhaps, sometimes, but there never was a woman,
never, never in all the story of the world, who was loved more
passionately than you are loved by me.  Come what may, while the
world lasts and the breath of life is between my lips, you are the
one woman to me.  If we are together, I care nothing for what the
future may bring.  If we are not together, all the world cannot fill
the void.

You say that I have given an impulse to your life:  that you read
more, study more, take a keener interest in everything.  You could
not possibly have said a thing which could have given me more
pleasure than that.  It is splendid!  It justifies me in aspiring to
you.  It satisfies my conscience over everything which I have done.
It must be right if that is the effect.  I have felt so happy and
light-hearted ever since you said it.  It is rather absurd to think
that _I_ should improve you, but if you in your sweet frankness say
that it is so, why, I can only marvel and rejoice.

But you must not study and work too hard.  You say that you do it to
please me, but that would not please me.  I'll tell you an anecdote
as a dreadful example.  I had a friend who was a great lover of
Eastern literature, Sanskrit, and so on.  He loved a lady.  The lady
to please him worked hard at these subjects also.  In a month she had
shattered her nervous system, and will perhaps never be the same
again.  It was impossible.  She was not meant for it, and yet she
made herself a martyr over it.  I don't mean by this parable that it
will be a strain upon your intellect to keep up with mine.  But I do
mean that a woman's mind is DIFFERENT from a man's.  A dainty rapier
is a finer thing than a hatchet, but it is not adapted for cutting
down trees all the same.

Rupton Hale, the architect, one of the few friends I have down here,
has some most deplorable views about women.  I played a round of the
Byfleet Golf Links with him upon Wednesday afternoon, and we
discussed the question of women's intellects.  He would have it that
they have never a light of their own, but are always the reflectors
of some other light which you cannot see.  He would allow that they
were extraordinarily quick in assimilating another person's views,
but that was all.  I quoted some very shrewd remarks which a lady had
made to me at dinner.  'Those are the traces of the last man,' said
he.  According to his preposterous theory, you could in conversation
with a woman reconstruct the last man who had made an impression to
her.  'She will reflect you upon the next person she talks to,' said
he.  It was ungallant, but it was ingenious.

Dearest sweetheart, before I stop, let me tell you that if I have
brought any happiness into your life, you have brought far, far more
into mine.  My soul seemed to come into full being upon the day when
I loved you.  It was so small, and cramped, and selfish, before--and
life was so hard, and stupid, and purposeless.  To live, to sleep, to
eat, for some years, and then to die--it was so trivial and so
material.  But now the narrow walls seem in an instant to have
fallen, and a boundless horizon stretches around me.  And everything
appears beautiful.  London Bridge, King William Street, Abchurch
Lane, the narrow stair, the office with the almanacs and the shining
desks, it has all become glorified, tinged with a golden haze.  I am
stronger:  I step out briskly and breathe more deeply.  And I am a
better man too.  God knows there was room for it.  But I do try to
make an ideal, and to live up to it.  I feel such a fraud when I
think of being put upon a pedestal by you, when some little hole
where I am out of sight is my true place.  I am like the man in
Browning who mourned over the spots upon his 'speckled hide,' but
rejoiced in the swansdown of his lady.  And so, my own dear sweet
little swansdown lady, good-night to you, with my heart's love now
and for ever from your true lover,

FRANK.

Saturday!  Saturday!  Saturday! oh, how I am longing for Saturday,
when I shall see you again!  We will go on Sunday and hear the banns
together.



CHAPTER III--THE OVERTURE CONCLUDED



St. Albans, June 14th.

Dearest Frank,--What a dreadful thing it is to have your name shouted
out in public!  And what a voice the man had!  He simply bellowed
'Maude Selby of this parish' as if he meant all this parish to know
about it.  And then he let you off so easily.  I suppose he thought
that there was no local interest in Frank Crosse of Woking.  But when
he looked round expectantly, after asking whether there was any known
cause or just impediment why we should not be joined together, it
gave me quite a thrill.  I felt as if some one would jump up like a
Jack-in-the-box and make a scene in the church.  How relieved I was
when he changed the subject!  I sank my face in my hands, but I know
that I was blushing all down my neck.  Then I looked at you between
my fingers, and there you were sitting quite cool and cheerful, as if
you rather liked it.  I think that we shall go to evening-service
next week.  Papa has given up going altogether since the new organist
came.  He says he cannot face the music.

What a sweet time we had together.  I shall never, never forget it!
O Frank, how good you are to me!  And how I hope you won't regret
what you are doing.  It is all very well just now, when I am young
and you think that I am pretty.  I love that you should think so, but
I am compelled to tell you that it is not really so.  I can't imagine
how you came to think it!  I suppose it was from seeing me so often
beside papa.  If you saw me near Nelly Sheridan, or any other REALLY
pretty girl, you would at once see the difference.  It just happens
that you like grey eyes and brown hair, and the other things, but
that does not mean that I am really pretty.  I should be so sorry if
there were any misunderstanding about this, and you only found out
when too late.  You ought to keep this letter for reference, as papa
always says, and then it will be interesting to you afterwards.

I should like you to see me now--or rather I wouldn't have you see me
for the world.  I am so flushed and untidy, for I have been cooking.
Is it not absurd, if you come to think of it, that we girls should be
taught the irregular French verbs, and the geography of China, and
never to cook the simplest thing?  It really does seem ridiculous.

But it is never too late to mend, so I went into the kitchen this
morning and made a tart.  You can't imagine what a lot of things one
needs even for such a simple thing as that.  I thought cook was
joking when she put them all down in front of me.  It was like a
conjurer giving his performance.  There was an empty bowl, and a bowl
full of sliced apples, and a big board, and a rolling-pin, and eggs,
and butter, and sugar, and cloves, and of course flour.  We broke
eggs and put them into a bowl--you can't think what a mess an egg
makes when it misses the bowl.  Then we stirred them up with flour
and butter and things.  I stirred until I was perfectly exhausted.
No wonder a cook has usually a great thick arm.  Then when it had
formed a paste, we rolled it out, and put the apples in the dish, and
roofed it in, and trimmed the edges, and stuck flat leaves made of
paste all over it, and the dearest little crown in the middle.  Then
we put it into the oven until it was brown.  It looked a very nice
tart, and mamma said that I had made it very solidly.  It certainly
did feel very heavy for its size.  Mamma would not taste it, because
she said that she thought Dr. Tristram would not approve of her doing
so, but I had a piece, and really it was not so bad.  Mamma said the
servants might have it at dinner, but the servants said that the poor
window-cleaner had a large family, and so we gave it to him.  It is
so sweet to feel that one is of any use to any one.

What do you think happened this morning?  Two wedding-presents
arrived.  The first was a very nice fish slice and fork in a case.
It was from dear old Mrs. Jones Beyrick, on whom we really had no
claim whatever.  We all think it so kind of her, and such a nice
fish-slice.  The other was a beautiful travelling-bag from Uncle
Arthur.  Stamped in gold upon it were the letters M.C., I said, 'Oh,
what a pity!  They have put the wrong initials.'  That made mamma
laugh.  I suppose one soon gets used to it.  Fancy how you would feel
if it were the other way about, and you changed your name to mine.
They might call you Selby, but you would continue to feel Crosse.  I
didn't mean that for a joke, but women make jokes without intending
it.  The other day the curate drove up in his donkey-cart, and mother
said, 'Oh, what a nice tandem!'  I think that she meant to say 'turn-
out'; but papa said it was the neatest thing he had heard for a long
time, so mamma is very pleased, but I am sure that she does not know
even now why it should be so funny.

What stupid letters I write!  Doesn't it frighten you when you read
them and think that is the person with whom I have to spend my life.
Yet you never seem alarmed about it.  I think it is so BRAVE of you.
That reminds me that I never finished what I wanted to say at the
beginning of this letter.  Even supposing that I am pretty (and my
complexion sometimes is simply awful), you must bear in mind how
quickly the years slip by, and how soon a woman alters.  Why, we
shall hardly be married before you will find me full of wrinkles, and
without a tooth in my head.  Poor boy, how dreadful for you!  Men
seem to change so little and so slowly.  Besides, it does not matter
for them, for nobody marries a man because he is pretty.  But you
must marry me, Frank, not for what I look but for what I am--for my
inmost, inmost self, so that if I had no body at all, you would love
me just the same.  That is how I love you, but I do prefer you with
your body on all the same.  I don't know how I love you, dear.  I
only know that I am in a dream when you are near me--just a beautiful
dream.  I live for those moments.--Ever your own little

MAUDE.

P.S.--Papa gave us such a fright, for he came in just now and said
that the window-cleaner and all his family were very ill.  This was a
joke, because the coachman had told him about my tart.  Wasn't it
horrid of him?


Woking, June 17th.

My own sweetest Maude,--I do want you to come up to town on Saturday
morning.  Then I will see you home to St. Albans in the evening, and
we shall have another dear delightful week end.  I think of nothing
else, and I count the hours.  Now please to manage it, and don't let
anything stop you.  You know that you can always get your way.  Oh
yes, you can, miss!  I know.

We shall meet at the bookstall at Charing Cross railway station at
one o'clock, but if anything should go wrong, send me a wire to the
Club.  Then we can do some shopping together, and have some fun also.
Tell your mother that we shall be back in plenty of time for dinner.
Make another tart, and I shall eat it.  Things are slack at the
office just now, and I could be spared for a few days.

So you have had a fish-slice.  It is so strange, because on that very
day I had my first present, and it was a fish-slice also.  We shall
have fish at each end when we give a dinner.  If we get another fish-
slice, then we shall give a fish-dinner--or keep one of the slices to
give to your friend Nelly Sheridan when SHE gets married.  They will
always come in useful.  And I have had two more presents.  One is a
Tantalus spirit-stand from my friends in the office.  The other is a
pair of bronzes from the cricket club.  They got it up without my
knowing anything about it, and I was amazed when a deputation came up
to my rooms with them last night.  'May your innings be long and your
partnership unbroken until you each make a hundred not out.'  That
was the inscription upon a card.

I have something very grave to tell you.  I've been going over my
bills and things, and I owe ever so much more than I thought.  I have
always been so careless, and never known exactly how I stood.  It did
not matter when one was a bachelor, for one always felt that one
could live quite simply for a few months, and so set matters
straight.  But now it is more serious.  The bills come to more than a
hundred pounds; the biggest one is forty-two pounds to Snell and
Walker, the Conduit Street tailors.  However, I am ordering my
marriage-suit from them, and that will keep them quiet.  I have
enough on hand to pay most of the others.  But we must not run short
upon our honeymoon--what an awful idea!  Perhaps there may be some
cheques among our presents.  We will hope for the best.

But there is a more serious thing upon which I want to consult you.
You asked me never to have any secrets from you, or else I should not
bother you about such things.  I should have kept it for Saturday
when we meet, but I want you to have time to think about it, so that
we may come to some decision then.

I am surety to a man for an indefinite sum of money.  It sounds
rather dreadful, does it not?  But it is not so bad as it sounds, for
there is no harm done yet.  But the question is what we should do in
the future about it, and the answer is not a very easy one.  He is a
very pleasant fellow, an insurance agent, and he got into some
trouble about his accounts last year.  The office would have
dismissed him, but as I knew his wife and his family, I became surety
that he should not go wrong again, and so I saved him from losing his
situation.  His name is Farintosh.  He is one of those amiable, weak,
good fellows whom you cannot help loving, although you never can
trust them.  Of course we could give notice that we should not be
responsible any longer, but it would be a thunderbolt to this poor
family, and the man would certainly be ruined.  We don't want to
begin our own happiness by making any one else unhappy, do we?  But
we shall talk it over, and I shall do what you advise.  You
understand that we are only liable in case he defaults, and surely it
is very unlikely that he will do so after the lesson that he has
already had.

I think the house will do splendidly.  The Lindens is the name, and
it is on the Maybury Road, not more than a quarter of a mile from the
station.  If your mother and you could come down on Tuesday or
Wednesday, I should get a half-day off, and you would be able to
inspect it.  Such a nice little lawn in front, and garden behind.  A
conservatory, if you please, dining-room and drawing-room.  You can
never assemble more than four or five guests.  On your at-home days,
we shall put up little placards as they do outside the theatres,
'Drawing-room full,' 'Dining-room full,' 'Room in the Conservatory.'
There are two good bedrooms, one large maid's room, and a lumber-
room.  One cook and one housemaid could run it beautifully.  Rent 50
pounds on a three years' lease--with taxes, about 62 pounds.  I think
it was just built for us.  Rupton Hale says that we must be careful
not to brush against the walls, and that it would be safer to go
outside to sneeze--but that is only his fun.

What a dull, stupid letter!  I do hope that I shall be in good form
on Saturday.  I am a man of moods--worse luck! and they come quite
regardless of how I wish to be, or even of how I have cause to be.  I
do hope that I shall make your day bright for you--the last day that
we shall have together before THE day.  There have been times when I
have been such bad company to you, just when I wished to be at my
best.  But you are always so sweet and patient and soothing.  Until
Saturday, then, my own darling.--Ever your lover, FRANK.

P.S.--I open this to tell you that such a gorgeous fish-knife, with
our monograms upon it, has just arrived from Mrs. Preston, my
father's old friend.  I went to the Goldsmith's Company in Regent
Street yesterday afternoon, and I bought--what do you think?  It
looks so beautiful upon its snow-white cotton wadding.  I like them
very broad and rather flat.  I do hope you will think it all right.
It fills me with the strangest feelings when I look at it.  Come what
may, foul weather or fair, sorrow or joy, that little strip of gold
will still be with us--we shall see it until we can see no more.

P.P.S.--Saturday!  Saturday!!  Saturday!!!



CHAPTER IV--THE TWO SOLOS



Their tryst was at the Charing Cross bookstall at one o'clock, and so
Mr. Frank Crosse was there at quarter-past twelve, striding
impatiently up and down, and stopping dead whenever a woman emerged
from the entrance, like a pointer dog before a partridge.  Before he
came he had been haunted by the idea that possibly Maude might have
an impulse to come early--and what if she were to arrive and not find
him there!  Every second of her company was so dear to him, that when
driving to meet her he had sometimes changed from one cab to another
upon the way, because the second seemed to have the faster horse.
But now that he was on the ground he realised that she was very exact
to her word, and that she would neither be early nor late.  And yet,
in the illogical fashion of a lover, he soon forgot that it was he
who was too soon, and he chafed and chafed as the minutes passed,
until at about quarter to one he was striding gloomily about with
despondent features and melancholy forebodings, imagining a thousand
miserable reasons for her inexplicable delay.  A good many people
stared at him as they passed, and we may do so among the number.

In person Frank Crosse was neither tall nor short, five feet eight
and a half to be exact, with the well-knit frame and springy step of
a young man who had been an athlete from his boyhood.  He was slim,
but wiry, and carried his head with a half-defiant backward slant
which told of pluck and breed.  His face was tanned brown, in spite
of his City hours, but his hair and slight moustache were flaxen, and
his eyes, which were his best features, were of a delicate blue, and
could vary in expression from something very tender to something
particularly hard.  He was an orphan, and had inherited nothing from
his parents save a dash of the artist from his mother.  It was not
enough to help him to earn a living, but it transformed itself into a
keen appreciation and some ambitions in literature, and it gave a
light and shade to his character which made him rather complex, and
therefore interesting.  His best friends could not deny the shade,
and yet it was but the shadow thrown by the light.  Strength,
virility, emotional force, power of deep feeling--these are traits
which have to be paid for.  There was sometimes just a touch of the
savage, or at least there were indications of the possibility of a
touch of the savage, in Frank Crosse.  His intense love of the open
air and of physical exercise was a sign of it.  He left upon women
the impression, not altogether unwelcome, that there were unexplored
recesses of his nature to which the most intimate of them had never
penetrated.  In those dark corners of the spirit either a saint or a
sinner might be lurking, and there was a pleasurable excitement in
peering into them, and wondering which it was.  No woman ever found
him dull.  Perhaps it would have been better for him if they had, for
his impulsive nature had never been long content with a chilly
friendship.  He was, as we may see, a man with a past, but it WAS a
past, now that Maude Selby had come like an angel of light across the
shadowed path of his life.  In age he was nearly twenty-seven.

There are one or two things which might be said for him which he
would not have said for himself.  He was an only child and an orphan,
but he had adopted his grandparents, who had been left penniless
through his father's death, and through all his struggles he had
managed to keep them happy and comfortable in a little cottage in
Worcestershire.  Nor did he ever tell them that he had a struggle--
fearing lest it should make their position painful; and so when their
quarterly cheque arrived, they took it as a kindly but not remarkable
act of duty upon the part of their wealthy grandson in the City, with
no suspicion as to the difference which their allowance was making to
him.  Nor did he himself look upon his action as a virtuous one, but
simply as a thing which must obviously be done.  In the meantime, he
had stuck closely to his work, had won rapid promotion in the
Insurance Office in which he had started as junior clerk, had gained
the goodwill of his superiors through his frank, unaffected ways, and
had been asked to play for the second Surrey eleven at cricket.  So
without going the length of saying that he was worthy of Maude Selby,
one might perhaps claim--if it could be done without endangering that
natural modesty which was one of his charms--that he was as worthy as
any other young man who was available.

That unfortunate artistic soul of his, which had been in the tropics
of expectation, and was now in the arctic of reaction, had just
finally settled down to black despair, with a grim recognition of the
fact that Maude had certainly and absolutely given him up, when one
boomed from the station clock, and on the very stroke she hurried on
to the platform.  How could he have strained his eyes after other
women, as if a second glance were ever needed when it was really she!
The perfectly graceful figure, the trimness and neatness of it, the
beautiful womanly poise of the head, the quick elastic step, he could
have sworn to her among ten thousand.  His heart gave a bound at the
sight of her, but he had the English aversion to giving himself away,
and so he walked quickly forward to meet her with an impassive face,
but with a look in his eyes which was all that she wanted.

'How are you?'

'How do you do?'

He stood for a few moments looking at her in silence.  She had on the
dress which he loved so much, a silver-grey merino skirt and jacket,
with a blouse of white pongee silk showing in front.  Some lighter
coloured trimming fringed the cloth.  She wore a grey toque, with a
dash of white at the side, and a white veil which softened without
concealing the dark brown curls and fresh girlish face beneath it.
Her gloves were of grey suede, and the two little pointed tan shoes
peeping from the edge of her skirt were the only touches of a darker
tint in her attire.  Crosse had the hereditary artist's eye, and he
could only stand and stare and enjoy it.  He was filled with
admiration, with reverence, and with wonder that this perfect thing
should really proclaim itself to be all his own.  Whatever had he
done, or could he do, to deserve it?

She looked up at him in a roguish sidelong way, with the bright
mischievous smile which was one of her charms.

'Well, sir, do you approve?'

'By Jove, it is splendid--beautiful!'

'So glad!  I hoped you would, since you are so fond of greys.
Besides, it is cooler in this weather.  I hope you have not been
waiting.'

'Oh no, that's all right.'

'You looked so solemn when first I saw you.'

'Did I?'

'And then you just jumped.'

'Did I?  I'm sorry.'

'Why?'

'I don't know.  I like our feelings to be our very very own, and
never to show them to any one else at all.  I dare say it is absurd,
but that is my instinct.'

'Never mind, dear, it wasn't such a big jump as all that.  Where are
we going?'

'Come here, Maude, into the waiting-room.'

She followed him into the gloomy, smoky, dingy room.  Bare yellow
benches framed an empty square of brown linoleum.  A labouring man
with his wife and a child sat waiting with the stolid patience of the
poor in one corner.  They were starting on some Saturday afternoon
excursion, and had mistimed their train.  Maude Selby and Frank
Crosse took the other corner.  He drew a jeweller's box from his
pocket and removed the lid.  Something sparkled among the wadding.

'O Frank!  Is that really it?'

'Do you like it?'

'What a broad one it is!  Mother's is quite thin.'

'They wear thin in time.'

'It is beautiful.  Shall I try it on?'

'No, don't.  There is some superstition about it.'

'But suppose it won't fit?'

'That is quite safe.  I measured it with your sapphire ring.'

'I haven't half scolded you enough about that sapphire ring.  How
could you go and give twenty-two guineas for a ring?--oh yes, sir,
that was the price, for I saw a duplicate yesterday in the
Goldsmith's Company.  You dear extravagant old boy!'

'I had saved the money.'

'But not for that!'

'For nothing half or quarter as important.  But I had the other to
the same size, so it is sure to fit.'

Maude had pushed up her veil, and sat with the little golden circlet
in her hand, looking down at it, while the dim watery London sunlight
poured through the window, and tagged all her wandering curls with a
coppery gleam.  It was a face beautiful in itself, but more beautiful
for its expression--sensitive, refined, womanly, full of innocent
archness and girlish mischief, but with a depth of expression in the
eyes, and a tender delicacy about the mouth, which spoke of a great
spirit with all its capacities for suffering and devotion within.
The gross admirer of merely physical charms might have passed her
over unnoticed.  So might the man who is attracted only by outward
and obvious signs of character.  But to the man who could see, to the
man whose own soul had enough of spirituality to respond to hers, and
whose eye could appreciate the subtlety of a beauty which is of the
mind as well as of the body, there was not in all wide London upon
that midsummer day a sweeter girl than Maude Selby, as she sat in her
grey merino dress with the London sun tagging her brown curls with
that coppery glimmer.

She handed back the ring, and a graver expression passed over her
mobile face.

'I feel as you said in your letter, Frank.  There IS something tragic
in it.  It will be with me for ever.  All the future will arrange
itself round that little ring.'

'Are you afraid of it?'

'Afraid!' her grey glove rested for an instant upon the back of his
hand.  'I COULDN'T be afraid of anything if you were with me.  It is
really extraordinary, for by nature I am so easily frightened.  But
if I were with you in a railway accident or anywhere, it would be
just the same.  You see I become for the time part of you, as it
were, and you are brave enough for two.'

'I don't profess to be so brave as all that,' said Frank.  'I expect
I have as many nerves as my neighbours.'

Maude's grey toque nodded up and down.  'I know all about that,' said
she.

'You have such a false idea of me.  It makes me happy at the time and
miserable afterwards, for I feel such a rank impostor.  You imagine
me to be a hero, and a genius, and all sorts of things, while I KNOW
that I am about as ordinary a young fellow as walks the streets of
London, and no more worthy of you than--well, than any one else is.'

She laughed with shining eyes.

'I like to hear you talk like that,' said she.  'That is just what is
so beautiful about you.'

It is hopeless to prove that you are not a hero when your disclaimers
are themselves taken as a proof of heroism.  Frank shrugged his
shoulders.

'I only hope you'll find me out gradually and not suddenly,' said he.
'Now, Maude, we have all day and all London before us.  What shall we
do?  I want you to choose.'

'I am quite happy whatever we do.  I am content to sit here with you
until evening.'

Her idea of a happy holiday set them both laughing.

'Come along,' said he, 'we shall discuss it as we go.'

The workman's family was still waiting, and Maude handed the child a
shilling as she went out.  She was so happy herself that she wanted
every one else to be happy also.  The people turned to look at her as
she passed.  With the slight flush upon her cheeks and the light in
her eyes, she seemed the personification of youth, and life, and
love.  One tall old gentleman started as he looked, and watched her
with a rapt face until she disappeared.  Some cheek had flushed and
some eye had brightened at his words once, and sweet old days had for
an instant lived again.

'Shall we have a cab?'

'O Frank, we must learn to be economical.  Let us walk.'

'I can't and won't be economical to-day.'

'There now!  See what a bad influence I have upon you.'

'Most demoralising!  But we have not settled yet where we are to go
to.'

'What DOES it matter, if we are together?'

'There is a good match at the Oval, the Australians against Surrey.
Would you care to see that?'

'Yes, dear, if you would.'

'And there are matinees at all the theatres.'

'You would rather be in the open air.'

'All I want is that you should enjoy yourself.'

'Never fear.  I shall do that.'

'Well, then, first of all I vote that we go and have some lunch.'

They started across the station yard, and passed the beautiful old
stone cross.  Among the hansoms and the four-wheelers, the hurrying
travellers, and the lounging cabmen, there rose that lovely
reconstruction of mediaevalism, the pious memorial of a great
Plantagenet king to his beloved wife.

'Six hundred years ago,' said Frank, as they paused and looked up,
'that old stone cross was completed, with heralds and armoured
knights around it to honour her whose memory was honoured by the
king.  Now the corduroyed porters stand where the knights stood, and
the engines whistle where the heralds trumpeted, but the old cross is
the same as ever in the same old place.  It is a little thing of that
sort which makes one realise the unbroken history of our country.'

Maude insisted upon hearing about Queen Eleanor, and Frank imparted
the little that he knew as they walked out into the crowded Strand.

'She was Edward the First's wife, and a splendid woman.  It was she,
you remember, who sucked the wound when he was stabbed with a
poisoned dagger.  She died somewhere in the north, and he had the
body carried south to bury it in Westminster Abbey.  Wherever it
rested for a night he built a cross, and so you have a line of
crosses all down England to show where that sad journey was broken.'

They had turned down Whitehall, and passed the big cuirassiers upon
their black chargers at the gate of the Horse Guards.  Frank pointed
to one of the windows of the old banqueting-hall.

'You've seen a memorial of a queen of England,' said he.  'That
window is the memorial of a king.'

'Why so, Frank?'

'I believe that it was through that window that Charles the First
passed out to the scaffold when his head was cut off.  It was the
first time that the people had ever shown that they claimed authority
over their king.'

'Poor fellow!' said Maude.  'He was so handsome, and such a good
husband and father.'

'It is the good kings who may be the dangerous ones.'

'O Frank!'

'If a king thinks only of pleasure, then he does not interfere with
matters of state.  But if he is conscientious, he tries to do what he
imagines to be his duty, and so he causes trouble.  Look at Charles,
for example.  He was a very good man, and yet he caused a civil war.
George the Third was a most exemplary character, but his stupidity
lost us America, and nearly lost us Ireland.  They were each
succeeded by thoroughly bad men, who did far less harm.'

They had reached the end of Whitehall, and the splendid panorama of
Westminster Abbey and the Houses of Parliament lay before them.  The
most stately of ancient English buildings was contrasted with the
most beautiful of modern ones.  How anything so graceful came to be
built by this tasteless and utilitarian nation must remain a marvel
to the traveller.  The sun was shining upon the gold-work of the
roof, and the grand towers sprang up amid the light London haze, like
some gorgeous palace in a dream.  It was a fit centre for the rule to
whose mild sway one-fifth of the human race acquiesces--a rule upheld
by so small a force that only the consent of the governed can sustain
it.

Frank and Maude stood together looking up at it.

'How beautiful it is!' she cried.  'How the gilding lights up the
whole building!'

'And how absurd it is not to employ it more in our gloomy London
architecture!' said Frank.  'Imagine how grand a gilded dome of St.
Paul's would look, hanging like a rising sun over the City.  But here
is our restaurant, Maude, and Big Ben says that it is a quarter to
two.



CHAPTER V--IN BRITAIN'S VALHALLA



They had discussed the rooms in their new house, and the bridesmaids'
dresses, and Maude's cooking, and marriage-presents, and the merits
of Brighton, and the nature of love, and volleying at tennis (Maude
was the lady-champion of a tennis club), and season tickets, and the
destiny of the universe--to say nothing of a small bottle of Perrier
Jouet.  It was reprehensibly extravagant, but this would be their
last unmarried excursion, and so they drank to the dear days of the
past, and the dearer ones of the future.  Good comrades as well as
lovers, they talked freely, and with pleasure.  Frank never made the
common mistake of talking down, and Maude justified his confidence by
eagerly keeping up.  To both of them silence was preferable to
conventional small talk.

'We'll just get down there after lunch,' said Frank, as he paid his
bill.  'You have not seen the Australians, have you?'

'Yes, dear, I saw them at Clifton four years ago.'

'But this is a new lot.  There are nine of the present team who have
never played in England before.'

'They are very good, are they not?'

'Very good indeed.  And the dry summer has helped them.  It is the
sticky English wickets which put them off.  The wickets are very fast
over there.  Giffen is their best all-round man, but Darling and
Iredale and young Hill are good enough for anything.  Well, then--O
Lord, what a pity!'

He had turned towards the window as he rose, and saw one of those
little surprises by which Nature relieves the monotony of life in
these islands.  The sun had gone, a ragged slate-coloured cloud was
drifting up from over the river, and the rain was falling with a soft
persistency which is more fatal than the most boisterous shower.
There would be no more cricket that day.

'Two coffees and two benedictines,' cried Frank, and they relapsed
into their chairs.  But a half-hour passed and the grey cloud was
thicker and the rain more heavy.  The cheerless leaden river flowed
slowly under drifting skies.  Beyond an expanse of shining pavement
the great black Abbey towered amidst the storm.

'Have you ever done the Abbey, Maude?'

'No, Frank; I should love to.'

'I have only been once--more shame to me to say so!  Is it not a sin
that we young Englishmen should be familiar with every music-hall in
London and should know so little of this which is the centre of the
British race, the most august and tremendous monument that ever a
nation owned.  Six hundred years ago the English looked upon it as
their holiest and most national shrine, and since then our kings and
our warriors and our thinkers and our poets have all been laid there,
until there is such an accumulation that the huge Abbey has hardly
space for another monument.  Let us spend an hour inside it.'

They made for Solomon's porch, since it was the nearest and they had
but the one umbrella.  Under its shelter they brushed themselves dry
before they entered.

'Whom does the Abbey belong to, Frank?'

'To you and me!'

'Now you are joking!'

'Not at all.  It belongs in the long-run to the British taxpayer.
You have heard the story of the Scotch visitor who came on board one
of our battleships and asked to see the captain.  "Who shall I say?"
said the sentry.  "One of the proprietors," said the Scotchman.
That's OUR position towards the Abbey.  Let us inspect our property.'

They were smiling as they entered, but the smile faded from their
lips as the door closed behind them.  In this holy of holies, this
inner sanctuary of the race, there was a sense of serene and
dignified solemnity which would have imposed itself upon the most
thoughtless.  Frank and Maude stood in mute reverence.  The high
arches shot up in long rows upon either side of them, straight and
slim as beautiful trees, until they curved off far up near the
clerestory and joined their sister curves to form the lightest, most
delicate tracery of stone.  In front of them a great rose-window of
stained glass, splendid with rich purples and crimsons, shone through
a subdued and reverent gloom.  Here and there in the aisles a few
spectators moved among the shadows, but all round along the walls two
and three deep were ranged the illustrious dead, the perishable body
within, the lasting marble without, and the more lasting name
beneath.  It was very silent in the home of the great dead--only a
distant footfall or a subdued murmur here and there.  Maude knelt
down and sank her face in her hands.  Frank prayed also with that
prayer which is a feeling rather than an utterance.

Then they began to move round the short transept in which they found
themselves--a part of the Abbey reserved for the great statesmen.
Frank tried to quote the passage in which Macaulay talks about the
men worn out by the stress and struggle of the neighbouring
parliament-hall, and coming hither for peace and rest.  Here were the
men who had been strong enough to grasp the helm, and who, sometimes
wisely, sometimes foolishly, but always honestly, had tried to keep
the old ship before the wind.  Canning and Peel were there, with
Pitt, Fox, Grattan and Beaconsfield.  Governments and oppositions
moulder behind the walls.  Beaconsfield alone among all the statues
showed the hard-lined face of the self-made man.  These others look
so plump and smooth one can hardly realise how strong they were, but
they sprang from those ruling castes to whom strength came by easy
inheritance.  Frank told Maude the little which he knew of each of
them--of Grattan, the noblest Irishman of them all, of Castlereagh,
whose coffin was pursued to the gates of the Abbey by a raging mob
who wished to tear out his corpse, of Fox the libertine philosopher,
of Palmerston the gallant sportsman, who rode long after he could
walk.  They marvelled together at the realism of the sculptor who had
pitted Admiral Warren with the smallpox, and at the absurdity of that
other one who had clad Robert Peel in a Roman toga.

Then turning to the right at the end of the Statesmen's Transept,
they wandered aimlessly down the huge nave.  It was overwhelming, the
grandeur of the roof above and of the contents below.  Any one of
hundreds of these tombs was worth a devout pilgrimage, but how could
one raise his soul to the appreciation of them all.  Here was Darwin
who revolutionised zoology, and here was Isaac Newton who gave a new
direction to astronomy.  Here were old Ben Jonson, and Stephenson the
father of railways, and Livingstone of Africa, and Wordsworth, and
Kingsley, and Arnold.  Here were the soldiers of the mutiny--Clyde
and Outram and Lawrence,--and painters, and authors, and surgeons,
and all the good sons who in their several degrees had done loyal
service to the old mother.  And when their service was done the old
mother had stretched out that long arm of hers and had brought them
home, and always for every good son brought home she had sent another
forth, and her loins were ever fruitful, and her children loving and
true.  Go into the Abbey and think, and as the nation's past is borne
in upon you, you will have no fear for its future.

Frank was delighted with some of the monuments and horrified by
others, and he communicated both his joy and his anger to Maude.
They noticed together how the moderns and the Elizabethans had much
in common in their types of face, their way of wearing the hair, and
their taste in monuments, while between them lie the intolerable
affectations--which culminated towards the end of last century.

'It all rings false--statue, inscription, everything,' said Frank.
'These insufferable allegorical groups sprawling round a dead hero
are of the same class as the pompous and turgid prose of Doctor
Johnson.  The greatest effects are the simplest effects, and so it
always was and so it always will be.  But that little bit of Latin is
effective, I confess.'

It was a very much defaced inscription underneath a battered
Elizabethan effigy, whose feet had been knocked off, and whose
features were blurred into nothing.  Two words of the inscription had
caught Frank's eye.

'Moestissima uxor!  It was his "most sad wife" who erected it!  Look
at it now!  The poor battered monument of a woman's love.  Now,
Maude, come with me, and we shall visit the famous Poets' Corner.'

What an assembly it would be if at some supreme day each man might
stand forth from the portals of his tomb.  Tennyson, the last and
almost the greatest of that illustrious line, lay under the white
slab upon the floor.  Maude and Frank stood reverently beside it.


'"Sunset and evening Star
And one clear call for me."'


Frank quoted.  'What lines for a very old man to write!  I should put
him second only to Shakespeare had I the marshalling of them.'

'I have read so little,' said Maude.

'We will read it all together after next week.  But it makes your
reading so much more real and intimate when you have stood at the
grave of the man who wrote.  That's Chaucer, the big tomb there.  He
is the father of British poetry.  Here is Browning beside Tennyson--
united in life and in death.  He was the more profound thinker, but
music and form are essential also.'

'What a splendid face!' cried Maude.

'It is a bust to Longfellow, the American.'  They read the
inscription.  'This bust was placed among the memorials of the poets
of England by English admirers of an American poet.'

'I am so glad to have seen that.  I know his poems so well,' said
Maude.

'I believe he is more read than any poet in England.'

'Who is that standing figure?'

'It is Dryden.  What a clever face, and what a modern type.  Here is
Walter Scott beside the door.  How kindly and humorous his expression
was!  And see how high his head was from the ear to the crown.  It
was a great brain.  There is Burns, the other famous Scot.  Don't you
think there is a resemblance between the faces?  And here are
Dickens, and Thackeray, and Macaulay.  I wonder whether, when
Macaulay was writing his essays, he had a premonition that he would
be buried in Westminster Abbey.  He is continually alluding to the
Abbey and its graves.  I always think that we have a vague intuition
as to what will occur to us in life.'

'We can guess what is probable.'

'It amounts to more than that.  I had an intuition that I should
marry you from the first day that I saw you, and yet it did not seem
probable.  But deep down in my soul I knew that I should marry you.'

'I knew that I should marry you, Frank, or else that I should never
marry at all.'

'There now!  We both had it.  Well, that IS really wonderful!'

They stood among the memorials of all those great people, marvelling
at the mysteries of their own small lives.  A voice at their elbows
brought them back to the present.

'This way, if you please, for the kings,' said the voice.  'They are
now starting for the kings.'

'They' proved to be a curiously mixed little group of people who were
waiting at the entrance through the enclosure for the arrival of the
official guide.  There were a tall red-bearded man with a very Scotch
accent and a small gentle wife, also an American father with his two
bright and enthusiastic daughters, a petty-officer of the navy in his
uniform, two young men whose attention was cruelly distracted from
the monuments by the American girls, and a dozen other travellers of
various sexes and ages.  Just as Maude and Frank joined them the
guide, a young fresh-faced fellow, came striding up, and they passed
through the opening into the royal burying-ground.

'This way, ladies and gentlemen,' cried the hurrying guide, and they
all clattered over the stone pavement.  He stopped beside a tomb upon
which a lady with a sad worn face was lying.  'Mary, Queen of Scots,'
said he, 'the greatest beauty of her day.  This monument was erected
by her son, James the First.'

'Isn't she just perfectly sweet?' said one of the American girls.

'Well, I don't know.  I expected more of her than that,' the other
answered.

'I reckon,' remarked the father, 'that if any one went through as
much as that lady did, it would not tend to improve her beauty.  Now
what age might the lady be, sir?'

'Forty-four years of age at the time of her execution,' said the
guide.

'Ah weel, she's young for her years,' muttered the Scotchman, and the
party moved on.  Frank and Maude lingered to have a further look at
the unfortunate princess, the bright French butterfly, who wandered
from the light and warmth into that grim country, a land of blood and
of psalms.

'She was as hard as nails under all her gentle grace,' said Frank.
'She rode eighty miles and hardly drew rein after the battle of
Langside.'

'She looks as if she were tired, poor dear!' said Maude; 'I don't
think that she was sorry to be at rest.'

The guide was narrating the names of the owners of the tombs at the
further end of the chapel.  'Queen Anne is here, and Mary the wife of
William the Third is beside her.  And here is William himself.  The
king was very short and the queen very tall, so in the sculptures the
king is depicted standing upon a stool so as to bring their heads
level.  In the vaults beyond there are thirty-eight Stuarts.'

Thirty-eight Stuarts!  Princes, bishops, generals, once the salt of
the earth, the mightiest of men, and now lumped carelessly together
as thirty-eight Stuarts.  So Death the Republican and Time the
Radical can drag down the highest from his throne.

They had followed the guide into another small chapel, which bore the
name of Henry VII. upon the door.  Surely they were great builders
and great designers in those days!  Had stone been as pliable as wax
it could not have been twisted and curved into more exquisite spirals
and curls, so light, so delicate, so beautiful, twining and turning
along the walls, and drooping from the ceiling.  Never did the hand
of man construct anything more elaborately ornate, nor the brain of
man think out a design more absolutely harmonious and lovely.  In the
centre, with all the pomp of mediaeval heraldry, starred and spangled
with the Tudor badges, the two bronze figures of Henry and his wife
lay side by side upon their tomb.  The guide read out the quaint
directions in the king's will, by which they were to be buried 'with
some respect to their Royal dignity, but avoiding damnable pomp and
outrageous superfluities!'  There was, as Frank remarked, a fine
touch of the hot Tudor blood in the adjectives.  One could guess
where Henry the Eighth got his masterful temper.  Yet it was an
ascetic and priest-like face which looked upwards from the tomb.

They passed the rifled tombs of Cromwell, Blake, and Ireton--the
despicable revenge of the men who did not dare to face them in the
field,--and they marked the grave of James the First, who erected no
monument to himself, and so justified in death the reputation for
philosophy which he had aimed at in his life.  Then they inspected
the great tomb of Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, as surprising and as
magnificent as his history, cast a glance at the covering of plucky
little George the Second, the last English king to lead his own army
into battle, and so onwards to see the corner of the Innocents, where
rest the slender bones of the poor children murdered in the Tower.

But now the guide had collected his little flock around him again,
with the air of one who has something which is not to be missed.
'You will stand upon the step to see the profile,' said he, as he
indicated a female figure upon a tomb.  'It is the great Queen
Elizabeth.'

It was a profile and a face worth seeing--the face of a queen who was
worthy of her Shakespeares upon the land and her Drakes upon the sea.
Had the Spanish king seen her, he would have understood that she was
not safe to attack--this grim old lady with the eagle nose and the
iron lips.  You could understand her grip upon her cash-box, you
could explain her harshness to her lovers, you could realise the
confidence of her people, you could read it all in that wonderful
face.

'She's splendid,' said Frank.

'She's terrible,' said Maude.

'Did I understand you to say, sir,' asked the American, 'that it was
this lady who beheaded the other lady, Queen of Scotland, whom we saw
'way back in the other compartment?'

'Yes, sir, she did.'

'Well, I guess if there was any beheading to be done, this was the
lady to see that it was put through with promptness and despatch.
Not a married lady, I gather?'

'No, sir.'

'And a fortunate thing for somebody.  That woman's husband would have
a mean time of it, sir, in my opinion.'

'Hush, poppa,' said the two daughters, and the procession moved on.
They were entering the inner chapel of all, the oldest and the
holiest, in which, amid the ancient Plantagenet kings, there lies
that one old Saxon monarch, confessor and saint, the holy Edward,
round whose honoured body the whole of this great shrine has
gradually risen.  A singular erection once covered with mosaic work,
but now bare and gaunt, stood in the centre.

'The body of Edward the Confessor is in a case up at the top,' said
the guide.  'This hollow place below was filled with precious relics,
and the pilgrims used to kneel in these niches, which are just large
enough to hold a man upon his knees.  The mosaic work has been picked
out by the pilgrims.'

'What is the date of the shrine?' asked Frank.

'About 1250, sir.  The early kings were all buried as near to it as
they could get, for it was their belief in those days that the devil
might carry off the body, and so the nearer they got to the shrine
the safer they felt.  Henry the Fifth, who won the battle of
Agincourt, is there.  Those are the actual helmet, shield, and saddle
which he used in the battle upon the crossbeam yonder.  That king
with the grave face and the beard is Edward the Third, the father of
the Black Prince.  The Black Prince never lived to ascend the throne,
but he was the father of the unfortunate Richard the Second, who lies
here--this clean-shaven king with the sharp features.  Now, ladies
and gentlemen, if you will turn this way, I will show you one of the
most remarkable objects in the Abbey.'

The object in question proved to be nothing more singular than a
square block of stone placed under an old chair.  And yet as the
guide continued to speak, they felt that he had justified his words.

'This is the sacred stone of Scone upon which the kings of Scotland
have been crowned from time immemorial.  When Edward the First
overran Scotland 600 years ago, he had it brought here, and since
then every monarch of England has also sat upon it when crowned.'

'The present Queen?' asked some one.

'Yes, she also.  The legend was that it was the stone upon which
Jacob rested his head when he dreamed, but the geologists have proved
that it is red sandstone of Scotland.'

'Then I understand, sir, that this other throne is the Scottish
throne,' said the American gentleman.

'No, sir, the Scottish throne and the English throne are the same
throne.  But at the time of William and Mary it was necessary to
crown her as well as him, and so a second throne was needed.  But
that of course was modern.'

'Only a couple of hundred years ago.  I wonder they let it in.  But I
guess they might have taken better care of it.  Some one has carved
his name upon it.'

'A Westminster boy bet his schoolfellows that he would sleep among
the tombs, and to prove that he had done it, he carved his name upon
the throne.'

'You don't say!' cried the American.  'Well, I guess that boy ended
pretty high up.'

'As high as the gallows, perhaps,' said Frank, and every one
tittered, but the guide hurried on with a grave face, for the dignity
of the Abbey was in his keeping.

'This tomb is that of Queen Eleanor,' said he.

Frank twitched Maude by the sleeve.  'Eleanor of Charing Cross,' said
he.  'See how one little bit of knowledge links on with another.'

'And here is the tomb of her husband, Edward the First.  It was he
who brought the stone from Scone.  At the time of his death the
conquest of Scotland was nearly done, and he gave orders that his
burial should be merely temporary until Scotland was thoroughly
subdued.  He is still, as you perceive, in his temporary tomb.'

The big Scotchman laughed loudly and derisively.  All the others
looked sadly at him with the pitying gaze which the English use
towards the more excitable races when their emotion gets the better
of them.  A stream from a garden hose could not have damped him more.

'They opened the grave last century,' said the guide.  'Inside was an
inscription, which said, "Here lies the hammer of the Scots."  He was
a fine man, six feet two inches from crown to sole.'

They wandered out of the old shrine where the great Plantagenet kings
lie like a bodyguard round the Saxon saint.  Abbots lay on one side
of them as they passed, and dead crusaders with their legs crossed,
upon the other.  And then, in an instant, they were back in
comparatively modern times again.

'This is the tomb of Wolfe, who died upon the Heights of Abraham,'
said the guide.  'It was due to him and to his soldiers that all
America belongs to the English-speaking races.  There is a picture of
his Highlanders going up to the battle along the winding path which
leads from Wolfe's Cove.  He died in the moment of victory.'

It was bewildering, the way in which they skipped from age to age.
The history of England appeared to be not merely continuous, but
simultaneous, as they turned in an instant from the Georgian to the
Elizabethan, the one monument as well preserved as the other.  They
passed the stately de Vere, his armour all laid out in fragments upon
a marble slab, as a proof that he died at peace with all men; and
they saw the terrible statue of the onslaught of Death, which, viewed
in the moonlight, made a midnight robber drop his booty and fly
panic-stricken out of the Abbey.  So awful and yet so fascinating is
it, that the shuffling feet of the party of sightseers had passed out
of hearing before Maude and Frank could force themselves away from
it.

In the base of the statue is an iron door, which has been thrown
open, and the sculptor's art has succeeded wonderfully in convincing
you that it has been thrown open violently.  The two leaves of it
seem still to quiver with the shock, and one could imagine that one
heard the harsh clang of the metal.  Out of the black opening had
sprung a dreadful thing, something muffled in a winding-sheet, one
bony hand clutching the edge of the pedestal, the other upraised to
hurl a dart at the woman above him.  She, a young bride of twenty-
seven, has fallen fainting, while her husband, with horror in his
face, is springing forward, his hand outstretched, to get between his
wife and her loathsome assailant.

'I shall dream of this,' said Maude.  She had turned pale, as many a
woman has before this monument.

'It is awful!'  Frank walked backwards, unable to take his eyes from
it.  'What pluck that sculptor had!  It is an effect which must be
either ludicrous or great, and he has made it great.'

'Roubillac is his name,' said Maude, reading it from the pedestal.

'A Frenchman, or a man of French descent.  Isn't that characteristic!
In the whole great Abbey the one monument which has impressed us with
its genius and imagination is by a foreigner.  We haven't got it in
us.  We are too much afraid of letting ourselves go and of giving
ourselves away.  We are heavy-handed and heavy-minded.'

'If we can't produce the monuments, we can produce the men who
deserve them,' said Maude, and Frank wrote the aphorism down upon his
shirt-cuff.

'We are too severe both in sculpture and architecture,' said he.
'More fancy and vigour in our sculptors, more use of gold and more
ornament in our architects--that is what we want.  But I think it is
past praying for.  It would be better to subdivide the work of the
world, according to the capacity of the different nations.  Let Italy
and France embellish us.  We might do something in exchange--organise
the French colonies, perhaps, or the Italian exchequer.  That is our
legitimate work, but we will never do anything at the other.'

The guide had already reached the end of his round, an iron gate
corresponding to that by which they had entered, and they found him
waiting impatiently and swinging his keys.  But Maude's smile and
word of thanks as she passed him brought content into his face once
more.  A ray of living sunshine is welcome to the man who spends his
days among the tombs.

They walked down the North Transept and out through Solomon's Porch.
The rain-cloud had swept over, and the summer sun was shining upon
the wet streets, turning them all to gold.  This might have been that
fabled London of which young Whittington dreamed.  In front of them
lay the lawns of vivid green, with the sunlit raindrops gleaming upon
the grass.  The air was full of the chirping of the sparrows.  Across
their vision, from the end of Whitehall to Victoria Street, the black
ribbon of traffic whirled and circled, one of the great driving-belts
of the huge city.  Over it all, to their right, towered those
glorious Houses of Parliament, the very sight of which made Frank
repent his bitter words about English architecture.  They stood in
the old porch gazing at the scene.  It was so wonderful to come back
at one stride from the great country of the past to the greater
country of the present.  Here was the very thing which these dead men
lived and died to build.

'It's not much past three,' said Frank.  'What a gloomy place to take
you to!  Good heavens, we have one day together, and I take you to a
cemetery!  Shall we go to a matinee to counteract it?'

But Maude laid her hand upon his arm.

'I don't think, Frank, that I was ever more impressed, or learned
more in so short a time, in my life.  It was a grand hour--an hour
never to be forgotten.  And you must not think that I am ever with
you to be amused.  I am with you to accompany you in whatever seems
to you to be highest and best.  Now before we leave the dear old
Abbey, promise me that you will always live your own highest and
never come down to me.'

'I can very safely promise that I will never come down to you,' said
Frank.  'I may climb all my life, and yet there are parts of your
soul which will be like snow-peaks in the clouds to me.  But you will
be now and always my own dear comrade as well as my sweetest wife.
And now, Maude, what shall it be, the theatre or the Australians?'

'Do you wish to go to either very much?'

'Not unless you do.'

'Well, then, I feel as if either would be a profanation.  Let us walk
together down to the Embankment, and sit on one of the benches there,
and watch the river flowing in the sunshine, and talk and think of
all that we have seen.'



CHAPTER VI--TWO SOLOS AND A DUET



The night before the wedding, Frank Crosse and his best man, Rupton
Hale, dined at the Raleigh Club with Maude's brother, Jack Selby, who
was a young lieutenant in a Hussar regiment.  Jack was a horsy,
slangy young sportsman who cared nothing about Frank's worldly
prospects, but had given the match his absolute approval from the
moment that he realised that his future brother had played for the
Surrey Second.  'What more can you want?' said he.  'You won't
exactly be a Mrs. W. G., but you will be on the edge of first-class
cricket.'  And Maude, who rejoiced in his approval, without quite
understanding the grounds for it, kissed him, and called him the best
of brothers.

The marriage was to be at eleven o'clock at St. Monica's Church, and
the Selbys were putting up at the Langham.  Frank stayed at the
Metropole, and so did Rupton Hale.  They were up early, their heads
and nerves none the better for Jack Selby's hospitality of the night
before.

Frank could eat no breakfast, and he shunned publicity in his
wedding-garments, so they remained in the upstairs sitting-room.  He
stood by the window, drumming his fingers upon the pane, and looking
down into Northumberland Avenue.  He had often pictured this day, and
associated it with sunshine and flowers and every emblem of joy.  But
Nature had not risen to the occasion.  A thick vapour, half smoke
half cloud, drifted along the street, and a thin persistent rain was
falling steadily.  It pit-patted upon the windows, splashed upon the
sills, and gurgled in the water-pipes.  Far down beneath him on the
drab-coloured slimy road stood the lines of wet cabs, looking like
beetles with glistening backs.  Round black umbrellas hurried along
the shining pavements.  A horse had fallen at the door of the
Constitutional Club, and an oil-skinned policeman was helping the
cabman to raise it.  Frank watched it until the harness had been
refastened, and it had vanished into Trafalgar Square.  Then he
turned and examined himself in the mirror.  His trim black frock-coat
and pearl grey trousers set off his alert athletic figure to
advantage.  His glossy hat, too, his lavender gloves, and dark-blue
tie, were all absolutely irreproachable.  And yet he was not
satisfied with himself.  Maude ought to have something better than
that.  What a fool he had been to take so much wine last night!  On
this day of all days in their lives she surely had a right to find
him at his best.  He was restless, and his nerves were all quivering.
He would have given anything for a cigarette, but he did not wish to
scent himself with tobacco.  He had cut himself in shaving, and his
nose was peeling from a hot day on the cricket-field.  What a silly
thing to expose his nose to the sun before his wedding!  Perhaps when
Maude saw it she would--well, she could hardly break it off, but at
least she might be ashamed of him.  He worked himself into a fever
over that unfortunate nose.

'You are off colour, Crosse,' said his best man.

'I was just thinking that my nose was.  It's very kind of you to come
and stand by me.'

'That's all right.  We shall see it through together.'

Hale was a despondent man, though the most loyal of friends, and he
spoke in a despondent way.  His gloomy manner, the London drizzle,
and the nervousness proper to the occasion, were all combining to
make Frank more and more wretched.  Fortunately Jack Selby burst like
a gleam of sunshine into the room.  The sight of his fresh-coloured
smiling face--or it may have been some reminder of Maude which he
found in it--brought consolation to the bridegroom.

'How are you, Crosse?  How do, Hale?  Excuse my country manners!  The
old Christmas-tree in the hall wanted to send for you, but I knew
your number.  You're looking rather green about the gills, old chap.'

'I feel a little chippy to-day.'

'That's the worst of these cheap champagnes.  Late hours are bad for
the young.  Have a whisky and soda with me.  No?  Hale, you must buck
him up, for they'll all be down on you if you don't bring your man up
to time in the pink of condition.  We certainly did ourselves up to
the top hole last night.  Couldn't face your breakfast, eh?  Neither
could I.  A strawberry and a bucket of soda-water.'

'How are they all at the Langham?' asked Frank eagerly.

'Oh, splendid!  At least I haven't seen Maude.  She's been getting
into parade order.  But mother is full of beans.  We had to take her
up one link in the curb, or there would have been no holding her.'

Frank's eyes kept turning to the slow-moving minute-hand.  It was not
ten o'clock yet.

'Don't you think that I might go round to the Langham and see them?'

'Good Lord, no!  Clean against regulations.  Stand by his head, Hale!
Wo, boy, steady!'

'It won't do, Crosse, it really won't!' said Hale solemnly.

'What rot it is!  Here am I doing nothing, and I might be of some use
or encouragement to her.  Let's get a cab!'

'Wo, laddie, wo then, boy!  Keep him in hand, Hale!  Get to his
head.'

Frank flung himself down into an armchair, and muttered about absurd
conventions.

'It can't be helped, my boy.  It is correct.'

'Buck up, Crosse, buck up!  We'll make the thing go with a buzz when
we do begin.  Two of our Johnnies are coming, regular fizzers, and
full of blood both of them.  We'll paint the Langham a fine bright
solferino, when the church parade is over.'

Frank sat rather sulkily watching the slow minute-hand, and listening
to the light-hearted chatter of the boy-lieutenant, and the more
deliberate answers of his best man.  At last he jumped up and seized
his hat and gloves.

'Half-past,' said he.  'Come on.  I can't wait any longer.  I must do
SOMETHING.  It is time we went to the church.'

'Fall in for the church!' cried Jack.  'Wait a bit!  I know this
game, for I was best man myself last month.  Inspect his kit, Hale.
See that he's according to regulations.  Ring?  All right.  Parson's
money?  Right oh!  Small change?  Good!  By the right, quick march!'

Frank soon recovered his spirits now that he had something to do.
Even that drive through the streaming streets, with the rain
pattering upon the top of their four-wheeler, could not depress him
any longer.  He rose to the level of Jack Selby, and they chattered
gaily together.

'Ain't we bringing him up fighting fit?' cried Jack exultingly.
'Shows that all the care we have taken of him in the last twenty-four
hours has not been wasted.  That's the sort I like--game as a pebble!
You can't buy 'em, you have to breed 'em.  A regular fizzer HE is,
and full of blood.  And here we are on the ground.'

It was a low, old-fashioned, grey church, with a Gothic entrance and
two niches on either side, which spoke of pre-Lutheran days.  Cheap
modern shops, which banked it in, showed up the quaint dignity of the
ancient front.  The side-door was open, and they passed into its dim-
lit interior, with high carved pews, and rich, old, stained glass.
Huge black oak beams curved over their heads, and dim inscriptions of
mediaeval Latin curled and writhed upon the walls.  A single step
seemed to have taken them from the atmosphere of the nineteenth to
that of the fifteenth century.

'What a ripping old church!' Jack whispered.

'You can't buy 'em.  But it's as festive as an ice-house.  There's a
friendly native coming down the aisle.  He's your man, Hale, if you
want the news.'

The verger was not in the best of tempers.  'It's at a quarter to
four,' said he, as Hale met him.

'No, no, at eleven.'

'Quarter to four, I tell you.  The vicar says so.'

'Why, it's not possible.'

'We have them at all hours.'

'Have what?'

'Buryin's.'

'But this is a marriage.'

'I'm sure I beg your pardon, sir.  I thought when I looked at you as
you was the party about the child's funeral.'

'Good heavens, no.'

'It was something in your expression, sir, but now that I can see the
colour of your clothes, why of course I know better.  There's three
marriages--which was it?'

'Crosse and Selby are the names.'

The verger consulted an old crumpled notebook.

'Yes, sir, I have it here.  Mr. or Miss Crosse to Mr. or Miss Selby.
Eleven o'clock, sir, SHARP.  The vicar's a terrible punctual man, and
I should advise you to take your places.'

'Any hitch?' asked Frank nervously, as Hale returned.

'No, no.'

'What was he talking about?'

'Oh, nothing.  Some little confusion of ideas.'

'Shall we go up?'

'Yes, I think that we had better.'

Their steps clattered and reverberated through the empty church as
they passed up the aisle.  They stood in an aimless way before the
altar rails.  Frank fidgeted about, and made sure that the ring was
in his ticket-pocket.  He also took a five-pound note and placed it
where he knew he could lay his hands upon it easily.  Then he sprang
round with a flush upon his cheeks, for one of the side-doors had
been flung open with a great bustle and clanging.  A stout charwoman
entered with a tin pail and a mop.

'Put up the wrong bird that time,' whispered Jack, and sniggered at
Frank's change of expression.

But almost at the same instant, the Selbys entered the church at the
further end.  Mr. Selby, with his red face and fluffy side-whiskers,
had Maude upon his arm.  She looked very pale and very sweet, with
downcast eyes and solemn mouth, while behind her walked her younger
sister Mary and her pretty friend Nelly Sheridan, both in pink
dresses with broad pink hats and white curling feathers.  The bride
was herself in the grey travelling-dress with which Frank was already
familiar by its description in her letter.  Its gentle tint and her
tenderly grave expression made a charming effect.  Behind them was
the mother, still young and elegant, with something of Maude's grace
in her figure and carriage.  As the party came up the aisle, Frank
was to be restrained no longer.  'Get to his head!' cried Jack to
Hale in an excited whisper, but their man was already hurrying to
shake hands with Maude.  He walked up on her right, and they took
their position in two little groups, the happy couple in the centre.
At the same moment the clang of the church-clock sounded above them,
and the vicar, shrugging his shoulders to get his white surplice into
position, came bustling out of the vestry.  To him it was all the
most usual, commonplace, and unimportant thing in the world, and both
Frank and Maude were filled with amazement at the nonchalant way in
which he whipped out a prayer-book, and began to rapidly perform the
ceremony.  It was all so new and solemn and all-important to them,
that they had expected something mystic and overpowering in the
function, and yet here was this brisk little man, with an obvious
cold in his head, tying them up in as business-like a fashion as a
grocer uniting two parcels.  After all, he had to do it a thousand
times a year, and so he could not be extravagant in his emotions.

The singular service was read out to them, the exhortations, and the
explanations, sometimes stately, sometimes beautiful, sometimes
odious.  Then the little vicar turned upon Frank--'Wilt thou have
this woman to thy wedded wife, to live together after God's ordinance
in the holy estate of matrimony?  Wilt thou love her, comfort her,
honour her, in sickness and in health, and forsaking all other, keep
thee only unto her as long as ye both shall live?'

'I will,' cried Frank, with conviction.

'And wilt thou have this man to thy wedded husband, to live together
after God's ordinance in the holy estate of matrimony?  Wilt thou
obey him, and serve him, love, honour, and keep him, in sickness and
in health, and forsaking all other, keep thee only unto him so long
as ye both shall live?'

'I will,' said Maude, from her heart.

'Who giveth this woman to be married to this man?'

'I do.  Mr. John Selby--her father, you know.'

And then in turn they repeated the fateful words--'I take thee to
have and to hold from this day forward, for better, for worse, for
richer, for poorer, in sickness and in health, to love, cherish, and
obey, till death us do part, according to God's holy ordinance, and
thereto I give thee my troth.'

'Ring!  Ring!' said Hale.

'Ring, you Juggins!' whispered Jack Selby.

Frank thrust his hands frantically into all his pockets.  The ring
was in the last one which he attempted.  But the bank-note was not to
be found.  He remembered that he had put it in some safe place.
Where could it have been?  Was it in his boot, or in the lining of
his hat?  No, surely he could not have done anything so infatuated.
Again he took his pockets two at a time, while a dreadful pause came
in the ceremony.

'Vestry--afterwards,' whispered the clergyman.

'Here you are!' gasped Frank.  He had come upon it in a last
desperate dive into his watch-pocket, in which he never by any chance
kept anything.  Of course it was for that very reason, that it might
be alone and accessible, that he had placed it there.  Ring and note
were handed to the vicar, who deftly concealed the one and returned
the other.  Then Maude's little white hand was outstretched, and over
the third finger Frank slipped the circlet of gold.

'With this ring I thee wed,' said Frank, 'and with my body I thee
worship (he paused, and made a mental emendation of 'with my soul
also'), and with all my worldly goods I thee endow.'

There was a prayer, and then the vicar joined the two hands, the
muscular sunburned one and the dainty white one, with the new ring
gleaming upon it.

'Those whom God hath joined together, let no man put asunder,' said
he.  'Forasmuch as Francis Crosse and Maude Selby have consented
together in holy wedlock, and have witnessed the same before God and
this company, and thereto have given and pledged their troth, either
to other, and have declared the same by giving and receiving of a
ring, and by joining of hands; I pronounce that they be man and wife
together.'

There now, it was done!  They were one, never more to part until the
coffin-lid closed over one or the other.  They were kneeling together
now, and the vicar was rapidly repeating some psalms and prayers.
But Frank's mind was not with the ritual.  He looked slantwise at the
graceful, girlish figure by his side.  Her hair hung beautifully over
her white neck, and the reverent droop of her head was lovely to his
eyes.  So gentle, so humble, so good, so beautiful, and all his, his
sworn life-companion for ever!  A gush of tenderness flowed through
his heart for her.  His love had always been passionate, but, for the
instant, it was heroic, tremendous in its unselfishness.  Might he
bring her happiness, the highest which woman could wish for!  God
grant that he might do so!  But if he were to make her unhappy, or to
take anything from her beauty and her goodness, then he prayed that
he might die now, at this supreme moment, kneeling at her side before
the altar rails.  So intense was his prayer that he looked up
expectantly at the altar, as if in the presence of an imminent
catastrophe.  But every one had risen to their feet, and the service
was at an end.  The vicar led the way, and they all followed him,
into the vestry.  There was a general murmur all round them of
congratulation and approval.

'Heartiest congratulations, Crosse!' said Hale.

'Bravo, Maude, you looked ripping!' cried Jack, kissing his sister.
'By Jove, it simply went with a buzz from the word "go."'

'You sign it here and here,' said the vicar, 'and the witnesses here
and here.  Thank you very much.  I am sure that I wish you every
happiness.  I need not detain you by any further formality.'

And so, with a curious dream-like feeling, Frank Crosse and Maude
found themselves walking down the aisle, he very proud and erect, she
very gentle and shy, while the organ thundered the wedding-march.
Carriages were waiting:  he handed in his wife, stepped in after her,
and they drove off, amidst a murmur of sympathy from a little knot of
idlers who had gathered in the porch, partly from curiosity, and
partly to escape the rain.

Maude had often driven alone with Frank before, but now she felt
suddenly constrained and shy.  The marriage-service, with all its
half-understood allusions and exhortations, had depressed and
frightened her.  She hardly dared to glance at her husband.  But he
soon led her out of her graver humour.

'Name, please?' said he.

'O Frank!'

'Name, if YOU please?'

'Why, you know.'

'Say it.'

'Maude.'

'That all?'

'Maude Crosse--O Frank!'

'You blessing!  How grand it sounds!  O Maude, what a jolly old world
it is!  Isn't it pretty to see the rain falling?  And aren't the
shining pavements lovely?  And isn't everything splendid, and am I
not the luckiest--the most incredibly lucky of men.  Dear girlie,
give me your hand!  I can feel IT under the glove.  Now, sweetheart,
you are not frightened, are you?'

'Not now.'

'You were?'

'Yes, I was a little.  O Frank, you won't tire of me, will you?  I
should break my heart if you did.'

'Tire of you!  Good heavens!  Now you'll never guess what I was doing
while the parson was telling us about what Saint Paul said to the
Colossians, and all the rest of it.'

'I know perfectly well what you were doing.  And you shouldn't have
done it.'

'What was I doing, then?'

'You were staring at me.'

'Oh, you saw that, did you?'

'I felt it.'

'Well, I was.  But I was praying also.'

'Were you, Frank?'

'When I saw you kneeling there, so sweet and pure and good, I seemed
to realise how you had been given into my keeping for life, and I
prayed with all my heart that if I should ever injure you in thought,
or word, or deed, I might drop dead now before I had time to do it.'

'O Frank, what a dreadful prayer!'

'But I felt it and I wished it, and I could not help it.  My own
darling, there you are just a living angel, the gentlest, most
sensitive, and beautiful living creature that walks the earth, and
please God I shall keep you so, and ever higher and higher if such a
thing is possible, and if ever I say a word or do a deed that seems
to lower you, then remind me of this moment, and send me back to try
to live up to our highest ideal again.  And I for my part will try to
improve myself and to live up to you, and to bridge more and more the
gap that is between us, that I may feel myself not altogether
unworthy of our love.  And so we shall act and re-act upon each
other, ever growing better and wiser, and dating what is best and
brightest in our minds and souls from the day that we were married.
And that's MY idea of a marriage-service, and here endeth the first
lesson, and the windows are blurred with rain, and hang the coachman,
and it's hard lines if a man may not kiss his own wife--you
blessing!'

A broad-brimmed hat with a curling feather is not a good shape for
driving with an ardent young bridegroom in a discreetly rain-blurred
carriage.  Frank demonstrated the fact, and it took them all the way
to the Langham to get those pins driven home again.  And then after
an abnormal meal, which was either a very late breakfast or a very
early lunch, they drove on to Victoria Station, from which they were
to start for Brighton.  Jack Selby and the two regimental fizzers,
who had secured immortality for the young couple, if the deep and
constant drinking of healths could have done it, had provided
themselves with packages of rice, old slippers, and other time-
honoured missiles.  On a hint from Maude, however, that she would
prefer a quiet departure, Frank coaxed the three back into the
luncheon-room with a perfectly guileless face, and then locking the
door on the outside, handed the key and a half-sovereign to the head-
waiter, with instructions to release the prisoners when the carriage
had gone--an incident which in itself would cause the judicious
observer to think that, given the opportunity, Mister Frank Crosse
had it in him to go pretty far in life.  And so, quietly and soberly,
they rolled away upon their first journey--the journey which was the
opening of that life's journey, the goal of which no man may see.



CHAPTER VII--KEEPING UP APPEARANCES



It was in the roomy dining-room of the Hotel Metropole at Brighton.
Maude and Frank were seated at the favourite small round table near
the window, where they always lunched.  Their immediate view was a
snowy-white tablecloth with a shining centre dish of foppish little
cutlets, each with a wisp of ornamental paper, and a surrounding bank
of mashed potatoes.  Beyond, from the very base of the window, as it
seemed, there stretched the huge expanse of the deep blue sea, its
soothing mass of colour broken only by a few white leaning sails upon
the furthest horizon.  Along the sky-line the white clouds lay in
carelessly piled cumuli, like snow thrown up from a clearing.  It was
restful and beautiful, that distant view, but just at the moment it
was the near one which interested them most.  Though they lose from
this moment onwards the sympathy of every sentimental reader, the
truth must be told that they were thoroughly enjoying their lunch.

With the wonderful adaptability of women--a hereditary faculty, which
depends upon the fact that from the beginning of time the sex has
been continually employed in making the best of situations which were
not of their own choosing--Maude carried off her new character easily
and gracefully.  In her trim blue serge dress and sailor hat, with
the warm tint of yesterday's sun upon her cheeks, she was the very
picture of happy and healthy womanhood.  Frank was also in a blue
serge boating-suit, which was appropriate enough, for they spent most
of their time upon the water, as a glance at his hands would tell.
Their conversation was unhappily upon a very much lower plane than
when we overheard them last.

'I've got such an appetite!'

'So have I, Frank.'

'Capital.  Have another cutlet.'

'Thank you, dear.'

'Potatoes?'

'Please.'

'I always thought that people on their honeymoon lived on love.'

'Yes, isn't it dreadful, Frank?  We must be so material.'

'Good old mother Nature!  Cling on to her skirt and you never lose
your way.  One wants a healthy physical basis for a healthy spiritual
emotion.  Might I trouble you for the pickles?'

'Are you happy, Frank?'

'Absolutely and completely.'

'Quite, QUITE sure?'

'I never was quite so sure of anything.'

'It makes me so happy to hear you say so.'

'And you?'

'O Frank, I am just floating upon golden clouds in a dream.  But your
poor hands!  Oh, how they must pain you!'

'Not a bit.'

'It was that heavy oar.'

'I get no practice at rowing.  There is no place to row in at Woking,
unless one used the canal.  But it was worth a blister or two.  By
Jove, wasn't it splendid, coming back in the moonlight with that
silver lane flickering on the water in front of us?  We were so
completely alone.  We might have been up in the interstellar spaces,
you and I, travelling from Sirius to Arcturus in one of those
profound gulfs of the void which Hardy talks about.  It was
overpowering.'

'I can never forget it.'

'We'll go again to-night.'

'But the blisters!'

'Hang the blisters!  And we'll take some bait with us and try to
catch something.'

'What fun!'

'And we'll drive to Rottingdean this afternoon, if you feel inclined.
Have this last cutlet, dear!'

'No, thank you.'

'Well, it seems a pity to waste it.  Here goes!  By the way, Maude, I
must speak very severely to you.  I can't if you look at me like
that.  But really, joking apart, you must be more careful before the
waiters.'

'Why, dear?'

'Well, we have carried it off splendidly so far.  No one has found us
out yet, and no one will if we are reasonably careful.  The fat
waiter is convinced that we are veterans.  But last night at dinner
you very nearly gave the thing away.'

'Did I, Frank?'

'Don't look so sweetly penitent, you blessing.  The fact is that you
make a shocking bad conspirator.  Now I have a kind of talent for
that, as I have for every other sort of depravity, so it will be
pretty safe in my hands.  You are as straight as a line by nature,
and you can't be crooked when you try.'

'But what did I say?  Oh, I AM so sorry!  I tried to be so careful.'

'Well, about the curry, you know.  It was an error of judgment to ask
if I took chutnee.  And then . . . '

'Something else?'

'About the boots.  Did I get them in London or Woking.'

'Oh dear, dear!'

'And then . . . '

'Not another!  O Frank!'

'Well, the use of the word "my."  You must give that word up.  It
should be "our."'

'I know, I know.  It was when I said that the salt water had taken
the curl out of the feather in my--no, in our--well, in THE hat.'

'That was all right.  But it is OUR luggage, you know, and OUR room,
and so on.'

'Of course it is.  How foolish I am!  Then the waiter knows!  O
Frank, what shall we do?'

'Not he.  He knows nothing.  I am sure of it.  He is a dull sort of
person.  I had my eye on him all the time.  Besides, I threw in a few
remarks just to set the thing right.'

'That was when you spoke about our travels in the Tyrol?'

'Yes.'

'O Frank, how COULD you?  And you said how lonely it was when we were
the only visitors at the Swiss hotel.'

'That was an inspiration.  That finished him.'

'And about the closeness of the Atlantic staterooms.  I blushed to
hear you.'

'But he listened eagerly to it all.  I could see it.'

'I wonder if he really believed it.  I have noticed that the maids
and the waiters seem to look at us with a certain interest.'

'My dear girlie, you will find as you go through life that every man
will always look at you with a certain interest.'

Maude smiled, but was unconvinced.

'Cheese, dear?'

'A little butter, please.'

'Some butter, waiter, and the Stilton.  You know the real fact is,
that we make the mistake of being much too nice to each other in
public.  Veterans don't do that.  They take the small courtesies for
granted--which is all wrong, but it shows that they ARE veterans.
That is where we give ourselves away.'

'That never occurred to me.'

'If you want to settle that waiter for ever, and remove the last
lingering doubt from his mind, the thing is for you to be rude to
me.'

'Or you to me, Frank.'

'Sure you won't mind?'

'Not a bit.'

'Oh, hang it, I can't--not even for so good an object.'

'Well, then, I can't either.'

'But this is absurd.  It is only acting.'

'Quite so.  It is only fun.'

'Then why won't you do it?'

'Why won't you?'

'He'll be back before we settle it.  Look here!  I've a shilling
under my hand.  Heads or tails, and the loser has to be rude.  Do you
agree?'

'Very well.'

'Your call.'

'Heads.'

'It's tails.'

'Oh goodness!'

'You've got to be rude.  Now mind you are.  Here he comes.'

The waiter had come up the room bearing the pride of the hotel, the
grand green Stilton with the beautiful autumn leaf heart shading away
to rich plum-coloured cavities.  He placed it on the table with a
solemn air.

'It's a beautiful Stilton,' Frank remarked.

Maude tried desperately to be rude.

'Well, dear, I don't think it is so very beautiful,' was the best
that she could do.

It was not much, but it had a surprising effect upon the waiter.  He
turned and hurried away.

'There now, you've shocked him?' cried Frank.

'Where HAS he gone, Frank?'

'To complain to the management about your language.'

'No, Frank.  Please tell me!  Oh, I wish I hadn't been so rude.  Here
he is again.'

'All right.  Sit tight,' said Frank.

A sort of procession was streaming up the hall.  There was their fat
waiter in front with a large covered cheese-dish.  Behind him was
another with two smaller ones, and a third with some yellow powder
upon a plate was bringing up the rear.

'This is Gorgonzola, main,' said the waiter, with a severe manner.
'And there's Camembert and Gruyere behind, and powdered Parmesan as
well.  I'm sorry that the Stilton don't give satisfaction.'

Maude helped herself to Gorgonzola and looked very guilty and
uncomfortable.  Frank began to laugh.

'I meant you to be rude to ME, not to the cheese,' said he, when the
procession had withdrawn.

'I did my best, Frank.  I contradicted you.'

'Oh, it was a shocking display of temper.'

'And I hurt the poor waiter's feelings.'

'Yes, you'll have to apologise to his Stilton before he will forgive
you.'

'And I don't believe he is a bit more convinced that we are veterans
than he was before.'

'All right, dear; leave him to me.  Those reminiscences of mine must
have settled him.  If they didn't, then I feel it is hopeless.'

It was as well for his peace of mind that Frank could not hear the
conversation between the fat waiter and their chambermaid, for whom
he nourished a plethoric attachment.  They had half an hour off in
the afternoon, and were comparing notes.

'Nice-lookin' couple, ain't they, John?' said the maid, with the air
of an expert.  'I don't know as we've 'ad a better since the spring
weddin's.'

'I don't know as I'd go as far as that,' said the fat waiter
critically.  ''E'd pass all right.  'E's an upstandin' young man with
a good sperrit in 'im.'

'What's wrong with 'er, then?'

'It's a matter of opinion,' said the waiter.  'I likes 'em a bit more
full-flavoured myself.  And as to 'er taste, why there, if you 'ad
seen 'er turn up 'er nose at the Stilton at lunch.'

'Turn up 'er nose, did she?  Well, she seemed to me a very soft-
spoken, obligin' young lady.'

'So she may be, but they're a queer couple, I tell you.  It's as well
they are married at last.'

'Why?'

'Because they 'ave been goin' on most owdacious before'and.  I 'ave
it from their own lips, and it fairly made me blush to listen to it.
Awful, it was, AWFUL!'

'You don't say that, John!'

'I tell you, Jane, I couldn't 'ardly believe my ears.  They was
married on Tuesday last, as we know well, and to-day's Times to prove
it, and yet if you'll believe me, they was talkin' about 'ow they 'ad
travelled alone abroad--'

'Never, John!'

'And alone in a Swiss 'otel!'

'My goodness!'

'And a steamer too.'

'Well, there!  I'll never trust any one again.'

'Oh, a perfec' pair of scorchers.  But I'll let 'im see as I knows
it.  I'll put that Times before 'im to-night at dinner as sure as my
name's John.'

'And a good lesson to them, too!  If you didn't say you'd 'eard it
from their own lips, John, I never could 'ave believed it.  It's
things like that as shakes your trust in 'uman nature.'

Maude and Frank were lingering at the table d'hote over their walnuts
and a glass of port wine, when their waiter came softly behind them.

'Beg pardon, sir, but did you see it in the Times?'

'See what?'

'THAT, sir.  I thought that it might be of interest to you and to
your good lady to see it.'

He had laid one page of the paper before them, with his forefinger
upon an item in the left-hand top corner.  Then he discreetly
withdrew.  Frank stared at it in horror.

'Maude, your people have gone and put it in.'

'Our marriage!'

'Here it is!  Listen!  "Crosse--Selby.  30th June, at St. Monica's
Church, by the Rev. John Tudwell, M.A., Vicar of St. Monica's, Frank
Crosse, of Maybury Road, Woking, to Maude Selby, eldest daughter of
Robert Selby, Esq., of St. Albans."  Great Scot, Maude! what shall we
do?'

'Well, dear, does it matter?'

'Matter!  It's simply awful!'

'I don't mind much if they do know.'

'But my reminiscences, Maude!  The travels in the Tyrol!  The Swiss
Hotel!  The Stateroom!  Great goodness, how I have put my foot into
it.'

Maude burst out laughing.

'You old dear!' she cried, 'I don't believe you are a bit better as a
conspirator than I am.  There's only one thing you can do.  Give the
waiter half a crown, tell him the truth, and don't conspire any
more.'

And so ignominiously ended the attempt which so many have made, and
at which so many have failed.  Take warning, gentle reader, and you
also, gentler reader still, when your own turn comes.



CHAPTER VIII--THE HOME-COMING



The days of holiday were over, and for each of them the duties of
life were waiting.  For him it was his work, and for her, her
housekeeping.  They both welcomed the change, for there was a rush
and a want of privacy about the hotel life which had been amusing at
first, but was now becoming irksome.  It was pleasant, as they rolled
out of Waterloo Station that summer night, to know that their cosy
little home was awaiting them just five-and-twenty miles down the
line.  They had a first-class carriage to themselves--it is
astonishing how easy it is for two people to fit into one of those
armchair partitions,--and they talked all the way down about their
plans for the future.  Golden visions of youth, how they can glorify
even a suburban villa and four hundred a year!  They exulted together
over the endless vista of happy days which stretched before them.

Mrs. Watson, Frank's trusty housekeeper, had been left in charge of
The Lindens, and he had sent her a telegram the evening before to
tell her that they were coming.  She had already engaged the two
servants, so everything would be ready for them.  They pictured her
waiting at the door, the neat little rooms with all their useful
marriage-presents in their proper places, the lamplight and the snowy
cloth laid for supper in the dining-room.  It would be ten o'clock
before they got there, and that supper would be a welcome sight.  It
was all delightful to look forward to, and this last journey was the
happiest of all their wanderings.  Maude wanted to see her kitchen.
Frank wanted to see his books.  Both were eager for the fight.

But they found a small annoyance waiting for them at Woking.  A
crowded train had preceded them, and there was not a single cab left
at the station.  Some would be back soon, but nobody could tell when.

'You don't mind walking, Maude?'

'I should prefer it.'

So a friendly porter took charge of their trunks, and promised to
send them up when a conveyance had arrived.  In the meantime they
started off together down an ill-lit and ill-kept road, which opened
into that more important thoroughfare in which their own villa was
situated.  They walked quickly, full of eager anticipations.

'It's just past the third lamp-post on the right,' said Frank.  'Now
it's only the second lamp-post.  You see it will not be far from the
station.  Those windows among the trees are where Hale lives--my best
man, you know!  Now it is only one lamp-post!'  They quickened their
pace almost to a run, and so arrived at the gate of The Lindens.

It was a white gate leading into a short path--'carriage sweep' the
house-agent called it,--and so to a low but comfortable-looking
little house.  The night was so dark that one could only see its
outline.  To their surprise, there was no sign of a light either
above the door or at any of the windows.

'Well, I'm blessed!' cried Frank.

'Never mind, dear.  They live at the back, no doubt.'

'But I gave them the hour.  This is too bad.  I am so sorry.'

'It will be all the more cosy inside.  What a dear little gate this
is!  The whole place is perfectly charming.'

But in spite of her brave attempts at making the best of it, it could
not be denied that this black house was not what they had pictured in
their dreams.  Frank strode angrily up the path and pulled at the
bell.  There was no answer, so he knocked violently.  Then he knocked
with one hand while he rang with the other, but no sound save that of
the clanging bell came from the gloomy house.  As they stood
forlornly in front of their own hall-door, a soft rain began to
rustle amidst the bushes.  At this climax of their troubles Maude
burst into such a quiet, hearty, irresistible fit of laughter, that
the angry Frank was forced to laugh also.

'My word, it will be no laughing matter for Mrs. Watson if she cannot
give a good reason for it,' said he.

'Perhaps the poor woman is ill.'

'But there should be two other people, the cook and the housemaid.
It is just as well that we did not bring up our trunks, or we should
have had to dump them down in the front garden.  You wait here, dear,
under the shelter of the porch, and I will walk round and see if I
can burgle it.'

He tried the back, but it was as dark as the front, and the kitchen-
door was locked.  Then he prowled unhappily in the rain from window
to window.  They were all fastened.  He came back to the kitchen-
door, poked his stick through the glass which formed the upper panel,
and then putting his hand through the hole, he turned the key, and so
stumbled into the obscurity of his own hall.  He passed through it,
unlocked the front door, and received Maude into his open arms.

'Welcome to your home, my own darling girl.  May you never have one
sad hour under this roof!  What a dismal home-coming!  What can I do
to make amends?  But good comes out of evil, you see, for in no other
possible way could I have been inside to welcome you when you
entered.'

They stayed in the hall in the dark some time, these wet and foolish
young people.  Then Frank struck a match, and tried to light the
hall-lamp.  There was no oil in it.  He muttered something vigorous,
and carried his burning vesta into the dining-room.  Two candles were
standing on the sideboard.  He lit them both, and things began to
look a little more cheerful.  They took a candle each and began to
explore their own deserted house.

The dining-room was excellent--small, but very snug.  The Tantalus
spirit-stand--stood upon the walnut sideboard, and the bronzes from
the cricket-club looked splendid upon each side of the mantelpiece.
Beside the clock in the centre lay an open telegram.  Frank seized it
eagerly.

'There now!' he cried.  'Listen to this.  "Expect us on Thursday
evening about ten."  It was TUESDAY evening, I said.  That's the
telegraphic clerk.  We've come two days before our time.'

It was good to have any sort of explanation, although it left a great
deal unexplained.  They passed through the hall with its shining
linoleum, and into the drawing-room.  It was not a very good room,
too square for elegance, but they were in no humour for criticism,
and it was charming to see all the old knick-knacks, and the
photographs of friends in their frames.  A big wrought-iron and
brass-work standing lamp towered up near the fireplace, but again
there was no oil.

'I think that Mrs. Watson has arranged it all splendidly,' said
Maude, whose active fingers were already beginning to reconstruct.
'But where can she be?'

'She must be out, for, of course, she lives in the house.  But it is
the absence of the servants which amazes me, for I understood that
they had arrived.  What would you like to do?'

'Aren't you hungry, Frank?'

'Simply starving.'

'So am I.'

'Well, then, let us forage and see if we cannot find something to
eat.'

So hand in hand, and each with a candle in the other hand, like a
pair of young penitents, they continued their explorations with more
purpose than before.  The kitchen, into which they penetrated, had
clearly been much used of late, for there were dirty dishes scattered
about, and the fire had been lighted, though it was now out.  In one
corner was what seemed to be a pile of drab-coloured curtains.  In
the other, an armchair lay upon its side with legs projecting.  A
singular disorder, very alien to Mrs. Watson's habits, pervaded the
apartment.  A dresser with a cupboard over it claimed the first
attention of the hungry pair.  With a cheer from Frank and hand-
clapping from Maude, they brought out a new loaf of bread, some
butter, some cheese, a tin of cocoa, and a bowl full of eggs.  Maude
tied an apron over her pretty russet dress, seized some sticks and
paper, and had a fire crackling in a very few minutes.

'Put some water in the kettle, Frank.'

'Here you are!  Anything else?'

'Some in the small saucepan for the eggs.'

'I believe they are "cookers,"' said he, sniffing at them
suspiciously.

'Hold them up to the light, sir.  There, they are quite bright and
nice.  In with them!  Now, if you will cut some bread and butter it,
we shall soon have our supper ready.'

'It's too new to cut,' cried Frank, sawing away upon the kitchen
table.  'Besides, new bread is better in chunks.  Here are some
cloths and knives and forks in the dresser drawer.  I will go and lay
the table.'

'And leave me here alone.  No please, Frank, if I am cook, you must
be scullery-maid.  Get the cups down and put the cocoa in them.  What
fun it all is!  I think it is simply SPLENDID to be mistress of a
house.'

'With one scullery-maid.'

'And she perfectly incompetent, and much given to embracing her
mistress.  I must take my hat off.  Get the sugar for the cocoa out
of the cupboard.  The kettle is singing, so it won't be long.  Do you
know, Frank'--she paused, listening, with the egg-saucepan in her
hands.  'There's a dog or something in the room.'

They had both become aware of a sort of sibilant breathing, and they
looked round them in bewilderment.

'Where is it?' asked Maude.  'Frank, I believe it's a mouse.'

'Hope for the best.  Don't frighten yourself unnecessarily.  I fancy
it comes from under these curtains.'  He approached them with his
candle, and was suddenly aware of a boot which was projecting from
them.  'Great Scot!' he cried, 'there's a woman here asleep.'

Reassured as to the mouse, Maude approached with her saucepan still
clutched in her hand.  There could be no doubt either as to the woman
or the sleep.  She lay in an untidy heap, her head under the table,
and her figure sprawling.  She appeared to be a very large woman.

'Hullo!' cried Frank, shaking her by the shoulder.  'Hullo, you
there!'

But the woman slumbered peacefully on.

'Heh, wake up, wake up!' he shouted, and pulled her up into a sitting
position.  But she slept as soundly sitting as lying.

'The poor thing must be ill,' said Maude.  'O Frank, shall I run for
a doctor?'

'Wake up, woman, wake up!' Frank yelled, and danced her up and down.
She flopped about like a sawdust doll, with her arms swinging in
front of her.  He panted with his exertions, but she was serenely
unconscious.  At last he had to lower her on to the floor again,
putting a footstool under her head.

'It's no go,' said he.  'I can make nothing of her.  She will sleep
it off.'

'You don't mean to say, Frank, that she is--'

'Indeed I do.'

'How horrible!'

'That kettle is boiling now.  Suppose we have our supper.'

'Dear Frank, I could not enjoy my supper with that unfortunate woman
lying there.  O Frank, I know that you could not either.'

'Bless her!' said Frank bitterly, as he gazed at the inert lump.  'I
really don't see why we should put ourselves out for her.  She is
quite comfortable.'

'Oh I couldn't, Frank.  It would seem inhuman.'

'What are we to do, then?'

'We must put her to bed.'

'Great heavens!'

'Yes, dear, it is our duty to put her to bed.'

'But look here, my dear girl, we must be practical.  The woman weighs
half a ton, and the bedrooms are at the top of the house.  It's
simply impossible.'

'Don't you think, Frank, that if you took her head and I took her
feet, we might get her up?'

'Not up the stair, dear.  She is enormous.'

'Well, then, on to the drawing-room sofa,' said Maude.  'I could have
my supper, if I knew that she was safe upon the sofa.'

So Frank, seeing that there was no help for it, seized her under the
arms, and Maude took her ankles, and they bore her, bulging but
serene, down the passage.  They staggered exhausted into the drawing-
room, and the new sofa groaned beneath the weight.  It was a curious
and unsavoury inaugural ceremony.  Maude put a rug over the prostrate
form, and they returned to their boiling kettle and their uncooked
eggs.  Then they laid the table, and served the supper, and enjoyed
this picnic meal of their own creating as no conventional meal could
ever have been enjoyed.  Everything seemed beautiful to the young
wife--the wall-paper, the pictures, the carpet, the rug; but to him,
she was so beautiful in mind, and soul, and body, that her presence
turned the little room into an enchanted chamber.  They sat long
together, and marvelled at their own happiness--that pure serene
happiness of mere companionship, which is so much more intimate and
deeper than all the transports of passion.

But suddenly he sprang from his chair.  There was the sound of steps,
of several steps, outside upon the gravel path.  Then a key clicked,
and a burst of cold air told them that the door was open.

'It's agin' the law for me to enter,' said a gruff voice.

'I tell you she's very strong and violent,' said a second voice,
which Frank recognised as that of Mrs. Watson.  'She chased the maid
out of the house, and I can do nothing with her.'

'Very sorry, mum, but it's clean agin' the law of England.  Give me a
warrant, and in I come.  If you will bring her to the doorstep, I
will be answerable for her removal.'

'She's in the dining-room.  I can see the lights,' said Mrs. Watson;
and then, 'Good Lord, Mr. Crosse, what a fright you gave me!  Oh dear
me, that you should have come when I was out, and I not expecting you
for another two days yet.  Well, now, I shall never forgive myself
for this.'

But all the mistakes and misfortunes were very quickly explained.
The telegram was the root of the evil.  And then the new cook had
proved to be a violent, intermittent drunkard.  She had chased the
other maid out of the house, and then, while Mrs. Watson rushed for
the police, she had drunk herself into the stupor in which she had
been found.  But now, in the nick of time, the station cab came up
with the luggage, and so the still placidly slumbering culprit was
carried out to it, and sent off in the charge of the policeman.  Such
was the first entry of Mr. and Mrs. Crosse into their home at The
Lindens.



CHAPTER IX--LAYING A COURSE



Frank Crosse was a methodical young man--his enemies might sometimes
have called him pedantic,--and he loved to reduce his life to rule
and order.  It was one of his peculiarities.  But how about this new
life into which he was entering?  It took two to draw up the rules
for that.  The little two-oared craft who put out upon that voyage
have to lay their own course, each for itself; and all round them, as
they go, they see the floating timbers and broken keels of other
little boats, which had once started out full of hope and confidence.
There are currents and eddies, low sand-banks and sunken reefs, and
happy the crews who see them ahead, and trim their course to avoid
them.  Frank brooded over it all.  He had seen something of life, for
his years.  He was observant and reflective.  He had watched his
friends who were happy, and he had watched his friends who were not.
And now, as a result of all this wise cogitation, he sat down at a
table one evening, with a solemn face, and a sheet of foolscap.

'Now, Maude,' said he, 'I want to have a serious talk.'

Maude looked up in surprise from the linen which she was marking.

'Oh dear!' she cried.

'Why "oh dear"?'

'There's something wrong?'

'Nothing in the world.'

'You looked so solemn, Frank.  I thought you had been looking at the
tradesman's books.  What is it, dear?'

'Well, Maude, I have been thinking of married life in general.  Don't
you think it would be a good thing if we were to make some
resolutions as to how it should be conducted--some fundamental
principles, as it were?'

'Oh do, dear, do!  What fun it will be!'

'But it's serious, Maude.'

'Yes, dear, I am quite serious.'

'It seemed to me, that if we could reduce it to certain rules, then,
whatever came upon us in the future, we should always know exactly
how to act.'

'What are the rules, dear?'

'Well, we can only arrive at them by talking it over between
ourselves.  I could not draw up a set of rules, and ask you to submit
to them.  That is not my idea of a partnership.  But if we found that
we were agreed upon certain points, then we could both adopt them by
mutual consent.'

'How charming, Frank!  Do please tell me some of the points.'

'I have a few in my mind, and I should like to hear any which you may
have--any ideas, you know, how to get the very highest and best out
of our life.  Now, first of all, there is the subject of
quarrelling.'

'O Frank, how horrid!'

'Dear girl, we must look into the future.  We are going to live all
our lives together.  We must foresee and prepare for all the chances
of life.'

'But that is absurd.'

'You can't live all your life and never be in a bad temper!'

'But not with YOU, Frank.'

'Oh, I can be very aggravating sometimes.  Now, my idea is this.
Ill-humour passes and hurts nobody.  But if two people are ill-
humoured, then each excites the other, and they say ever so much more
than they mean.  Let us make a compact never both to be ill-humoured
at the same time.  If YOU are cross, then it is your turn, and I
stand clear.  If _I_ am cross, you let me work it off.  When either
hoists the danger-signal, the other is on guard.  What do you think
of that?'

'I think you are the funniest old boy--'

'Do you agree?'

'Yes, dear, of course I agree.'

'Article number one,' said Frank, and scribbled upon his paper.

'Your turn, now.'

'No, dear, I have not thought of anything.'

'Well, then, here is another point.  Never take each other for
granted.'

'What do you mean by that?'

'Never relax those attentions which one lover shows to another.  Some
husbands seem to forget that their wives are ladies.  Some wives
speak to their husbands with less courtesy and consideration than to
any casual male visitor.  They mean no harm, but they get into a
slack way.  We must not do that.'

'I don't think we are likely to.'

'People get into it unconsciously.  Pull me up sharply at the first
sign.'

'Yes, sir, I will.'

'The next point that I have noted is an extension of the last.  Let
each strive to be worthy of the love of the other.  People get
slovenly and slipshoddy, as if it didn't matter now that they were
married.  If each were very keen to please the other, that would not
be so.  How many women neglect their music after marriage.'

'My goodness, I haven't practised for a week!' cried Maude.

'And their dress and their hair'--Maude's hand flew up to her curls.
'My darling, yours is just perfect.  But you know how often a woman
grows careless.  "He will love me anyhow," she says to herself, and
perhaps she is right, but still it is not as it should be.'

'Why, Frank, I had no idea you knew so much.'

'I have heard my friends' experiences.--And the man too:  he should
consider his wife's feelings as much as he did his sweetheart's.  If
she dislikes smoke, he should not smoke.  He should not yawn in her
presence.  He should keep himself well-groomed and attractive.  Look
at that dirty cuff!  I have no business to have it.'

'As if it could make any difference to me.'

'There now!  That is what is so demoralising.  You should stand out
for the highest.  When I came to you at St Albans, I had not dirty
cuffs.'

'You forgive me the music, Frank, and I'll forgive you the cuff.  But
I agree to all you say.  I think it is so wise and good.  Now I've
got something to add.'

'Good.  What is it?'

'Each should take an interest in the other's department.'

'Why, of course they should.'

'But it is not done.'

'Why naturally, dear, you take an interest in my City work.'

'Yes, sir, but do you take as keen an interest in my housekeeping?'

'Perhaps I have been a little thoughtless.'

'No, no, dear, you haven't.  You are always full of consideration.
But I have noticed it with mother, and with others also.  The husband
pulls out his cheque-book at the end of the week or month, and he
says, "Well, this is rather more than we can afford," or "This is
less than I expected," but he never really takes any interest in his
wife's efforts to keep things nice on a little.  He does not see it
with her eyes and try to realise her difficulties.  Oh, I wish I
could express myself better, but I know that the interest is one-
sided.'

'I think what you say is quite right.  I'll try to remember that.
How shall we enter it upon our list?'

'That Interests should be mutual.'

'Quite right.  I have it down.  Well, any more points?'

'It is your turn.'

'Well, there is this, and I feel that it is just the holiest thing in
matrimony, and its greatest justification--that love should never
degenerate into softness, that each should consciously stimulate the
better part of the other and discourage the worse, that there should
be a discipline in our life, and that we should brace each other up
to a higher ideal.  The love that says, "I know it is wrong, but I
love him or her so much that I can't refuse," is a poor sort of love
for the permanent use of married life.  The self-respect which
refuses to let the most lofty ideal of love down by an inch is a far
nobler thing, and it wears better too.'

'How will you express all that?'

'Mutual respect is necessary for mutual love.'

'Yes, I am sure that that is right.'

'It sounds obvious, but the very intensity of love makes love soft
and blind.  Now I have another, which I am convinced that you will
not agree with.'

'Let me hear it.'

'I have put it in this way, "The tight cord is the easiest to snap."'

'What do you mean?'

'Well, I mean that married couples should give each other a certain
latitude and freedom.  If they don't, one or other will sooner or
later chafe at the restriction.  It is only human nature, which is an
older and more venerable thing than marriage.'

'I don't like that at all, Frank.'

'I feared you wouldn't, dear, but I believe you'll see it with me
when I explain what I mean.  If you don't, then I must try to see it
with you.  When one talks of freedom in married life, it means, as a
rule, freedom only for the man.  He does what he likes, but still
claims to be a strict critic of his wife.  That, I am sure, is wrong.
To take an obvious example of what I mean, has a husband a right to
read his wife's letters?  Certainly not, any more than she has a
right to read his without his permission.  To read them as a matter
of course would be stretching the chain too tight.'

'Chain is a horrid word, Frank.'

'Well, it is only a metaphor.  Or take the subject of friendships.
Is a married man to be debarred from all friendship and intimacy with
another woman?'

Maude looked doubtful.

'I should like to see the woman first,' she said.

'Or is a married woman to form no friendship with another man who
might interest or improve her?  There is such a want of mutual
confidence in such a view.  People who are sure of each other should
give each other every freedom in that.  If they don't, they are again
stretching it tight.'

'If they do, it may become so slack that it might as well not be
there at all.'

'I felt sure that we should have an argument over this.  But I have
seen examples.  Look at the Wardrops.  THERE were a couple who were
never apart.  It was their boast that everything was in common with
them.  If he was not in, she opened his letters, and he hers.  And
then there came a most almighty smash.  The tight cord had snapped.
Now, I believe that for some people, it is a most excellent thing
that they should take their holidays at different times.'

'O Frank!'

'Yes, I do.  No, not for us, by Jove!  I am generalising now.  But
for some couples, I am sure that it is right.  They reconsider each
other from a distance, and they like each other the better.'

'Yes, but these rules are for our guidance, not for that of other
people.'

'Quite right, dear.  I was off the rails.  "As you were," as your
brother Jack would say.  But I am afraid that I am not going to
convince you over this point.'

Maude looked charmingly mutinous.

'No, Frank, you are not.  I don't think marriage can be too close.  I
believe that every hope, and thought, and aspiration should be in
common.  I could never get as near to your heart and soul as I should
wish to do.  I want every year to draw me closer and closer, until we
really are as nearly the same person as it is possible to be upon
earth.'

When you have to surrender, it is well to do so gracefully.  Frank
stooped down and kissed his wife's hand, and apologised.  'The wisdom
of the heart is greater than the wisdom of the brain,' said he.  But
the love of man comes from the brain, far more than the love of
woman, and so it is that there will always be some points upon which
they will never quite see alike.

'Then we scratch out that item.'

'No, dear.  'Put "The cord which is held tight is the easiest to
snap."  That will be all right.  The cord of which I speak is never
held at all.  The moment it is necessary to hold it, it is of no
value.  It must be voluntary, natural, unavoidable.'

So Frank amended his aphorism.

'Anything more, dear?'

'Yes, I have thought of one other,' said she.  'It is that if ever
you had to find fault with me about anything, it should be when we
are alone.'

'And the same in your case with me.  That is excellent.  What can be
more vulgar and degrading than a public difference of opinion?
People do it half in fun sometimes, but it is wrong all the same.
Duly entered upon the minutes.  Anything else?'

'Only material things.'

'Yes, but they count also.  Now, in the matter of money, I feel that
every husband should allow his wife a yearly sum of her own, to be
paid over to her, and kept by her, so that she may make her own
arrangements for herself.  It is degrading to a woman to have to
apply to her husband every time she wants a sovereign.  On the other
hand, if the wife has any money, she should have the spending of it.
If she chooses to spend part of it in helping the establishment, that
is all right, but I am sure that she should have her own separate
account, and her own control of it.'

'If a woman really loves a man, Frank, how can she grudge him
everything she has?  If my little income would take one worry from
your mind, what a joy it would be to me to feel that you were using
it!'

'Yes, but the man has his self-respect to think of.  In a great
crisis one might fall back upon one's wife--since our interests are
the same, but only that could justify it.  So much for the wife's
money.  Now for the question of housekeeping.'

'That terrible question!'

'It is only hard because people try to do so much upon a little.  Why
should they try to do so much?  The best pleasures of life are
absolutely inexpensive.  Books, music, pleasant intimate evenings,
the walk among the heather, the delightful routine of domestic life,
my cricket and my golf--these things cost very little.'

'But you must eat and drink, Frank.  And as to Jemima and the cook,
it is really extraordinary the amount which they consume.'

'But the tendency is for meals to become much too elaborate.  Why
that second vegetable?'

'There now!  I knew that you were going to say something against that
poor vegetable.  It costs so little.'

'On an average, I have no doubt that it costs threepence a day.  Come
now, confess that it does.  Do you know what threepence a day comes
to in a year?  There is no use in having an accountant for a husband,
if you can't get at figures easily.  It is four pounds eleven
shillings and threepence.'

'It does not seem very much.'

'But for that money, and less, one could become a member of the
London Library, with the right to take out fifteen books at a time,
and all the world's literature to draw from.  Now just picture it:
on one side, all the books in the world, all the words of the wise,
and great, and witty; on the other side, a lot of cauliflowers and
vegetable-marrows and French beans.  Which is the better bargain?'

'Good gracious, we shall never have a second vegetable again!'

'And pudding?'

'My dear, you always eat the pudding.'

'I know I do.  It seems an obvious thing to do when the pudding is
there in front of me.  But if it were not there, I should neither eat
it nor miss it, and I know that you care nothing about it.  There
would be another five or six pounds a year.'

'We'll have a compromise, dear.  Second vegetable one day, pudding
the next.'

'Very good.'

'I notice that it is always after you have had a substantial meal
that you discuss economy in food.  I wonder if you will feel the same
when you come back starving from the City to-morrow?  Now, sir, any
other economy?'

'I don't think money causes happiness.  But debt causes unhappiness.
And so we must cut down every expense until we have a reserve fund to
meet any unexpected call.  If you see any way in which I could save,
or any money I spend which you think is unjustifiable, I do wish that
you would tell me.  I got into careless ways in my bachelor days.'

'That red golfing-coat.'

'I know.  It was idiotic of me.'

'Never mind, dear.  You look very nice in it.  After all, it was only
thirty shillings.  Can you show me any extravagance of mine?'

'Well, dear, I looked at that dressmaker's bill yesterday.'

'O Frank, it is such a pretty dress, and you said you liked it, and
you have to pay for a good cut, and you said yourself that a wife
must not become dowdy after marriage, and it would have cost double
as much in Regent Street.'

'I didn't think the dress dear.'

'What was it, then?'

'The silk lining of the skirt.'

'You funny boy!'

'It cost thirty shillings extra.  Now, what can it matter if it is
lined with silk or not?'

'Oh, doesn't it?  Just you try one and see.'

'But no one can know that it is lined with silk.'

'When I rustle into a room, dear, every woman in it knows that my
skirt is lined with silk.'

Frank felt that he had ventured out of his depth, so he struck out
for land again.

'There's only one economy which I don't think is justifiable,' said
he, 'and that is, to cut down your subscriptions to charities.  It is
such a very cheap way of doing things.  Not that I do much in that
line--too little, perhaps.  But to say that because WE want to
economise, therefore some poor people are to suffer, is a very poor
argument.  We must save at our own expense.'

So now Frank, in his methodical fashion, had all his results
tabulated upon his sheet of foolscap.  It was not a very brilliant
production, but it might serve as a chart for the little two-oared
boats until a better one is forthcoming.  It ran in this way -


Maxims for the Married

1.  Since you ARE married, you may as well make the best of it.

2.  So make some maxims and try to live up to them.

3.  And don't be discouraged if you fail.  You WILL fail, but perhaps
you won't always fail.

4.  Never both be cross at the same time.  Wait your turn.

5.  Never cease to be lovers.  If you cease, some one else may begin.

6.  You were gentleman and lady before you were husband and wife.
Don't forget it.

7.  Keep yourself at your best.  It is a compliment to your partner.

8.  Keep your ideal high.  You may miss it, but it is better to miss
a high one than to hit a low one.

9.  A blind love is a foolish love.  Encourage the best in each
other's nature.

10.  Permanent mutual respect is necessary for a permanent mutual
love.  A woman can love without respect, but a man cannot.

11.  The tight cord is the easiest to snap.

12.  Let there be one law for both.

13.  There is only one thing worse than quarrels in public.  That is
caresses.

14.  Money is not essential to happiness, but happy people usually
have enough.

15.  So save some.

16.  The easiest way of saving is to do without things.

17.  If you can't, then you had better do without a wife.

18.  The man who respects his wife does not turn her into a
mendicant.  Give her a purse of her own.

19.  If you save, save at your own expense.

20.  In all matters of money, prepare always for the worst and hope
for the best.


Such was their course as far as this ambitious young couple could lay
it.  They may correct it by experience, and improve it by use, but it
is good enough to guide them safely out to sea.



CHAPTER X--CONFESSIONS



'Tell me, Frank, did you ever love any one before me?'

'How badly trimmed the lamp is to-night!' said he.  It was so bad
that he went off instantly into the dining-room to get another.  It
was some time before he returned.

She waited inexorably until he had settled down again.

'Did you, Frank?' she asked.

'Did I what?'

'Ever love any one else?'

'My dear Maude, what IS the use of asking questions like that?'

'You said that there were no secrets between us.'

'No, but there are some things better left alone.'

'That is what I should call a secret.'

'Of course, if you make a point of it--'

'I do.'

'Well, then, I am ready to answer anything that you ask.  But you
must not blame me if you do not like my answers.'

'Who was she, Frank?'

'Which?'

'O Frank, more than one!'

'I told you that you would not like it.'

'Oh, I wish I had not asked you!'

'Then do let us drop it.'

'No, I can't drop it now, Frank.  You have gone too far.  You must
tell me everything.'

'Everything?'

'Yes, everything, Frank.'

'I am not sure that I can.'

'Is it so dreadful as that?'

'No, there is another reason.'

'Do tell me, Frank.'

'There is a good deal of it.  You know how a modern poet excused
himself to his wife for all his pre-matrimonial experiences.  He said
that he was looking for her.'

'Well, I do like that!' she cried indignantly.

'I was looking for you.'

'You seem to have looked a good deal.'

'But I found you at last.'

'I had rather you had found me at first, Frank.'  He said something
about supper, but she was not to be turned.

'How many did you really love?' she asked.  'Please don't joke about
it, Frank.  I really want to know.'

'If I choose to tell you a lie--'

'But you won't!'

'No, I won't.  I could never feel the same again.'

'Well, then, how many did you love?'

'Don't exaggerate what I say, Maude, or take it to heart.  You see it
depends upon what you mean by love.  There are all sorts and degrees
of love, some just the whim of a moment, and others the passion of a
lifetime; some are founded on mere physical passion, and some on
intellectual sympathy, and some on spiritual affinity.'

'Which do you love me with?'

'All three.'

'Sure?'

'Perfectly sure.'

She came over and the cross-examination was interrupted.  But in a
few minutes she had settled down to it again.

'Well, now--the first?' said she.

'Oh, I can't, Maude--don't.'

'Come, sir--her name?'

'No, no, Maude, that is going a little too far.  Even to you, I
should never mention another woman's name.'

'Who was she, then?'

'Please don't let us go into details.  It is perfectly HORRIBLE.  Let
me tell things in my own way.'

She made a little grimace.

'You are wriggling, sir.  But I won't be hard upon you.  Tell it your
own way.'

'Well, in a word, Maude, I was always in love with some one.'

Her face clouded over.

'Your love must be very cheap,' said she.

'It's almost a necessity of existence for a healthy young man who has
imagination and a warm heart.  It was all--or nearly all--quite
superficial.'

'I should think all your love was superficial, if it can come so
easily.'

'Don't be cross, Maude.  I had never seen you at the time.  I owed no
duty to you.'

'You owed a duty to your own self-respect.'

'There, I knew we should have trouble over it.  What do you want to
ask such questions for?  I dare say I am a fool to be so frank.'

She sat for a little with her face quite cold and set.  In his inmost
heart Frank was glad that she should be jealous, and he watched her
out of the corner of his eye.

'Well!' said she at last.

'Must I go on?'

'Yes, I may as well hear it.'

'You'll only be cross.'

'We've gone too far to stop.  And I'm not cross, Frank.  Only pained
a little.  But I do appreciate your frankness.  I had no idea you
were such a--such a Mormon.'  She began to laugh.

'I used to take an interest in every woman.'

'"Take an interest" is good.'

'That was how it began.  And then if circumstances were favourable
the interest deepened, until at last, naturally--well, you can
understand.'

'How many did you take an interest in?'

'Well, in pretty nearly all of them.'

'And how many deepened?'

'Oh, I don't know.'

'Twenty?'

'Well--rather more than that, I think.'

'Thirty?'

'Quite thirty.'

'Forty?'

'Not more than forty, I think.'

Maude sat aghast at the depths of his depravity.

'Let me see:  you are twenty-seven now, so you have loved four women
a year since you were seventeen.'

'If you reckon it that way,' said Frank, 'I am afraid that it must
have been more than forty.'

'It's dreadful,' said Maude, and began to cry.

Frank knelt down in front of her and kissed her hands.  She had sweet
little plump hands, very soft and velvety.

'You make me feel such a brute,' said he.  'Anyhow, I love you now
with all my heart and mind and soul.'

'Forty-firstly and lastly,' she sobbed, half laughing and half
crying.  Then she pulled his hair to reassure him.

'I can't be angry with you,' said she.  'Besides, it would be
ungenerous to be angry when you tell me things of your own free will.
You are not forced to tell me.  It is very honourable of you.  But I
do wish you had taken an interest in me first.'

'Well, it was not so fated.  I suppose there are some men who are
quite good when they are bachelors.  But I don't believe they are the
best men.  They are either archangels upon earth--young Gladstones
and Newmans--or else they are cold, calculating, timid, un-virile
creatures, who will never do any good.  The first class must be
splendid.  I never met one except in memoirs.  The others I don't
want to meet.'

Women are not interested in generalities.

'Were they nicer than me?' she asked.

'Who?'

'Those forty women.'

'No, dear, of course not.  Why are you laughing?'

'Well, it came into my head how funny it would be, if the forty were
all gathered into one room, and you were turned loose in the middle
of them.'

'Funny!' Frank ejaculated.  Women have such extraordinary ideas of
humour.  Maude laughed until she was quite tired.

'It doesn't strike you as comic?' she cried at last.

'No, it doesn't,' he answered coldly.

'Of course it wouldn't,' said she, and went off into another ripple
of pretty contralto laughter.  There is a soft, deep, rich laugh,
which some women have, that is the sweetest sound in Nature.

'When you have quite finished,' said he huffily.  Her jealousy was
much more complimentary than her ridicule.

'All right now.  Don't be cross.  If I didn't laugh I should cry.
I'm so sorry if I have annoyed you.'  He had gone back to his chair,
so she paid him a flying visit.  'Satisfied?'

'Not quite.'

'Now?'

'All right.  I forgive you.'

'That's funny too.  Fancy YOU forgiving ME after all these
confessions.  But you never loved one of them all as you love me.'

'Never.'

'Swear it.'

'I do swear it.'

'Morally, and what do you call it, and the other?'

'Not one of them.'

'And never will again?'

'Never.'

'Good boy for ever and ever?'

'For ever and ever.'

'And the forty were horrid?'

'No, hang it, Maude, I can't say that.'

She pouted and hung her head.

'You do like them better, then?'

'How absurd you are, Maude!  If I had liked one better, I should have
married her.'

'Well, yes, I suppose you would.  You must have taken a deeper
interest in me than in the others, since you married me.  I hadn't
thought of that.'

'Silly old girl!  Of course I liked you best.  Let us drop the thing,
and never talk about it any more.'

'Have you their photographs?'

'No.'

'None of them?'

'No.'

'What did you do with them?'

'I never had most of them.'

'And the others?'

'I destroyed some when I married.'

'That was nice of you.  Aren't you sorry?'

'No, I thought it was only right.'

'Were you fondest of dark women or fair?'

'Oh, I don't know.  _I_ was never pernickety in MY tastes.  You know
those lines I read you from Henley:  "Handsome, ugly--all are women."
That's a bachelor's sentiment.'

'But do you mean to say, sir--now, you are speaking on your honour,
that out of all these forty, there was not one who was prettier than
I am?'

'Do let us talk of something else.'

'And not one as clever?'

'How absurd you are to-night, Maude!'

'Come, answer me.'

'I've answered you already.'

'I did not hear you.'

'Oh yes, you did.  I said that I had married you, and that shows that
I liked you best.  I don't compare you quality for quality against
every one in the world.  That would be absurd.  What I say is that
your combination of qualities is the one which is most dear to me.'

'Oh, I see,' said Maude dubiously.  'How nice and frank you are!'

'Now I've hurt you!'

'Oh no, not in the least.  I like you to be frank.  I should hate to
think that there was anything you did not dare to tell me.'

'And you, Maude--would you be equally frank with me?'

'Yes, dear, I will.  I feel that I owe it to you after your
confidence in me.  I have had my little experiences too.'

'You!'

'Perhaps you would rather that I said nothing about them.  What good
can there be in raking up these old stories?'

'No, I had rather you told me.'

'You won't be hurt?'

'No, no--certainly not.'

'You may take it from me, Frank, that if any married woman ever tells
her husband that until she saw him she never felt any emotion at the
sight of another man, it is simple nonsense.  There may be women of
that sort about, but I never met them.  I don't think I should like
them, for they must be dry, cold, unsympathetic, unemotional,
unwomanly creatures.'

'Maude, you have loved some one else!'

'I won't deny that I have been interested deeply interested in
several men.'

'Several!'

'It was before I had met you, dear.  I owed you no duty.'

'You have loved several men.'

'The feeling was for the most part quite superficial.  There are many
different sorts and degrees of love.'

'Good God, Maude!  How many men inspired this feeling in you?'

'The truth is, Frank, that a healthy young woman who has imagination
and a warm heart is attracted by every young man.  I know that you
wish me to be frank and to return your confidence.  But there is a
certain kind of young man with whom I always felt my interest
deepen.'

'Oh, you did discriminate?'

'Now you are getting bitter.  I will say no more.'

'You have said too much.  You must go on now.'

'Well, I was only going to say that dark men always had a peculiar
fascination for me.  I don't know what it is, but the feeling is
quite overpowering.'

'Is that why you married a man with flaxen hair?'

'Well, I couldn't expect to find every quality in my husband, could
I?  It would not be reasonable.  I assure you, dear, that taking your
tout ensemble, I like you far the best of all.  You may not be the
handsomest, and you may not be the cleverest--one cannot expect one's
absolute ideal,--but I love you far, far the best of any.  I do hope
I haven't hurt you by anything I have said.'

'I am sorry I am not your ideal, Maude.  It would be absurd to
suppose myself anybody's ideal, but I hoped always that the eyes of
love transfigured an object and made it seem all right.  My hair is
past praying for, but if you can point out anything that I can mend--
'

'No, no, I want you just as you are.  If I hadn't liked you best, I
shouldn't have married you, Frank, should I?'

'But those other experiences?'

'Oh, we had better drop them.  What good can it possibly do to
discuss my old experiences?  It will only annoy you.'

'Not at all.  I honour you for your frankness in speaking out,
although I acknowledge that it is a little unexpected.  Go on.'

'I forget where I was.'

'You had just remarked that before your marriage you had love-affairs
with a number of men.'

'How horrid it sounds, doesn't it?'

'Well, it did strike me in that way.'

'But that's because you exaggerate what I said.  I said that I had
been attracted by several men.'

'And that dark men thrilled you.'

'Exactly.'

'I had hoped that I was the first.'

'It was not fated to be so.  I could easily tell you a lie, Frank,
and say that you were, but I should never forgive myself if I were to
do such a thing.  You see I left school at seventeen, and I was
twenty-three when I became engaged to you.  There are six years.
Imagine all the dances, picnics, parties, visitings of six years.  I
could not help meeting young men continually.  A good many were
interested in me, and I--'

'You were interested in them.'

'It was natural, Frank.'

'Oh yes, perfectly natural.  And then I understand that the interest
deepened.'

'Sometimes.  When you met a young man who was interested several
times running, at a dance, then in the street, then in the garden,
then a walk home at night--of course your interest began to deepen.'

'Yes.'

'And then--'

'Well, what was the next stage?'

'Sure you're not angry?'

'No, no, not at all.  Why don't you keep the key in the spirit-
stand?'

'It might tempt Jemima.  Shall I get it?'

'No, no, go on!  The next stage was?'

'Well, when you have been deeply interested some time, then you begin
to have experiences.'

'Ah!'

'Don't shout, Frank.'

'Did I shout?  Never mind.  Go on!  You had experiences.'

'Why go into details?'

'You must go on.  You have said too much to stop.  I insist upon
hearing the experiences.'

'Not if you ask for them in that way, Frank.'  Maude had a fine
dignity of her own when she liked.

'Well, I don't insist.  I beg you to have confidence in me, and tell
me some of your experiences.'

She leaned back in her armchair with her eyes half closed, and a
quiet retrospective smile upon her face.

'Well, if you would really like to hear, Frank, as a proof of my
confidence and trust, I will tell you.  You will remember that I had
not seen you at the time.'

'I will make every excuse.'

'I will tell you a single experience.  It was my first of the sort,
and stands out very clearly in my memory.  It all came through my
being left alone with a gentleman who was visiting my mother.'

'Yes!'

'Well, we were alone in the room, you understand.'

'Yes, yes, go on!'

'And he paid me many little compliments:  kept saying how pretty I
was, and that he had never seen a sweeter girl, and so on.  You know
what gentlemen would say?'

'And you?'

'Oh, I hardly answered him, but of course I was young and
inexperienced, and I could not help being flattered and pleased at
his words.  I may have shown him what I felt, for he suddenly--'

'Kissed you!'

'Exactly.  He kissed me.  Don't walk up and down the room, dear.  It
fidgets me.'

'All right.  Go on.  Don't stop.  After this outrage what happened
next?'

'You really want to know?'

'I must know.  What did you do?'

'I am so sorry that I ever began, for I can see that it is exciting
you.  Light your pipe, dear, and let us talk of something else.  It
will only make you cross if I tell you the truth.'

'I won't be cross.  Go on.  What did you do?'

'Well, Frank, since you insist--I kissed him back.'

'You--you kissed him back!'

'You'll have Jemima up if you go on like that.'

'You kissed him back!'

'Yes, dear; it may be wrong, but I did.'

'Good God! why did you do that?'

'Well, I liked him.'

'A dark man?'

'Yes, he was dark.'

'O Maude!  Maude!  Well, don't stop.  What then?'

'Then he kissed me several times.'

'Of course he would, if you kissed him.  What else could you expect?
And then?'

'O Frank, I can't.'

'Go on.  I am ready for anything!'

'Well, do sit down, and don't run about the room.  I am only
agitating you.'

'There, I am sitting.  You can see that I am not agitated.  For
Heaven's sake, go on!'

'He asked me if I would sit upon his knee.'

'Yek!'

Maude began to laugh.

'Why, Frank, you are croaking like a frog.'

'I am glad you think it a laughing matter.  Go on!  Go on!  You
yielded to his very moderate and natural request.  You sat upon his
knee.'

'Well, Frank, I did.'

'Good heavens!'

'Don't be so excitable, dear.  It was long before I ever saw you.'

'You mean to sit there and tell me in cold blood that you sat upon
this ruffian's knee!'

'What else could I do?'

'What could you do?  You could have screamed, you could have rung the
bell, you could have struck him--you could have risen in the dignity
of your insulted womanhood and walked out of the room.'

'It was not so easy for me to walk out of the room.'

'He held you?'

'Yes, he held me.'

'Oh, if I had been there!'

'And there was another reason.'

'What was that?'

'Well, I wasn't very good at walking at that time.  You see, I was
only three years old.'

Frank sat for a few minutes absorbing it.

'You little wretch!' he said at last.

'Oh you dear old goose!  I feel so much better.'

'You horror!'

'I had to get level with you over my forty predecessors.  You old
Bluebeard!  But I did harrow you a little--didn't I?'

'Harrow me!  I'm raw all over.  It's a nightmare.  O Maude, how could
you have the heart?'

'Oh, it was lovely--beautiful!'

'It was dreadful.'

'And how jealous you were!  Oh, I AM so glad!'

'I don't think,' said Frank, as he put his arms round her, 'that I
ever quite realised before--'

And just then Jemima came in with the tray.



CHAPTER XI--CONCERNING MRS. BEETON



Frank Crosse had only been married some months when he first had
occasion to suspect that his wife had some secret sorrow.  There was
a sadness and depression about her at times, for which he was unable
to account.  One Saturday afternoon he happened to come home earlier
than he was expected, and entering her bedroom suddenly, he found her
seated in the basket-chair in the window, with a large book upon her
knees.  Her face, as she looked up at him with a mixed expression of
joy and of confusion, was stained by recent tears.  She put the book
hastily down upon the dressing-stand.

'Maude, you've been crying.'

'No, Frank, no!'

'O Maude, you fibber!  Remove those tears instantly.'  He knelt down
beside her and helped.  'Better now?'

'Yes, dearest, I am quite happy.'

'Tears all gone?'

'Quite gone.'

'Well, then, explain!'

'I didn't mean to tell you, Frank!'  She gave the prettiest, most
provocative little wriggles as her secret was drawn from her.  'I
wanted to do it without your knowing.  I thought it would be a
surprise for you.  But I begin to understand now that my ambition was
much too high.  I am not clever enough for it.  But it is
disappointing all the same.'

Frank took the bulky book off the table.  It was Mrs. Beeton's Book
of Household Management.  The open page was headed, 'General
Observations on the Common Hog,' and underneath was a single large
tear-drop.  It had fallen upon a woodcut of the Common Hog, in spite
of which Frank solemnly kissed it, and turned Maude's trouble into
laughter.

'Now you are all right again.  I do hate to see you crying, though
you never look more pretty.  But tell me, dear, what was your
ambition?'

'To know as much as any woman in England about housekeeping.  To know
as much as Mrs. Beeton.  I wanted to master every page of it, from
the first to the last.'

'There are 1641 of them,' said Frank, turning them over.

'I know.  I felt that I should be quite old before I had finished.
But the last part, you see, is all about wills, and bequests, and
homeopathy, and things of that kind.  We could do it later.  It is
the early part that I want to learn now--but it IS so hard.'

'But why do you wish to do it, Maude?'

'Because I want you to be as happy as Mr. Beeton.'

'I'll bet I am.'

'No, no, you can't be, Frank.  It says somewhere here that the
happiness and comfort of the husband depend upon the housekeeping of
the wife.  Mrs. Beeton must have been the finest housekeeper in the
world.  Therefore, Mr. Beeton must have been the happiest and most
comfortable man.  But why should Mr. Beeton be happier and more
comfortable than my Frank?  From the hour I read that I determined
that he shouldn't be--and he won't be.'

'And he isn't.'

'Oh, you think so.  But then you know nothing about it.  You think it
right because I do it.  But if you were visiting Mrs. Beeton, you
would soon see the difference.'

'What an awkward trick you have of always sitting in a window,' said
Frank, after an interval.  'I'll swear that the wise Mrs. Beeton
never advocates that--with half a dozen other windows within point-
blank range.'

'Well, then, you shouldn't do it.'

'Well, then, you shouldn't be so nice.'

'You really still think that I am nice?'

'Fishing!'

'After all these months?'

'Nicer and nicer every day.'

'Not a bit tired?'

'You blessing!  When I am tired of you, I shall be tired of life.'

'How wonderful it all seems!'

'Does it not?'

'To think of that first day at the tennis-party.  "I hope you are not
a very good player, Mr. Crosse!"--"No, Miss Selby, but I shall be
happy to make one in a set."  That's how we began.  And now!'

'Yes, it is wonderful.'

'And at dinner afterwards.  "Do you like Irving's acting?"--"Yes, I
think that he is a great genius."  How formal and precise we were!
And now I sit curling your hair in a bedroom window.'

'It DOES seem funny.  But I suppose, if you come to think of it,
something of the same kind must have happened to one or two people
before.'

'But never quite like us.'

'Oh no, never quite like us.  But with a kind of family resemblance,
you know.  Married people do usually end by knowing each other a
little better than on the first day they met.'

'What DID you think of me, Frank?'

'I've told you often.'

'Well, tell me again.'

'What's the use when you know?'

'But I like to hear.'

'Well, it's just spoiling you.'

'I love to be spoiled.'

'Well, then, I thought to myself--If I can only have that woman for
my own, I believe I will do something in life yet.  And I also
thought--If I don't get that woman for my own, I will never, never be
the same man again.'

'Really, Frank, the very first day you saw me?'

'Yes, the very first day.'

'And then?'

'And then, day by day, and week by week, that feeling grew deeper and
stronger, until at last you swallowed up all my other hopes, and
ambitions, and interests.  I hardly dare think, Maude, what would
have happened to me if you had refused me.'

She laughed aloud with delight.

'How sweet it is to hear you say so!  And the wonderful thing is that
you have never seemed disappointed.  I always expected that some day
after marriage--not immediately, perhaps, but at the end of a week or
so--you would suddenly give a start, like those poor people who are
hypnotised, and you would say, "Why, I used to think that she was
pretty!  I used to think that she was sweet!  How could I be so
infatuated over a little, insignificant, ignorant, selfish,
uninteresting--"  O Frank, the neighbours will see you?'

'Well, then, you mustn't provoke me.'

'What WILL Mrs. Potter think?'

'You should pull down the blinds before you make speeches of that
sort.'

'Now do sit quiet and be a good boy.'

'Well, then, tell me what you thought.'

'I thought you were a very good tennis-player.'

'Anything else?'

'And you talked nicely.'

'Did I?  I never felt such a stick in my life.  I was as nervous as a
cat.'

'That was so delightful.  I do hate people who are very cool and
assured.  I saw that you were disturbed, and I even thought--'

'Yes?'

'Well, I thought that perhaps it was I who disturbed you.'

'And you liked me?'

'I was very interested in you.'

'Well, that is the blessed miracle which I can never get over.  You,
with your beauty, and your grace, and your rich father, and every
young man at your feet, and I, a fellow with neither good looks, nor
learning, nor prospects, nor--'

'Be quiet, sir!  Yes, you shall!  Now?'

'By Jove, there IS old Mrs. Potter at the window!  We've done it this
time.  Let us get back to serious conversation again.'

'How did we leave it?'

'It was that hog, I believe.  And then Mr. Beeton.  But where does
the hog come in?  Why should you weep over him?  And what are the
Lady's Observations on the Common Hog?'

'Read them for yourself.'

Frank read out aloud:  '"The hog belongs to the order Mammalia, the
genus sus scrofa, and the species pachydermata, or thick-skinned.
Its generic characters are a long, flexible snout, forty-two teeth,
cloven feet, furnished with four toes, and a tail, which is small,
short, and twisted, while, in some varieties, this appendage is
altogether wanting." --But what on earth has all this to do with
housekeeping?'

'That's what _I_ want to know.  It is so disheartening to have to
remember such things.  What does it matter if the hog HAS forty-two
toes.  And yet, if Mrs. Beeton knew it, one feels that one ought to
know it also.  If once I began to skip, there would be no end to it.
But it really is such a splendid book in other ways.  It doesn't
matter what you want, you will find it here.  Take the index
anywhere.  Cream.  If you want cream, it's all there.  Croup.  If you
want--I mean, if you don't want croup, it will teach you how not to
get it.  Crumpets--all about them.  Crullers--I'm sure you don't know
what a cruller is, Frank.'

'No, I don't.'

'Neither do I.  But I could look it up and learn.  Here it is--
paragraph 2847.  It is a sort of pancake, you see.  That's how you
learn things.'

Frank Crosse took the book and dropped it.  It fell with a sulky thud
upon the floor.

'Nothing that it can teach you, dear, can ever make up to me if it
makes you cry, and bothers you.--You bloated, pedantic thing!' he
cried, in sudden fury, aiming a kick at the squat volume.  'It is to
you I owe all those sad, tired looks which I have seen upon my wife's
face.  I know my enemy now.  You pompous, fussy old humbug, I'll kick
the red cover off you!'

But Maude snatched it up, and gathered it to her bosom.  'No, no,
Frank, I don't know what I should do without it.  You have no idea
what a wise old book it is.  Now, sit there on the footstool at my
feet, and I will read to you.'

'Do, dear; it's delightful.'

'Sit quiet, then, and be good.  Now listen to this pearl of wisdom:
"As with the commander of an army, so it is with the mistress of a
house.  Her spirit will be seen through the whole establishment, and,
just in proportion as she performs her duties thoroughly, so will her
domestics follow in her path."'

'From which it follows,' said her husband, 'that Jemima must be a
perfect paragon.'

'On the contrary, it explains all Jemima's shortcomings.  Listen to
this:  "Early rising is one of the most essential qualities.  When a
mistress is an early riser, it is almost certain that her house will
be orderly and well managed."'

'Well, you are down at nine--what more do you want?'

'At nine!  I am sure that Mrs. Beeton was always up at six.'

'I have my doubts about Mrs. B.  Methinks the lady doth protest too
much.  I should not be very much surprised to learn that she had
breakfast in bed every morning.'

'O Frank!  You have no reverence for anything.'

'Let us have some more wisdom.'

'"Frugality and Economy are home virtues without which no household
can prosper.  Dr. Johnson says, 'Frugality may be termed--'"

'Oh, bother Dr. Johnson!  Who cares for a man's opinion.  Now, if it
had been Mrs. Johnson--!'

'Johnson kept house for himself for years--and a queer job he made of
it.'

'So I should think.'  Maude tossed her pretty curls.  'Mrs. Beeton is
all right, but I will not be lectured by Dr. Johnson.  Where was I?
Oh yes--"'We must always remember that to manage a little well, is a
great merit in housekeeping."'

'Hurrah!  Down with the second vegetable!  No pudding on fish days.
Vive la biere de Pilsen!'

'What a noisy boy you are!'

'This book excites me.  Anything more?'

"Friendships should not be hastily formed, nor the heart given at
once to every newcomer--"'

'Well, I should hope not!  Don't let me catch you at it!  You don't
mind my cigarette?  Has Mrs. Beeton a paragraph about smoking in
bedrooms?'

'Such an enormity never occurred to her as a remote possibility.  If
she had known you, dear, she would have had to write an appendix to
her book to meet all the new problems which you would suggest.  Shall
I go on?'

'Please do!'

'She next treats conversation.  "In conversation, trifling
occurrences such as small disappointments, petty annoyances, and
other everyday incidents, should never be mentioned to friends.  If
the mistress be a wife, never let a word in connection with her
husband's failings pass her lips--"'

'By Jove, this book has more wisdom to the square inch than any work
of man,' cried Frank, in enthusiasm.

'I thought that would please you.  "Good temper should be cultivated
by every mistress, as upon it the welfare of the household may be
said to turn."'

'Excellent!'

'"In starting a household, it is always best in the long-run to get
the very best articles of their kind."'

'That is why I got you, Maude.'

'Thank you, sir.  We have a dissertation then upon dress and fashion,
another upon engaging domestics, another about daily duties, another
about visiting, another about fresh air and exercise--'

'The most essential of any,' cried Frank, jumping up, and pulling his
wife by the arms out of her low wicker-chair.  'There is just time
for nine holes at golf before it is dark, if you wilt come exactly as
you are.  But listen to this, young lady.  If ever again I see you
fretting or troubling yourself about your household affairs--'

'No, no, Frank, I won't!'

'Well, if you do, Mrs. Beeton goes into the kitchen-fire.  Now
remember?'

'You are sure you don't envy Mr. Beeton?'

'I don't envy a man upon earth.'

'Then why should I try to be Mrs. Beeton?'

'Why indeed?'

'O Frank, what a load off my mind!  Those sixteen hundred pages have
just lain upon it for months.  Dear old boy! come on!'

And they clattered downstairs for their golf-clubs.



CHAPTER XII--MR. SAMUEL PEPYS



There were few things which Maude liked so much as a long winter
evening when Frank and she dined together, and then sat beside the
fire and made good cheer.  It would be an exaggeration to say that
she preferred it to a dance, but next to that supreme joy, and higher
even than the theatre in her scale of pleasures, were those serene
and intimate evenings when they talked at their will, and were silent
at their will, within their home brightened by those little jokes and
endearments and allusions which make up that inner domestic masonry
which is close-tiled for ever to the outsider.  Five or six evenings
a week, she with her sewing and Frank with his book, settled down to
such enjoyment as men go to the ends of the earth to seek, while it
awaits them, if they will but atune their souls to sympathy, beside
their own hearthstones.  Now and again their sweet calm would be
broken by a ring at the bell, when some friend of Frank's would come
round to pay them an evening visit.  At the sound Maude would say
'bother,' and Frank something shorter and stronger, but, as the
intruder appeared, they would both break into, 'Well, really now it
WAS good of you to drop in upon us in this homely way.'  Without such
hypocrisy, the world would be a hard place to live in.

I may have mentioned somewhere that Frank had a catholic taste in
literature.  Upon a shelf in their bedroom--a relic of his bachelor
days--there stood a small line of his intimate books, the books which
filled all the chinks of his life when no new books were forthcoming.
They were all volumes which he had read in his youth, and many times
since, until they had become the very tie-beams of his mind.  His
tastes were healthy and obvious without being fine.  Macaulay's
Essays, Holmes' Autocrat, Gibbons' History, Jefferies' Story of my
Heart, Carlyle's Life, Pepys' Diary, and Borrow's Lavengro were among
his inner circle of literary friends.  The sturdy East Anglian, half
prize-fighter, half missionary, was a particular favourite of his,
and so was the garrulous Secretary of the Navy.  One day it struck
him that it would be a pleasant thing to induce his wife to share his
enthusiasms, and he suggested that the evenings should be spent in
reading selections from these old friends of his.  Maude was
delighted.  If he had proposed to read the rig-vedas in the original
Sanskrit, Maude would have listened with a smiling face.  It is in
such trifles that a woman's love is more than a man's.

That night Frank came downstairs with a thick well-thumbed volume in
his hand.

'This is Mr. Pepys,' said he solemnly.

'What a funny name!' cried Maude.  'It makes me think of indigestion.
Why?  Oh yes, pepsine, of course.'

'We shall take a dose of him every night after dinner to complete the
resemblance.  But seriously, dear, I think that now that we have
taken up a course of reading, we should try to approach it in a grave
spirit, and endeavour to realise--Oh, I say, don't!'

'I AM so sorry, dear!  I do hope I didn't hurt, you!'

'You did--considerably.'

'It all came from my having the needle in my hand at the time--and
you looked so solemn--and--well, I couldn't help it.'

'Little wretch--!'

'No, dear; Jemima may come in any moment with the coffee.  Now, do
sit down and read about Mr Pepys to me.  And first of all, would you
mind explaining all about the gentleman, from the beginning, and
taking nothing for granted, just as if I had never heard of him
before.'

'I don't believe--'

'Never mind, sir!  Be a good boy and do exactly what you are told.
Now begin!'

'Well, Maude, Mr. Pepys was born--'

'What was his first name?'

'Samuel.'

'Oh dear, I'm sure I should not have liked him.'

'Well, it's too late to change that.  He was born--I could see by
looking, but it really doesn't matter, does it?  He was born
somewhere in sixteen hundred and something or other, and I forget
what his father was.'

'I must try to remember what you tell me.'

'Well, it all amounts to this, that he got on very well in the world,
that he became at last a high official of the navy in the time of
Charles the Second, and that he died in fairly good circumstances,
and left his library, which was a fine one, to one of the
universities, I can't remember which.'

'There is an accuracy about your information, Frank--'

'I know, dear, but it really does not matter.  All this has nothing
to do with the main question.'

'Go on, then!'

'Well, this library was left as a kind of dust-catcher, as such
libraries are, until one day, more than a hundred years after the old
boy's death, some enterprising person seems to have examined his
books, and he found a number of volumes of writing which were all in
cipher, so that no one could make head or tail of them.'

'Dear me, how very interesting!'

'Yes, it naturally excited curiosity.  Why should a man write volumes
of cipher?  Imagine the labour of it!  So some one set to work to
solve the cipher.  This was about the year 1820.  After three years
they succeeded.'

'How in the world did they do it?'

'Well, they say that human ingenuity never yet invented a cipher
which human ingenuity could not also solve.  Anyhow, they did
succeed.  And when they had done so, and copied it all out clean,
they found they had got hold of such a book as was never heard of
before in the whole history of literature.'

Maude laid her sewing on her lap, and looked across with her lips
parted and her eyebrows raised.

'They found that it was an inner Diary of the life of this man, with
all his impressions, and all his doings, and all his thoughts--not
his ought-to-be thoughts, but his real, real thoughts, just as he
thought then at the back of his soul.  You see this man, and you know
him very much better than his own wife knew him.  It is not only that
he tells of his daily doings, and gives us such an intimate picture
of life in those days, as could by no other means have been conveyed,
but it is as a piece of psychology that the thing is so valuable.
Remember the dignity of the man, a high government official, an
orator, a writer, a patron of learning, and here you have the other
side, the little thoughts, the mean ideas which may lurk under a
bewigged head, and behind a solemn countenance.  Not that he is worse
than any of us.  Not a bit.  But he is frank.  And that is why the
book is really a consoling one, for every sinner who reads it can say
to himself, "Well, if this man who did so well, and was so esteemed,
felt like this, it is no very great wonder that I do."'

Maude looked at the fat brown book with curiosity.  'Is it really all
there?' she asked.

'No, dear, it will never all be published.  A good deal of it is, I
believe, quite impossible.  And when he came to the impossible
places, he doubled and trebled his cipher, so as to make sure that it
should never be made out.  But all that is usually published is
here.'  Frank turned over the leaves, which were marked here and
there with pencilings.

'Why are you smiling, Frank?'

'Only at his way of referring to his wife.'

'Oh, he was married?'

'Yes, to a very charming girl.  She must have been a sweet creature.
He married her at fifteen on account of her beauty.  He had a keen
eye for beauty had old Pepys.'

'Were they happy?'

'Oh yes, fairly so.  She was only twenty-nine when she died!'

'Poor girl!'

'She was happy in her life--though he DID blacken her eye once.'

'Not really?'

'Yes, he did.  And kicked the housemaid.'

'Oh, the brute!'

'But on the whole he was a good husband.  He had a few very good
points about him.'

'But how does he allude to his wife?'

'He has a trick of saying, "my wife, poor wretch!"'

'Impertinent!  Frank, you said to-night that other men think what
this odious Mr. Pepys says.  Yes, you did!  Don't deny it!  Does that
mean that you always think of me as "poor wretch"?'

'We have come along a little since then.  But how these passages take
you back to the homely life of those days!'

'Do read some.'

'Well, listen to this, "And then to bed without prayers, to-morrow
being washing-day."  Fancy such a detail coming down to us through
two centuries.'

'Why no prayers?'

'I don't know.  I suppose they had to get up early on washing-days,
and so they wanted to go to sleep soon.'

'I'm afraid, dear, you do the same without as good an excuse.  Read
another!'

'He goes to dine with some one--his uncle, I think.  He says, "An
excellent dinner, but the venison pasty was palpable beef, which was
not handsome."'

'How beautiful!  Mrs. Hunt Mortimer's sole last week was palpable
plaice.  Mr. Pepys is right.  It was not handsome.'

'Here's another grand entry:  "Talked with my wife of the poorness
and meanness of all that the people about us do, compared with what
we do."  I dare say he was right, for they did things very well.
When he dined out, he says that his host gave him "the meanest dinner
of beef, shoulder and umbles of venison, and a few pigeons, and all
in the meanest manner that ever I did see, to the basest degree."

'What are umbles, dear?'

'I have no idea.'

'Well, whatever they are, it sounds to me a very good dinner.  People
must have lived very well in those days.'

'They habitually over-ate and over-drank themselves.  But Pepys gives
us the menu of one of his own entertainments.  I've marked it
somewhere.  Yes, here it is.  "Fricassee of rabbits and chickens, a
leg of mutton boiled, three carps in a dish, a great dish of a side
of lamb, a dish of roasted pigeons, a dish of four lobsters, three
tarts, a lamprey pie (a most rare pie!), a dish of anchovies, good
wine of several sorts, and all things mighty noble and to my great
content."'

'Good gracious!  I told you that I associated him with indigestion.'

'He did them pretty well that time.'

'Who cooked all this?'

'The wife helped in those days.'

'No wonder she died at twenty-nine.  Poor dear!  What a splendid
kitchen-range they must have had!  I never understood before why they
had such enormous grates in the old days.  Naturally, if you have six
pigeons, and a lamprey, and a lobster, and a side of lamb, and a leg
of mutton, and all these other things cooking at the same time, you
would need a huge fire.'

'The wonderful thing about Pepys,' said Frank, looking thoughtfully
over the pages, 'is that he is capable of noting down the mean little
impulses of human nature, which most men would be so ashamed of, that
they would hasten to put them out of their mind.  His occasional
shabbiness in money matters, his jealousies, his envies, all his
petty faults, which are despicable on account of their pettiness.
Fancy any man writing this.  He is describing how he visited a friend
and was reading a book from his library.  "A very good book," says
he, "especially one letter of advice to a courtier, most true and
good, which made me once resolve to tear out the two leaves that it
was writ in, but I forbore it."  Imagine recording such a vile
thought.'

'But what you have never explained to me yet, dear, or if you did, I
didn't understand--you don't mind my being a little stupid, do you?--
is, what object Mr. Pepys had in putting down all this in such a form
that no one could read it.'

'Well, you must bear in mind, dear, that he could read it himself.
Besides he was a fellow with a singularly methodical side to his
mind.  He was, for example, continually adding up how much money he
had, or cataloguing and indexing his library, and so on.  He liked to
have everything shipshape.  And so with his life, it pleased him to
have an exact record which he could turn to.  And yet, after all, I
don't know that that is a sufficient explanation.'

'No, indeed, it is not.  My experience of man--'

'YOUR experience, indeed!'

'Yes, sir, my experience of men--how rude you are, Frank!--tells me
that they have funny little tricks and vanities which take the
queerest shapes.'

'Indeed!  Have I any?'

'You--you are compounded of them.  Not vanity--no, I don't mean that.
But pride--you are as proud as Lucifer, and much too proud to show
it.  That is the most subtle form of pride.  Oh yes, I know perfectly
well what I mean.  But in this man's case, it took the form of
wishing to make a sensation after his death.  He could not publish
such a thing when he lived, could he?'

'Rather not.'

'Well, then, he had to do it after his death.  He had to write it in
cipher, or else some one would have found him out during his
lifetime.  But, very likely, he left a key to the cipher, so that
every one might read it when he was gone, but the key and his
directions were in some way lost.'

'Well, it is very probable.'

The fire had died down, so Maude shipped off her chair, and sat on
the black fur rug, with her back against Frank's knees.  'Now, dear,
read away!' said she.

But the lamp shone down upon her dainty head, and it gleamed upon her
white neck, and upon the fluffy, capricious, untidy, adorable, little
curlets, which broke out along the edges of the gathered strands of
her chestnut hair.  And so, after the fashion of men, his thoughts
flew away from Mr. Pepys and the seventeenth century, and all that is
lofty and instructive, and could fix upon nothing except those dear
little wandering tendrils, and the white column on which they twined.
Alas, that so small a thing can bring the human mind from its
empyrean flights!  Alas, that vague emotions can drag down the
sovereign intellect!  Alas, that even for an hour, a man should
prefer the material to the spiritual!

But the man who doesn't misses a good deal.



CHAPTER XIII--A VISIT TO MR. SAMUEL PEPYS



There are several unjustifiable extravagances which every normal man
commits.  There are also several unjustifiable economies.  Among
others, there is that absurd eagerness to save the striking of a
second match, which occasions so many burned fingers, and such
picturesque language.  And again, there is the desire to compress a
telegraphic message into the minimum sixpennyworth, and so send an
ambiguous and cryptic sentence, when sevenpence would have made it as
clear as light.  We all tend to be stylists in our telegrams.

A week after the conversation about Mr. Pepys, when some progress had
been made with the reading of the Diary, Maude received the following
wire from Frank -


'Mrs. Crosse.  Woking.--Pepys buttered toast suede gloves four
Monument wait late.'

As a sixpennyworth it was a success, but as a message it seemed to
leave something to be desired.  Maude puzzled over it, and tried
every possible combination of the words.  The nearest approach to
sense was when it was divided in this way--Pepys--buttered toast--
suede gloves--four--Monument, wait late.

She wrote it out in this form, and took it section by section.
'Pepys,' that was unintelligible.  'Buttered toast,' no sense in
that.  'Suede gloves,' yes, she had told Frank that when she came to
town, she would buy some suede gloves at a certain shop in the City,
where she could get for three and threepence a pair which would cost
her three and ninepence in Woking.  Maude was so conscientiously
economical, that she was always prepared to spend two shillings in
railway fares to reach a spot where a sixpence was to be saved, and
to lavish her nerve and energy freely in the venture.  Here, then, in
the suede gloves, was a central point of light.  And then her heart
bounded with joy, as she realised that the last part could only mean
that she was to meet Frank at the Monument at four, and that she was
to wait for him if he were late.

So, now, returning to the opening of the message, with the light
which shone from the ending, she realised that buttered toast might
refer to a queer little City hostel, remarkable for that luxury,
where Frank had already taken her twice to tea.  And so leaving Mr.
Pepys to explain himself later, Maude gave hurried orders to Jemima
and the cook, and dashed upstairs to put on her new fawn-coloured
walking-dress--a garment which filled her with an extraordinary
mixture of delight and remorse, for it was very smart, cost seven
guineas, and had not yet been paid for.

The rendezvous was evidently a sudden thought upon the part of Frank,
for he had left very little time for her to reach the trysting-place.
However, she was fortunate in catching a train to Waterloo, and
another thence to the City, and so reached the Monument at five
minutes to four.  The hour was just striking when Frank, with his
well-brushed top-hat and immaculate business frock-coat, came rushing
from the direction of King William Street.  Maude held out her hand
and he shook it, and then they both laughed at the formality.

'I am so glad you were able to come, dearest.  How you do brighten up
the old City!'

'Do I?  I felt quite lonely until you came.  Nothing but droves of
men--and all staring.'

'It's your dress.'

'Oh, thank you, sir!'

'Entirely that pretty brown--'

'Brown!  Fawn colour.'

'Well, that's brown.  Anyhow, it looks charming.  And so do you--by
Jove you do, Maude!  Come this way!'

'Where are we going?'

'By underground.  Here we are.--Two second singles, Mark Lane,
please!--No, that's for the west-end trains.  Down here!  Next train,
the man says.'

They were in the mephitic cellar, with the two long wooden platforms
where the subterranean trains land or load their freights.  A
strangling gas tickled their throats and set them coughing.  It was
all dank and dark and gloomy.  But little youth and love care for
that!  They were bubbling over with the happiness of this abnormal
meeting.  Both talked together in their delight, and Maude patted
Frank's sleeve with every remark.  They could even illuminate all
that was around them, by the beauty and brightness of their own love.
It went the length of open praise for their abominable surroundings.

'Isn't it grand and solemn?' said Maude.  'Look at the black
shadows.'

'When they come to excavate all this some thousands of years hence,
they will think it was constructed by a race of giants,' Frank
answered.

'The modern works for the benefit of the community are really far
greater than those which sprang from the caprice of kings.  The
London and North-Western Railway is an infinitely grander thing than
the pyramids.  Look at the two headlights in the dark!'

Two sullen crimson discs glowed in the black arch of the tunnel.
With a menacing and sinister speed, they grew and grew until roaring
they sprang out of the darkness, and the long, dingy train, with a
whining of brakes, drew up at the platform.

'Here's one nearly empty,' said Frank, with his hand on the handle.

'Don't you think--' said Maude.

'Yes, I do,' cried Frank.

And they got into one which was quite empty.  For the underground
railway is blessed as regards privacy above all other lines, and
where could a loving couple be more happy, who have been torn apart
by cruel fate for seven long hours or so?  It was with a groan that
Frank remarked that they had reached Mark Lane.

'Bother!' said Maude, and wondered if there were any shop near where
she could buy hairpins.  As every lady knows, or will know, there is
a very intimate connection between hairpins and a loving husband.

'Now, Frank, about your telegram.'

'All right, dear.  Come along where I lead you, and you will
understand all about it.'

They passed out of Mark Lane Station and down a steep and narrow
street to the right.  At the bottom lay an old smoke-stained church
with a square tower, and a small open churchyard beside it.

'That's the church of Saint Olave,' said Frank.  'We are going into
it.'

He pushed open a folding oaken door, and they found themselves inside
it.  Rows of modern seats filled the body of it, but the walls and
windows gave an impression of great antiquity.  The stained glass--
especially that which surmounted the altar--contained those rich
satisfying purples and deep deep crimsons which only go with age.  It
was a bright and yet a mellow light, falling in patches of vivid
colour upon the brown woodwork and the grey floors.  Here and there
upon the walls were marble inscriptions in the Latin tongue, with
pompous allegorical figures with trumpets, for our ancestors blew
them in stone as well as in epitaphs over their tombs.  They loved to
die, as they had lived, with dignity and with affectation.  White
statues glimmered in the shadows of the corners.  As Frank and his
wife passed down the side-aisle, their steps clanged through the
empty and silent church.

'Here he is!' said Frank, and faced to the wall.

He was looking up at the modern representation of a gentleman in a
full and curly wig.  It was a well-rounded and comely face, with
shrewd eyes and a sensitive mouth.  The face of a man of affairs, and
a good fellow, with just that saving touch of sensuality about it
which makes an expression human and lovable.  Underneath was printed
-


SAMUEL PEPYS
Erected by public subscription
1883.


'Oh, isn't he nice?' said Maude.

'He's not a bad-looking chap, is he?'

'I don't believe that man ever could have struck his wife or kicked
the maid.'

'That's calling him a liar.'

'Oh dear, I forgot that he said so himself.  Then I suppose he must
have done it.  What a pity it seems.'

'Cheer up!  We must say what the old heathen lady said when they read
the gospels to her.'

'What did she say?'

'She said, "Well, it was a long time ago, and we'll hope that it
wasn't true!"'

'O Frank, how can you tell such stories in a church.  Do you really
suppose that Mr. Pepys is in that wall?'

'I presume that the monument marks the grave.'

'There's a little bit of plaster loose.  Do you think I might take
it?'

'It isn't quite the thing.'

'But it can't matter, and it isn't wrong, and we are quite alone.'
She picked off the little flake of plaster, and her heart sprang into
her mouth as she did so, for there came an indignant snort from her
very elbow, and there was a queer little smoke-dried, black-dressed
person who seemed to have risen, like the Eastern genii or a modern
genius, in a single instant.  A pair of black list slippers explained
the silence of his approach.

'Put that back, young lady,' said he severely.

Poor Maude held out her guilty relic on the palm of her hand.  'I am
so sorry,' said she.  'I am afraid I cannot put it back.'

'We'll 'ave the 'ole church picked to pieces at this rate,' said the
clerk.  'You shouldn't 'ave done it, and it was very wrong.'  He
snorted and shook his head.

'It's of no consequence,' said Frank.  'The plaster was hanging, and
must have fallen in any case.  Don't make a fuss about a trifle.'

The clerk looked at the young gentleman and saw defiance in one of
his eyes and half a crown in the other.

'Well, well!' he grumbled.  'It shows as the young lady takes an
interest, and that's more than most.  Why, sir, if you'll believe me,
there's not one in a hundred that comes to this church that ever
'eard of Pepys.  "Pepys!" says they.  "'Oo's Pepys?"  "The Diarist,"
says I.  "Diarist!" says they, "wot's a Diarist?"  I could sit down
sometimes an' cry.  But maybe, miss, you thought as you were picking
that plaster off 'is grave?'

'Yes, I thought so.'

The clerk chuckled.

'Well, it ain't so.  I'll tell you where 'e really lies, if you'll
promise you won't pick another chunk off that.  Well, then, it's
there--beside the communion.  I saw 'im lyin' there with these very
eyes, and 'is wife in the coffin beneath 'im.'

'You saw him?'

'Yes, sir, I saw 'im, an' that's more than any livin' man could say,
for there were only four of us, and the other three are as dead as
Pepys by now.'

'Oh do tell us about it!' cried Maude.

'Well, it was like this, miss.  We 'ad to examine to see 'ow much
room there was down there, and so we came upon them.'

'And what did you see?'

'Well, miss, 'is coffin lay above, and 'is wife's below, as might be
expected, seeing that she died thirty years or so before 'im.  The
coffins was very much broken, an' we could see 'im as clear us I can
see you.  When we first looked in I saw 'im lying quite plain--a
short thick figure of a man--with 'is 'ands across 'is chest.  And
then, just as we looked at 'im, 'e crumbled in, as you might say,
across 'is breast bone, an' just quietly settled down into a 'uddle
of dust.  It's a way they 'as when the fresh air strikes 'em.  An'
she the same, an' 'is dust just fell through the chinks o' the wood
and mixed itself with 'ers.'

'O Frank!'  Maude's ready tears sprang to her eyes.  She put her hand
upon her husband's and was surprised to find how cold it was.  Women
never realise that the male sex is the more sensitive.  He had not
said, 'O Maude!' because he could not.

'They used some powder like pepper for embalmin' in those days,' said
the clerk.  'And the vicar--it was in old Bellamy's time--'e took a
sniff into the grave, an' 'e sneezed an' sneezed till we thought we
should 'ave to fetch a doctor.  'Ave you seen Mrs. Pepys' tomb?'

'No, we have only just come.'

'That's it on the left of the common.'

'With the woman leaning forward?'

'Yes, sir.  That's Mrs. Pepys herself.'

It was an arch laughing face, the face of a quite young woman; the
sculptor had depicted her as leaning forward in an animated and
natural attitude.  Below was engraved -


Obiit
Xo Novembris
AEtatis 29
Conjugii 15
Anno Domini 1669.


'Poor dear!' whispered Maude.

'It was hard that she should die just as her husband was becoming
famous and successful,' said Frank.  'She who had washed his shirts,
and made up the coal fires, when they lived in a garret together.
What a pity that she could not have a good time!'

'Ah well, if she loved him, dear, she had a good time in the garret.'

Maude was leaning forward with her face raised to look at the bust of
the dead woman, which also leaned forward as if to look down upon
her.  A pair of marble skulls flanked the lady's grave.  A red glow
from the evening sun struck through a side-window and bathed the
whole group in its ruddy light.  As Frank, standing back in the
shadow, ran his eyes from the face of the dead young wife to that of
his own sweet, girlish bride, with those sinister skulls between,
there came over him like a wave, a realisation of the horror which
lies in things, the grim close of the passing pageant, the black
gloom, which swallows up the never-ending stream of life.  Will the
spirit wear better than the body; and if not, what infernal practical
joke is this to which we are subjected!

'It will.  It must,' he said.

'WHY, Frank--Frank dear, what is the matter?  You are quite pale.'

'Come out into the air, Maude.  I have had enough of this stuffy old
church.'

'Stuffy!' said the clerk.  'Well, we've 'ad the Lord Mayor 'ere at
least once a year, an' 'e never found it stuffy.  A cleaner, fresher
church you won't find in the city of London.  It's 'ad its day, I'll
allow.  There was a time--and I can remember it--when folk used to
spend their money where they made it, and the plate would be full of
paper and gold, where now we find it 'ard enough to get coppers.
That was fifty year ago, when I was a young clerk.  You might not
think it, but I've seen a Lord Mayor, a past Lord Mayor, and a Lord
Mayor elect of the city of London, all sitting on one bench in this
very church.  And YOU call it stuffy!'

Frank soothed the wounded feelings of the old clerk, and explained
that by stuffy he meant interesting.  He also shook hands with him in
a peculiar way as he held his palm upturned in the small of his back.
Then Maude and he retraced their steps up the narrow street which is
called Seething Lane.

'Poor old boy!  What was it, then?' asked Maude, looking up with her
sympathetic eyes.  It is at such moments that a man realises what the
companionship of women means.  The clouds melted before the sun.

'What an ass I was!  I began to think of all sorts of horrible
things.  Never mind, Maude!  We are out for a holiday.  Hang the
future!  Let us live in the present.'

'I always do,' said Maude, and she spoke for her sex.

'Well, what now?  Buttered toast or suede gloves?'

'Business first!' said Maude primly, and so proceeded to save her
sixpence on the gloves.  As she was tempted, however ('such a civil
obliging shopman, Frank!'), to buy four yards of so-called Astrakhan
trimming, a frill of torchon lace, six dear little festooned
handkerchiefs, and four pairs of open-work stockings--none of which
were contemplated when she entered the shop--her sixpenny saving was
not as brilliant a piece of finance as she imagined.

And then they finished their excursion in the dark, wainscotted, low-
ceilinged coffee-room of an old-fashioned inn, once the mother of
many coaches, and now barren and deserted, but with a strange cunning
in the matter of buttered toast which had come down from more
prosperous days.  It was a new waiter who served them, and he
imagined them to be lovers and scented an intrigue; but when they
called for a second plate of toast and a jug of boiling water, he
recognised the healthy appetite of the married.  And then, instead of
going home like a good little couple, Maude suddenly got it into her
head that it would cheer away the last traces of Frank's gloom if
they went to see 'Charley's Aunt' at the Globe.  So they loitered and
shopped for a couple of hours, and then squeezed into the back of the
pit; and wedged in among honest, hearty folk who were not ashamed to
show their emotions, they laughed until they were tired.  And so
home, as their friend Pepys would have said, after such a day as
comes into the memory, shining golden among the drab, when old folk
look back, and think of the dear dead past.  May you and I, reader,
if ever we also come to sit in our final armchairs in the chimney
corners, have many such to which our minds may turn, sweet and
innocent and fragrant, to cheer us in those darksome hours to come.



CHAPTER XIV--TROUBLE



One evening Frank came home with a clouded face.  His wife said
nothing, but after dinner she sat on a footstool beside his chair and
waited.  She knew that if it were for the best, he would tell her
everything, and she had confidence enough in his judgment to
acquiesce in his silence if he thought it best to be silent.  As a
matter of fact, it was just this telling her which made his trouble
hard to bear.  And yet he thought it wiser to tell.

'I've had something to worry me, dear.'

'Poor old boy, I know you have.  What was it?'

'Why should I bother you with it?'

'A nice wife I should be, if I shared all your joys and none of your
sorrows!  Anyhow, I had rather share sorrow with you than joy within
any one else.'  She snuggled her head up against his knee.  'Tell me
about it, Frank.'

'You remember my telling you just before our marriage that I was
surety for a man?'

'I remember perfectly well.'

'His name was Farintosh.  He was an insurance-agent, and I became
surety for him in order to save his situation.'

'Yes, dear, it was so noble of you.'

'Well, Maude, he was on the platform this morning, and when he saw
me, he turned on his heel and hurried out of the station.  I read
guilt in his eyes.  I am sure that his accounts are wrong again.'

'Oh, what an ungrateful wretch!'

'Poor devil, I dare say he has had a bad time.  But I was a fool not
to draw out of that.  It was all very well when I was a bachelor.
But here I am as a married man faced with an indefinite liability and
nothing to meet it with.  I don't know what is to become of us,
Maude.'

'How much is it, dearest?'

'I don't know.  That is the worst of it.'

'But surely your own office would not be so hard upon you?'

'It is not my own office.  It is another office--the Hotspur.'

'Oh dear!  What have you done about it, Frank?'

'I called at their office in my lunch-hour, and I requested them to
send down an accountant to examine Farintosh's books.  He will be
here to-morrow morning, and I have leave of absence for the day.'

And so they were to spend an evening and a night without knowing
whether they were merely crippled or absolutely ruined.  Frank's
nature was really a very proud one, and the thought of failing in his
engagements wounded his self-respect most deeply.  His nerves winced
and quivered before it.  But her sweet, strong soul rose high above
all fear, and bore him up with her, into the serenity of love and
trust and confidence.  The really precious things, the things of the
spirit, were permanent, and could not be lost.  What matter if they
lived in an eight-roomed villa, or in a tent out on the heath?  What
matter if they had two servants, or if she worked for him herself?
All this was the merest trifle, the outside of life.  But the
intimate things, their love, their trust, their pleasures of mind and
soul, these could not be taken away from them while they had life to
enjoy them.  And so she soothed Frank with sweet caresses and gentle
words, until this night of gloom had turned to the most beautiful of
all his life, and he had learned to bless the misfortune which had
taught him to know the serene courage and the wholehearted devotion
which can only be felt, like the scent of a fragrant leaf, when Fate
gives us a crush between its iron fingers.

Shortly after breakfast Mr. Wingfield, the accountant from London,
arrived--a tall, gentlemanly man, with a formal manner.

'I'm sorry about this business, Mr. Crosse,' said he.

Frank made a grimace.  'It can't be helped.'

'We will hope that the amount is not very serious.  We have warned
Mr. Farintosh that his books will be inspected to-day.  When you are
ready we shall go round.'

The agent lived in a side-street not far off.  A brass plate, outside
a small brick house, marked it out from the line of other small brick
houses.  A sad-faced woman opened the door, and Farintosh himself,
haggard and white, was seated among his ledgers in the little front
room.  A glance at the man's helpless face turned all Frank's
resentment to pity.

They sat down at the table, the accountant in the centre, Farintosh
on the right, and Frank on the left.  There was no talk save an
occasional abrupt question and answer.  For two hours the swish and
rustle of the great blue pages of the ledgers were the chief sound,
with the scratching of Mr. Wingfield's pen as he totalled up long
columns of figures.  Frank's heart turned to water as he saw the huge
sums which had passed through this man's hands.  How much had
remained there?  His whole future depended upon the answer to that
question.  How prosaic and undramatic are the moments in which a
modern career is made or marred!  In this obscure battlefield, the
squire no longer receives his accolade in public for his work well
done, nor do we see the butcher's cleaver as it hacks off the
knightly spurs, but failure and success come strangely and
stealthily, determined by trifles, and devoid of dignity.  Here was
the crisis of Frank's young life, in this mean front room, amongst
the almanacs and the account-books.

'Can I rely upon these figures?' asked Wingfield at last.

'You can, sir.'

'In that case I congratulate you, Mr. Crosse.  I can only find a
deficiency of fifty pounds.'

Only enough to swallow the whole of their little savings, which they
had carefully invested!  However, it was good news, and Frank shook
the proffered hand of the accountant.

'I will stay for another hour to check these figures,' said
Wingfield.  'But there is no need to detain you.'

'You will come round and lunch with us?'

'With pleasure.'

'Au revoir, then.'  Frank ran all the way home, and burst in upon his
wife.  'It is not so very bad, dear--only fifty pounds.'  They danced
about in their joy like two children.

But Wingfield came to his lunch within a solemn face.

'I am very sorry to disappoint you,' he said, 'but the matter is more
serious than I thought.  We have entered some sums as unpaid which he
has really received, but the receipts for which he has held back.
They amount to another hundred pounds.'

Maude felt inclined to cry as she glanced at Frank, and saw his
resolute effort to look unconcerned.

'Then it's a hundred and fifty.'

'Certainly not less.  I have marked the items down upon this paper
for your inspection.'

Frank glanced his practised eyes over the results of the accountant's
morning's work.

'You have credited him within a hundred and twenty pounds in the
bank, I see.'

'Yes, his bank-book shows a balance of that amount.'

'When was it made out?'

'Last Saturday.'

'He may have drawn it since them.'

'It is certainly possible.'

'We might go round after lunch and make sure.'

'Very good.'

'And in any case, as it is the Company's money, don't you think we
had better take it out of his hands?'

'Yes, I think you are right.'

It was a miserable meal, and they were all glad when it was finished.
Maude drew Frank into the other room before he started.

'I could not let you go without THAT, dearest.  Keep a brave heart,
my own laddie, for I know so well that we shall come through it all
right.'

So Frank set out with a higher courage, and they both returned to the
agent's house.  His white face turned a shade whiter when he
understood their errand.

'Is this necessary, Mr. Wingfield?' he pleaded.  'Won't you take my
word for this money?'

'I am sorry to have to say it, sir, but we have trusted in your word
too often.'

'But the money is there, I swear it.'

'It is the Company's money, and we must have it.'

'It will ruin my credit locally if I draw out my whole account under
compulsion.'

'Then let him keep ten pounds in,' said Frank.  Farintosh agreed with
an ill grace to the compromise, and they all started off for the
bank.  When they reached the door the agent turned upon them with an
appealing face.

'Don't come in with me, gentlemen.  I could never hold up my head
again.'

'It is for Mr. Crosse to decide.'

'I don't want to be unreasonable, Farintosh.  Go in alone and draw
the money.'

They could never understand why he begged for that extra five
minutes.  Perhaps it was that he had some mad hope of persuading the
bank manager to allow him to overdraw to that amount.  If so, the
refusal was a curt one, for he reappeared with a ghastly face and
walked up to Frank.

'I may as well confess to you, Mr. Crosse, I have nothing in the
bank.'

Frank whistled and turned upon his heel.  He could not by reproaches
add to the wretched man's humiliation.  After all, he had himself to
blame.  He had incurred a risk with his eyes open, and he was not the
man to whine now that the thing had gone against him.  Wingfield
walked home with him and murmured some words of sympathy.  At the
gate the accountant left him and went on to the station.

So their liability had risen from fifty to two hundred and seventy
pounds.  Even Maude was for an instant daunted by the sum.  The sale
of their furniture would hardly meet it.  It was the blackest hour of
their lives, and yet, always a strange sweet undercurrent of joy was
running through it, for it is only sorrow, fairly shared and bravely
borne, which can weld two human souls together.

Dinner was over when there came a ring at the bell.

'If you please, sir, Mr. Farintosh would like to see you,' said the
maid Jemima.

'Show him in here.'

'Don't you think, Frank, that I had better go?'

'No, I don't.  I never asked him to come.  If he comes, let him face
us both.  I have not made much of my dealings with him alone.'

He was shown in, downcast, shifty-eyed, and ill at ease.  He laid his
hat upon the floor, and crept humbly towards the chair which Frank
pushed towards him.

'Well, Farintosh?'

'Well, Mr. Crosse, I have come round to tell you, and you too,
missus, the sorrow I feel that I have brought this trouble upon you.
I hoped all would have gone right after that last time, but I've had
to pay up back debts, and that's what has put me wrong.  I've never
had what one may call a fair chance.  But I'm really sorry, sir, that
you who have, as one might say, befriended me, should have to suffer
for it in this way.'

'Words won't mend it, Farintosh.  I only blame you for not coming to
me when first things began to go wrong.'

'Well, sir, I was always hoping that I could turn them right again,
so as you wouldn't need to be troubled at all.  And so it went from
bad to worse until we find ourselves here.  But what I wanted to ask
you, Mr. Crosse, was what you meant to do about it?'

Frank writhed before this home question.

'Well, I suppose I am responsible,' said he.

'You mean to pay the money, sir?'

'Well, somebody must pay it.'

'Do you remember the wording of the bond, Mr. Crosse?'

'Not the exact wording.'

'Well, sir, I should advise you to get your lawyer to read it.  In my
opinion, sir, you are not liable at all.'

'Not liable!'  Frank felt as if his heart had turned suddenly from a
round-shot to an air-balloon.  'Why not liable?'

'You were a little slapdashy, if one might say so, in matters of
business, sir, and perhaps you read that bond less carefully than I
did.  There was a clause in it by which the Company agreed frequently
and periodically to audit my accounts, so as to prevent your
liability being at any time a very high one.'

'So there was!' cried Frank.  'Well, didn't they?'

'No, sir, they didn't.'

'By Jove--Maude, do you hear that?--if that is right, they brought
their own misfortunes upon themselves.  Do you mean to say they never
audited you?'

'Yes, sir, they did so four times.'

'In how long?'

'In fourteen months.'

The air-balloon was gone and the cannon-ball back in its place once
more.

'That will be held to exonerate them.'

'No, sir, I think not.  "Frequently and periodically" does not mean
four times in fourteen months.'

'A jury might take it so.'

'Consider, sir, that the object was that your liability should be
limited.  Thousands of pounds were passing through my hands in that
time, and therefore these four audits were, as one might say,
insufficient for the object of the bond.'

'So I think,' cried Maude, with conviction.  'Frank, we'll have the
best advice upon the subject to-morrow.'

'And meanwhile, Mr. Crosse,' said Farintosh, rising from his chair,
'I am your witness, whether the Company prosecutes me or not.  And I
hope that this will be some humble atonement for the trouble that I
have brought you.'

And so a first rift of light began to shine in the dark place.  But
it was not broadened by the letter which he found waiting upon his
breakfast-table -


Re Farintosh's Accounts.

HOTSPUR INSURANCE OFFICE.

Dear Sir,--On arriving in London I came here at once, and checked
Farintosh's accounts from the books of the head office.  I am sorry
to say that I find a further discrepancy of seventy pounds.  I am
able, however, to assure you that we have now touched bottom.  The
total amount is three hundred and forty pounds, and a cheque for that
sum at your early convenience would oblige us, as we are anxious to
bring so unpleasant a business to a conclusion.--Yours truly,

JAMES WINGFIELD.


To which Frank and Maude in collaboration -


Dear Sir,--I note your claim for 340 pounds on account of the affairs
of your agent Farintosh.  I am advised, however, that there have been
certain irregularities in the matter, about which I must make some
investigation before paying the claim.--Yours truly,

Frank Crosse.


To which the Hotspur Insurance Office -


Sir,--Had your letter been a plea for more time to fulfil your
engagement, we should have been content to wait; but since you appear
disposed to dispute your liability, we have no alternative but to
take immediate steps to enforce payment. -

Yours truly, JOHN WATERS, Secretary.


To which Frank and Maude -


Sir,--My solicitor, A. C. R. Owen, of 14 Shirley Lane, E.C., will be
happy to accept service.


Which is the correct legal English for 'You may go to the devil!'

But this is an anticipation.  In the meantime, having received the
original letter and answered it, Frank went up to town as usual,
while Maude played the more difficult part of waiting quietly at
home.  In his lunch-hour Frank went to see his friend and solicitor,
who in turn obtained leave to see the bond, and came back with a
grave face.

'You have a case,' said he, 'but by no means a certainty.  It all
depends upon how the judge might read the document.  I think that it
would strengthen our case very materially if we had counsel's
opinion.  I'll copy the bond and show it to Manners, and have his
opinion before you go back to-night.'

So Frank went round again after office-hours, and found Owen waiting
in very low spirits, for their relations were closer than those of
mere solicitor and client.

'Very sorry,' said he.

'Opinion against us.'

'Dead against us.'

Frank tried to look as if he didn't mind.

'Let me see it.'

It was a long blue document with the heading, 'The Hotspur Insurance
Company, Limited, v. Frank Crosse.'

'I have perused the case submitted to me, and the papers accompanying
the same,' said the learned counsel, 'and in my opinion the Hotspur
Insurance Company, Limited, are entitled to recover from Mr. Crosse
under his guarantee, the sum of 340 pounds, being monies received by
Mr. Farintosh, and not paid over by him to the said Company.'  There
was a great deal more, but it was anticlimax.

'Well, what shall we do?' asked Frank helplessly.  The British law
makes one feel so.

'Well, I should stand out, if I were you.  There is certainly a
chance.'

'Look here, old chap,' said Frank, 'I may as well be honest with you.
If this thing goes against me, I am stony broke.  I don't know where
your costs are coming from.'

'Don't bother about that,' said Owen kindly.  'After all, Manners is
not infallible.  Let us have Holland, and see what he can make of
it.'

So twenty-four hours later Frank found Owen radiant with another
opinion in his hand.

'Dead for us this time.  Look here!'

And he read out, 'I have carefully considered the case submitted to
me for my opinion, and the documents sent therewith.  In my opinion
the Hotspur Insurance Company, Limited, are not entitled to recover
against Mr. Crosse the sum claimed by them or any part thereof, as
there has been a breach on their part of an essential condition of
the guarantee.'  'He reads "frequently and periodically" as we do,'
continued Owen, glancing over the long document, 'and he is very
clear as to our case.'

'Suppose we have another, and try the best of three,' said Frank.

'It's too expensive a game.  No, Holland is a sound man, and his
opinion would weigh with any judge.  I think we have enough to go on
with.'

'And you think it is safe?'

'No, no, nothing is ever safe in the law.  But we can make a fight of
it now.'

And now Frank was to learn what it meant to be entangled in an
intricate clumsy old machine, incredibly cumbrous and at the same
time incredibly powerful, jolting along with its absurd forms and
abominable English towards an end which might or might not be just,
but was most certainly ruinously expensive.  The game began by a
direct letter from the Queen, of all people, an honour which Frank
had never aspired to before, and certainly never did again.

Victoria, by the grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Faith, remarked abruptly to Frank
Crosse of Woking, in the county of Surrey, 'We command you that
within eight days of the service of this writ on you, inclusive of
the day of such service, you cause an appearance to be entered for
you in an action at the suit of the Hotspur Insurance Company,
Limited.'  If he didn't do so, Her Majesty remarked that several very
unpleasant things might occur, and Hardinge Stanley, Earl of
Halsbury, corroborated Her Majesty.  Maude was frightened to death
when she saw the document, and felt as if unawares they must have
butted up against the British Constitution, but Owen explained that
it was only a little legal firework, which meant that there might be
some trouble later.

'Well, at any rate,' said Frank, 'it means that in eight days it will
all be over.'

Owen laughed heartily at the remark.

'It means,' said he, 'that in eight days we must promise that at some
future date we will begin to make preparations for something to
happen in the future.  That is about the meaning of it.  All you can
do now is to be perfectly philosophic, and leave the rest to me.'

But how is a man with a capital of fifty pounds going to be
philosophic when he is fighting an opponent whose assets, as a
certain hoarding near Clapham Junction told him every morning,
exceeded three millions of pounds.  He treated it lightly to Maude,
and she to him, but each suffered horribly, and each was well aware
of the other's real feelings.  Sometimes there was a lull, and they
could almost believe that the whole thing was over.  And then the old
machine gave a creak, and the rusty cog-wheels took one more turn,
and they both felt the horrid thing which held them.

First of all, they had to enter appearances, which meant that they
would dispute the action.  Then the other side had to make an
affidavit verifying their claim.  Then a Master had to pronounce
whether the action should be treated offhand, or whether he would
listen to what they had to say about it.  He decided to listen to
what was to be said.  Then each side claimed to see the other's
documents, 'discovery' they called it, as if the documents were
concealed, and they had to hunt for them stealthily with lanterns.
Then each made remarks about the other's documents, and claimed to
see the remarks so made.  Then the lawyers of the Company made a
statement of their claim, and when she read it Maude burst into
tears, and said that it was all over, and they must make the best of
it, and she should never forgive herself for that new dress in the
spring.  And then Frank's lawyer drew up a defence, and when Frank
heard it, he said, 'Why, what a silly business it seems!  They have
not got a leg to stand upon.'  And so, after all these flourishes and
prancings, the two parties did actually begin to show signs of coming
to a hearing after all, and a day was fixed for the trial.  By a
coincidence it was Frank's birthday.  'There's a good omen!' cried
Maude.

The first herald of the approaching conflict was a seedy person, who
thrust a paper into Frank's hand as he emerged from The Lindens in
the morning.  It was another letter from Her Majesty, in which sub
poena (Her Majesty has not a gracious way of putting things in these
documents), Mr. Frank Crosse had 'to attend at the Royal Courts of
Justice, Strand, at the sittings of the Queen's Bench Division of our
High Court of Justice, to give evidence on behalf of the Hotspur
Company.'

This seemed to Frank to be a most unexpected and fearsome stroke, but
Owen simply laughed.

'That is mere bluff,' said he.  'It makes me think that they are
weakening.  They want to frighten you.'

'They did,' said Frank.

'Two can play at that game.  We must keep a bold front.'

'What do you mean to do?'

'To subpoena all their crowd.'

'Capital!' cried Frank.  So a clerk was sent across to the Hotspur
office with a whole bundle of subpoenas, and served them liberally
out.  And in two days' time was the day of battle.



CHAPTER XV--A RESCUE



As the day fixed for the hearing drew near, Ruin lived with them by
day and slept with them by night.  Its dark shadow covered their
lives, and they moved in the gloom of its presence.  If the trial
went against them, and Owen in his most hopeful moods did not
disguise from them that it might, they would have to pay the double
costs as well as the original claim.  All that they possessed would
not cover it.  On the other hand, if they won, this rich Company
might carry the matter to a higher Appeal Court, and so involve them
in a fresh succession of anxieties and expenses.  Do what they would,
there was always danger.  Frank said little, and he slept little
also.

One night, just before the trial, Wingfield, the accountant of the
Society, came down to Woking.  He had managed the case all through
for the directors.  His visit was a sort of ultimatum.

'We are still ready to pay our own law-costs,' said he, 'if you will
allow the original claim.'

'I can't do that,' said Frank doggedly.

'The costs are piling up at a furious rate, and some one will have to
pay them.'

'I hope that it will be you.'

'Well, don't say afterwards that I did not warn you.  My dear Crosse,
I assure you that you are being misled, and that you have not really
got a leg to stand upon.'

'That's what the trial is about,' said Frank.

He kept a bold face to the enemy, but after Wingfield's departure,
Maude saw that his confidence was greatly shaken.

'He seemed very sure of their case,' said he.  'He would not speak
like that if he did not know.'

But Maude took quite another view.

'If they know that they can recover their money in court, why should
they send Mr. Wingfield down in this way.'

'He is such a good chap--he wants to save us expense.'

Maude was less trusting.

'He is doing the best for his own side,' said she.  'It is his duty,
and we can't blame him.  But if he thought it best to get behind his
own lawyers and come down here, then he must have some doubts about
going into court.  Perhaps he would be willing to consider some
compromise.'

But Frank only shook his head.

'We have drawn the cork, and we must drink the wine,' said he.  'We
have gone too far to stop.  Any compromise which they would accept
would be as much out of our power to pay as the whole sum would be,
and so we may just as well see it through.'  But for once Maude did
not take his opinion as final, but lay awake all night and thought it
over.  She had determined to begin acting upon her own account, and
she was so eager to try what she could do that she lay longing for
the morning to break.  When she came down to breakfast, her plan of
campaign was formed.

'I am coming up to town with you, Frank.'

'Delighted to hear it, dear.'  When she had shopping to do, she
frequently went up with him, so it did not surprise him.  What would
have surprised him was to know that she had despatched three
telegrams, by means of Jemima, before he was up.


'To John Selby, 53 Fenchurch Street, E.C.  Will call eleven o'clock.
Important business. -
MAUDE.'

'To Lieutenant Selby, the Depot, Canterbury.  Please come up next
train, meet me Fenchurch Street, eleven thirty.  Important. -
MAUDE.'

'To Owen, 14 Shirley Lane, E.C.  Will call twelve o'clock.
Important.--MRS. CROSSE.'


So she had opened her campaign.

'By the way, Frank,' said she, as they travelled up together, 'to-
morrow is your birthday.'

'Yes, dear, it is,' he answered lugubriously.

'Dear me!  What shall I give my boy for a birthday present?  Nothing
you particularly want?'

'I have all I want,' said he, looking at her.

'Oh, but I think I could find something.  I must look round when I am
in town.'

She began her looking round by a visit to her father in Fenchurch
Street.  It was something new for him to get telegrams from Maude
upon business, and he was very much surprised.

'Looking remarkably well, my dear.  Your appearance is a certificate
of character to your husband.  Well, and how is all at Woking?  I
hope the second cook proved to be a success.'

But Maude was not there for small talk.  'Dear dad,' said she, 'I
want you to stand by me, for I am in trouble.  Now, my dear good dad,
please see things from my point of view, and don't make objections,
and do exactly what I ask you.'  She threw her arms round his neck
and gave him a hearty squeeze.

'Now I call that exerting undue pressure,' said he, extricating his
white head.  'If this sort of thing is allowed in the city of London,
there is an end of all business.'  However, his eyes twinkled and
looked as if he liked it.  'Now madame, what can I do for you?'

'I'm going to be perfectly business-like,' said she, and gave him
another squeeze before sitting down.  'Look here, dad.  You give me
an income of fifty pounds a year, don't you?'

'My dear girl, I can't raise it.  Jack's expenses in the Hussars--'

'I don't want you to raise it.'

'What do you want?'

'I seem to remember, dad, that you told me that this fifty pounds was
the interest on a thousand pounds which was invested for me.'

'So it is--five per cent. debentures.'

'Well, dad, if I were content with an income of twenty-five pounds a
year instead of fifty pounds, then I could take five hundred pounds
out of my money, and nobody would be the worse.'

'Except yourself.'

Maude laughed at that.

'I want the use of the money just for one day.  I certainly won't
need it all.  I just want to feel that I have as much as that in case
I need it.  Now, my dear old daddy, do please not ask any questions,
but be very nice and good, and tell me how I can get these five
hundred pounds.'

'And you won't tell me why you want them?'

'I had rather not--but I will if you insist.'

Old Selby looked into the brave, clear eyes of his daughter, and he
did not insist.

'Look here!  You've got your own little banking account, have you
not?'

'Yes, dad.'

'That's right.  Never mix it up with your husband's.'  He scribbled a
cheque.  'Pay that in!  It is for five hundred pounds.  I will sell
half your debentures and charge you with brokerage.  I believe in
strict business between relatives.  When you pay back the five
hundred pounds, your allowance will be fifty a year once more.'

Maude then and there endorsed the cheque and posted it to her bank.
Then with a final embrace to her father, she hastened out to further
victories.  Jack Selby was smoking a cigarette upon the doorstep.

'Hullo, Maude!  Calling up the reserves?  What's the matter?  Jolly
lucky it wasn't my day on duty.  You girls think a soldier has
nothing to do.  It was so once, but we are all scientific blokes now.
No, thank you, I won't see the dad!  He'd think I had come for money,
and it would upset him for the day.'

Maude took her brother in the cab with her, and told him the whole
story of Frank's misfortune, with some account of her own intentions.
Jack was vastly interested.

'What did dad say about it?'

'I didn't tell him.  I thought Frank would rather not.'

'Quite right.  He won't mind me.  He knows I'm a bit of a business
man myself.  Only signed a paper once in my life, and quite a small
paper too, and I haven't heard the last of it yet.  The thing wasn't
much bigger than a postcard, but the fuss those people made
afterwards!  I suppose they've been worrying Frank.'

'We have had no peace for months.'

'Worry is bad for the young.  But he should not mind.  He should go
on fizzing like I did.  Now we'll put this thing through together,
Maude.  I see your line, and I'll ride it with you.'

They found Mr. Owen at home, and Maude did the talking.

'I am convinced, Mr. Owen, that they don't want to go into court.
Mr. Wingfield coming down like that proves it.  My husband is too
proud to bargain with them, but I have no scruples.  Don't you think
that I might go to Mr. Wingfield myself, and pay the three hundred
and forty pounds, and so have done with the worry for ever?'

'Speaking as a lawyer,' said Owen, 'I think that it is very
irregular.  Speaking as a man, I think no harm could come of it.  But
I should not like you to offer the whole sum.  Simply say that you
are prepared for a reasonable compromise, and ask them to suggest
what is the lowest sum which the office would accept to close the
business.'

'You leave it with me,' said Jack, winking at the lawyer.  'I am
seeing her through.  I'll keep her on the rails.  I am Number 1,
Class A, at business.  We'll take 'em up one link in the curb if they
try any games with us!  Come on, Maude, and get it over.'

He was an excellent companion for her, for his buoyancy turned the
whole thing into fun.  She could not take it too seriously in his
company.  They called at the Hotspur office and asked to see Mr.
Wingfield.  He was engaged, but Mr. Waters, the secretary, a very
fat, pompous man, came in to them.

'I am very sorry,' said he, 'very sorry, indeed, Mrs. Crosse, but it
is too late for any compromise of the sort.  We have our costs to
consider, and there is no alternative but for the case to go into
court.'

Poor Maude nearly burst into tears.

'But suppose that we were to offer--'

'To give you an hour to think it over,' cried Jack.

Mr. Waters shook, his head despondently.

'I do not think that we should alter our decision.  However, Mr.
Wingfield will be here presently, and he will, of course, listen to
any representations which you may have to make.  In the meantime you
must excuse me, as I have matters of importance to attend to.'

'Why, Maude, you little Juggins,' cried Jack, when the door was shut,
'you were just going to offer to pay their costs.  I only just headed
you off in time.'

'Well, I was going to inquire about it.'

'Great Scot, it's lucky you've got a business man at your elbow.  I
couldn't stand that chap at any price.  A bit too hairy in the
fetlocks for my taste.  Couldn't you see that he was only bluffing?'

'How do you know, Jack?'

'It was shining all over him.  Do you suppose a man has bought as
many hairies as I have, and can't tell when a dealer is bluffing?  He
was piling it on so that when the next Christmas-tree comes along, he
may find a soft job waiting for him.  I tell you you want a friendly
native, like me, when you get into this kind of country.  Now ride
this one on the curb, and don't let him have his head for a moment.'

Mr. Wingfield had entered, and his manner was very different to that
of the secretary.  He had great sympathy with the Crosses, and no
desire to wash the Company's dirty linen in public.  He was,
therefore, more anxious than he dared to show to come to some
arrangement.

'It is rather irregular for me to see you.  I should refer you to our
solicitors,' said he.

'Well, we saw you when you came to Woking,' said Maude.  'I believe
that we are much more likely to come to an arrangement if we talk it
over ourselves.'

'I am sure I earnestly hope so,' Wingfield answered.  'I shall be
delighted to listen to anything which you may suggest.  Do you, in
the first place, admit your liability?'

'To some extent,' said Maude, 'if the Company will admit that they
are in the wrong also.'

'Well, we may go so far as to say that we wish the books had been
inspected more often, and that we regret our misplaced confidence in
our agent.  That should satisfy you, Mrs. Crosse.  And now that you
admit SOME liability, that is a great step in advance.  We have no
desire to be unreasonable, but as long as no liability was admitted,
we had no course open to us but litigation.  We now come to the
crucial point, which is, how much liability should fall upon you.  My
own idea is, that each should pay their own costs, and that you
should, in addition, pay over to the Company--'

'Forty pounds,' said Jack firmly.

Maude expected Mr. Wingfield to rise up and leave the room.  As he
did not do so, nor show any signs of violence, she said, 'Yes, forty
pounds.'

He shook his head.

'Dear me, Mrs. Crosse, this is a very small sum.'

'Forty pounds is our offer,' said Jack.

'But on what is this offer based?'

'We have worked it out,' said Jack, 'and we find that forty pounds is
right.'

Mr. Wingfield rose from his chair.

'Well,' said he, 'of course any offer is better than no offer.  I
cannot say what view the directors may take of this proposal, but
they will hold a board meeting this afternoon, and I will lay it
before them.'

'And when shall we know?'

'I could send you round a line by hand to your solicitor.'

'No hurry about it!  Quite at your own convenience!' said Jack.  When
he got outside, in the privacy of their hansom, he was convulsed with
the sense of his own achievements.

'Class A, Number 1, and mentioned at the Agricultural Hall,' he
cried, hugging himself in his delight.  His sister hugged him also,
so he was a much-embraced young man.  'Am I not a man of business,
Maude?  You can't buy 'em--you must breed 'em.  One shilling with the
basket.  I shook him in the first round, and he never rallied after.'

'You are a dear good boy.  You did splendidly.'

'That's the way to handle 'em.  He saw that I was a real fizzer and
full of blood.  One business man can tell another at a glance.'

Maude laughed, for Jack, with his cavalry swagger and a white weal
all round his sunburned face to show where his chin-strap hung,
looked the most unbusiness-like of mortals.

'Why did you offer forty pounds?' she asked.

'Well, you have to begin somewhere.'

'But why forty?'

'Because it is what we offer when we are buying the hairies--
trooper's chargers, you know.  It's a great thing to have a fixed
rule in business.  I never go higher than forty--rule one, section
one, and no exceptions in the margin.'

They lunched together at the Holborn, and Jack took Maude afterwards
to what he called 'a real instructive show,' which proved to be a
horse-sale at Tattersall's.  They then drove back to the lawyer's,
and there they found a letter waiting addressed to Mrs. Crosse.
Maude tore it open.

'Dear Mrs. Crosse,' said this delightful note, 'I am happy to be able
to inform you that the directors have decided to stop the legal
proceedings, and to accept your offer of forty pounds in full
satisfaction of all claims due against your husband.'

Maude, Jack, and the good Owen performed a triumphant pas de trois.

'You have done splendidly, Mrs. Crosse, splendidly!' cried Owen.  'I
never heard a better day's work in my life.  Now, if you will give me
your cheque and wait here, I will go over and settle everything.'

'And please bring the bond back with you,' said Maude.


So it was that Frank, coming down upon the morning of his birthday,
perceived a pretty silver cigarette-box laid in front of his plate.

'Is this for me, my darling?'

'Yes, Frank, a wee present from your wife.'

'How sweet of you!  I never saw such a lovely case.  Why, there's
something inside it.'

'Cigarettes, I suppose.

'No, it is a paper of some kind.  "Hotspur Insurance Company."  Good
Lord, I never seem for one instant to be able to shake that infernal
thing off!  How on earth did it get in there?  What's this?--"I
hereby guarantee to you--"  What's this?  Maude, Maude, what have you
been doing?'

'Dear old boy,' she cried, as she put her arms round him.  'Dear old
boy!  Oh, I DO feel so happy!'



CHAPTER XVI--THE BROWNING SOCIETY



It all began by Mrs. Hunt Mortimer, the smart little up-to-date wife
of the solicitor, saying to Mrs. Beecher, the young bride of the
banker, that in a place like Woking it was very hard to get any
mental friction, or to escape from the same eternal grooves of
thought and conversation.  The same idea, it seemed, had occurred to
Mrs. Beecher, fortified by a remark from the Lady's Journal that an
internal intellectual life was the surest method by which a woman
could preserve her youth.  She turned up the article--for the
conversation occurred in her drawing-room--and she read extracts from
it.  'Shakespeare as a Cosmetic' was the title.  Maude was very much
struck, and before they separated they had formed themselves into a
Literary Society which should meet and discuss classical authors
every Wednesday afternoon at each other's houses.  That one hour of
concentrated thought and lofty impulse should give a dignity and a
tone to the whole dull provincial week.

What should they read?  It was well that they should decide it before
they separated, so as to start fair upon the next Wednesday.  Maude
suggested Shakespeare, but Mrs. Hunt Mortimer thought that a good
deal of it was improper.

'Does it matter?' said Mrs. Beecher.  'We are all married.'

'Still I don't think it would be quite nice,' said Mrs. Hunt
Mortimer.  She belonged to the extreme right on matters of propriety.

'But surely Mr. Bowdler made Shakespeare quite respectable,' Mrs.
Beecher argued.

'He did his work very carelessly.  He left in much that might be
dispensed with, and he omitted a good deal which was quite innocent.'

'How do you know?'

'Because I once got two copies and read all the omissions.'

'Why did you do that?' asked Maude mischievously.

'Because I wanted to make sure that they HAD been omitted,' said Mrs.
Hunt Mortimer severely.

Mrs. Beecher stooped and picked an invisible hairpin out of the rug.
Mrs. Hunt Mortimer continued.

'There is Byron, of course.  But he is so very suggestive.  There are
passages in his works--'

'I could never see any harm in them,' said Mrs. Beecher.

'That is because you did not know where to look,' said Mrs. Hunt
Mortimer.  'If you have a copy in the house, Mrs. Beecher, I will
undertake to make it abundantly clear to you that he is to be
eschewed by those who wish to keep their thoughts unsullied.  Not?  I
fancy that even quoting from memory I could convince you that it is
better to avoid him.'

'Pass Byron,' said Mrs. Beecher, who was a very pretty little
kittenish person, with no apparent need of any cosmetics, literary or
otherwise.  'How about Shelley?'

'Frank raves about Shelley,' observed Maude.

Mrs. Hunt Mortimer shook her head.

'His work has some dreadful tendencies.  He was, I am informed,
either a theist or an atheist, I cannot for the moment recall which--
I think that we should make our little course as improving as
possible.'

'Tennyson,' Maude suggested.

'I have been told that his meaning is too clear to entitle him to
rank among the great thinkers of our race.  The lofty thought is
necessarily obscure.  There is no merit in following a poem which is
perfectly intelligible.  Which leads us to--'

'Browning!' cried the other ladies.

'Exactly.  We might form a little Browning Society of our own.'

'Charming!  Charming!'

And so it was agreed.

There was only one other point to be settled at this their inaugural
meeting, which was, to choose the other ladies who should be admitted
into their literary circle.  There were to be no men.

'They do distract one so,' said Mrs. Hunt Mortimer.

The great thing was to admit no one save those earnest spirits who
would aspire to get the full benefit from their studies.  Mrs.
Fortescue could not be thought of, she was much too talkative.  And
Mrs. Jones had such a frivolous mind.  Mrs. Charles could think and
talk of nothing but her servants.  And Mrs. Patt-Beatson always
wanted to lay down the law.  Perhaps on the whole it would be better
to start the society quietly among themselves, and then gradually to
increase it.  The first meeting should be next Wednesday, at Mrs.
Crosse's house, and Mrs. Hunt Mortimer would bring her complete two-
volume edition with her.  Mrs. Beecher thought that one volume would
be enough just at first, but Mrs. Hunt Mortimer said that it was
better to have a wide choice.  Maude went home and told Frank in the
evening.  He was pleased, but rather sceptical.

'You must begin with the simpler things first,' said he.  'I should
recommend Herve Riel and Gold Hair.'

But Maude put on the charming air of displeasure which became her so
well.

'We are serious students, sir,' said she.  'We want the very hardest
poem in the book.  I assure you, Frank, that one of your little
faults is that you always underrate a woman's intelligence.  Mrs.
Hunt Mortimer says that though we may be less original than men, we
are more assim--more assmun--'

'Assimulative.'

'That's what I say--assimulative.  Now, you always talk as if--oh
yes, you do!  No, you mustn't!  How absurd you are, Frank!  Whenever
I try to speak seriously to you, you always do that and spoil
everything.  How would you like to discuss Browning if at the end of
every sentence somebody came and kissed you?  You wouldn't mind!  No,
I dare say not.  But you would feel that you were not being taken
seriously.  Wait till the next time YOU are in earnest about
anything--you'll see!'


The meeting was to be at three o'clock, and at ten minutes to the
hour Mrs. Hunt Mortimer arrived with two large brown volumes under
her arm.  She had come early, she said, because there was to be a
rehearsal of the amateur theatricals at the Dixons' at a quarter-past
four.  Mrs. Beecher did not appear until five minutes after the hour.
Her cook had quarrelled with the housemaid, and given instantaneous
notice, with five people coming to dinner on Saturday.  It had upset
the lady very much, and she explained that she would not have come if
she had not promised.  It was so difficult to follow poetry when you
were thinking about the entree all the time.

'Why the entree?' asked Mrs. Hunt Mortimer, looking up from the book
which she held open in front of her.

'My dear,' said Mrs. Beecher, who had the art of saying the most
simple things as if they were profoundly confidential secrets,--'My
dear, my parlourmaid is really an excellent cook, and I shall rely
upon her if Martha really goes.  But she is limited, very limited,
and entrees and savouries are the two things in which I cannot
entirely trust her.  I must, therefore, find some dish which is well
within her capacity.'

Mrs. Hunt Mortimer prided herself upon her housekeeping, so the
problem interested her.  Maude also began to feel the meeting less
dull than she had expected.

'Of course there are many things to be considered,' said Mrs. Hunt
Mortimer, with the air of a Q.C. giving an opinion.  'Oyster patties
or oyster vol-au-vents--'

'Oysters are out of season,' said Maude.

'I was about to say,' Mrs. Hunt Mortimer continued, with admirable
presence of mind, 'that these entrees of oysters are inadmissible
because they are out of season.  Now curried prawns--'

'My husband loathes them.'

'Well, well!  What do you say to sweetbreads en caisse?  All you want
are chopped mushrooms, shalots, parsley, nutmeg, pepper, salt,
breadcrumb, bacon fat--'

'No, no,' cried Mrs. Beecher despairingly.  'Anne would never
remember all that.'

'Cutlets a la Constance,' said Mrs. Hunt Mortimer.  'I am sure that
they are simple enough.  Cutlets, butter, fowls' livers, cocks'
combs, mushrooms--'

'My dear, my dear, remember that she is only a parlourmaid.  It is
unreasonable.'

'Ragout of fowl, chicken patties, croquettes of veal with a little
browning--'

'We've got back to Browning after all,' cried Maude.

'Dear me,' said Mrs. Beecher, 'it is all my fault, and I am so sorry.
Now, Mrs. Hunt Mortimer, do please read us a little of that
delightful poetry.'

'You can always get small entrees sent down from the Stores,' cried
Maude, as a happy thought.

'You dear, good girl, how sweet of you to think of it.  Of course one
can.  That is really an admirable idea.  There now, we may consider
the entree as being removed, so we proceed to--'

'The piece de resistance,' said Mrs. Hunt Mortimer solemnly, glancing
down the index of the first volume.  'I confess that my acquaintance
with the poet has up to now been rather superficial.  Our ambition
must be to so master him that he becomes from this time forward part
and parcel of ourselves.  I fancy that the difficulties in
understanding him have been very much exaggerated, and that with
goodwill and perseverance we shall manage to overcome them.'

It was a relief to Mrs. Beecher and to Maude to realise that Mrs.
Hunt Mortimer knew no more about the matter than themselves.  They
both ventured upon a less diffident air now that it was clear that it
might be done in safety.  Maude frowned thoughtfully, and Mrs.
Beecher cast up her pretty brown eyes at the curtain-rod, as if she
were running over in her memory the whole long catalogue of the
poet's works.

'I will tell you what we should do,' said she.  'We must make a vow
that we shall never pass a line until we understand it.  We will go
over it again and again until we grasp its meaning.'

'What an excellent idea!' cried Maude, with one of her little bursts
of enthusiasm.  'Now that is really splendid, Mrs. Beecher.'

'My friends always call me Nellie,' said the little brunette.

'How nice of you to say so!  I should love to call you so, if you
don't mind.  It is such a pretty name too.  Only you must call me
Maude.'

'You look like a Maude,' said Mrs. Beecher.  'I always picture a
Maude as bright and pretty and blonde.  Isn't it strange how names
associate themselves with characters.  Mary is always domestic, and
Rose is a flirt, and Elizabeth is dutiful, and Evelyn is dashing, and
Alice is colourless, and Helen is masterful--'

'And Matilda is impatient,' said Mrs. Hunt Mortimer, laughing.
'Matilda has reason to be, seated here with an index in front of her
while you two are exchanging compliments.'

'Why, we were waiting for you to begin,' said Mrs. Beecher
reproachfully.  'Do let us have something, for really the time is
slipping away.'

'It would be a pity to begin at the beginning, because that
represents his immature genius,' remarked Mrs. Hunt Mortimer.  'I
think that on this the opening day of the Society, we should have the
poet at his best.'

'How are we to know which IS his best?' Maude asked.

'I should be inclined to choose something with a title which suggests
profundity--"A Pretty Woman," "Love in a Life," "Any Wife to any
Husband"--'

'Oh, what DID she say to him?' cried Maude.

'Well, I was about to say that all these subjects rather suggested
frivolity.'

'Besides, it really is a very absurd title,' remarked Mrs. Beecher,
who was fond of generalising from her six months' experience of
matrimony.  '_A_ husband to _A_ wife' would be intelligible, but how
can you know what ANY husband would say to ANY wife?  No one can
really foretell what a man will do.  They really are such
extraordinary creatures.'

But Mrs. Hunt Mortimer had been married for five years, and felt as
competent to lay down the law about husbands as about entrees.

'When you have had a larger experience of them, dear, you will find
that there is usually a reason, or at least a primitive instinct of
some sort, at the root of their actions.  But, seriously, we must
really concentrate our attention upon the poet, for my other
engagement will call me away at four, which only leaves me ten
minutes to reach Maybury.'

Mrs. Beecher and Maude settled down with anxious attention upon their
faces.

'Do please go on!' they cried.

'Here is "The Pied Piper of Hamelin."'

'Now that interests me more than I can tell,' cried Maude, with her
eyes shining with pleasure.  'Do please read us everything there is
about that dear piper.'

'Why so?' asked her two companions.

'Well, the fact is,' said Maude, 'Frank--my husband, you know--came
to a fancy-dress at St. Albans as the Pied Piper.  I had no idea that
it came from Browning.'

'How did he dress for it?' asked Mrs. Beecher.  'We are invited to
the Aston's dress ball, and I want something suitable for George.'

'It was a most charming dress.  Red and black all over, something
like Mephistopheles, you know, and a peaked hat with a bell at the
top.  Then he had a flute, of course, and a thin wire from his waist
with a stuffed rat at the end of it.'

'A rat!  How horrid!'

'Well, that was the story, you know.  The rats all followed the Pied
Piper, and so this rat followed Frank.  He put it in his pocket when
he danced, but once he forgot, and so it got stood upon, and the
sawdust came out all over the floor.'

Mrs. Hunt Mortimer was also invited to the dress ball, and her
thoughts flew away from the book in front of her.

'How did you go, Mrs. Crosse?' she asked.

'I went as "Night."'

'What! you with your brown hair!'

'Well, father said that I was not a very dark night.  I was in black,
you know, just my ordinary black silk dinner-dress.  Then I had a
silver half-moon over my head, and black veils round my hair, and
stars all over my bodice and skirt, with a long comet right across
the front.  Father upset a cup of milk over me at supper, and said
afterwards that it was the milky way.'

'It is simply maddening how men WILL make jokes about the most
important subjects,' said Mrs. Hunt Mortimer.  'But I have no doubt,
dear, that your dress was an exceedingly effective one.  Now, for my
own part, I had some idea of going as the "Duchess of Devonshire."'

'Charming!' cried Mrs. Beecher and Maude.

'It is not a very difficult costume, you know.  I have some old Point
d'Alencon lace which has been in the family for a century.  I make it
the starting-point of my costume.  The gown need not be very
elaborate--'

'Silk?' asked Mrs. Beecher.

'Well, I thought that perhaps a white-flowered brocade--'

'Oh yes, with pearl trimming.'

'No, no, dear, with my lace for trimming.'

'Of course.  You said so.'

'And then a muslin fichu coming over here.'

'How perfectly sweet!' cried Maude.

'And the waist cut high, and ruffles at the sleeves.  And, of course,
a picture hat--you know what I mean--with a curling ostrich feather.'

'Powdered hair, of course?' said Mrs. Beecher.

'Powdered in ringlets.'

'It will suit you admirably--beautifully.  You are tall enough to
carry it off, and you have the figure also.  How I wish I was equally
certain about my own!'

'What had you thought of, dear?'

'Well, I had some idea about "Ophelia."  Do you think that it would
do?'

'Certainly.  Had you worked it out at all?'

'Well, my dear,' said Mrs. Beecher, relapsing into her pleasant
confidential manner.  'I had some views, but, of course, I should be
so glad to have your opinion about it.  I only saw Hamlet once, and
the lady was dressed in white, with a gauzy light nun's-veiling over
it.  I thought that with white pongee silk as an under-dress, and
then some sort of delicate--'

'Crepe de Chine,' Maude suggested.

'But in Ophelia's day such a thing had never been heard of,' said
Mrs. Hunt Mortimer.  'A net of silver thread--'

'Exactly,' cried Mrs. Beecher, 'with some sort of jewelling upon it.
That was just what I had imagined.  Of course it should be cut
classically and draped--my dressmaker is such a treasure--and I
should have a gold embroidery upon the white silk.'

'Crewel work,' said Maude.

'Or a plain cross-stitch pattern.  Then a tiara of pearls on the
head.  Shakespeare--'

At the name of the poet their three consciences pricked
simultaneously.  They looked at each other and then at the clock with
dismay.

'We must--we really MUST go on with our reading,' cried Mrs. Hunt
Mortimer.  'How did we get talking about these dresses?'

'It was my fault,' said Mrs. Beecher, looking contrite.

'No, dear, it was mine,' said Maude.  'You remember it all came from
my saying that Frank had gone to the ball as the Pied Piper.'

'I am going to read the very first poem that I open,' said Mrs. Hunt
Mortimer remorselessly.  'I am afraid that it is almost time that I
started, but we may still be able to skim over a few pages.  Now
then!  There!  Setebos!  What a funny name!'

'What DOES it mean?' asked Maude.

'We shall find out, no doubt, as we proceed,' said Mrs. Hunt
Mortimer.  'We shall take it line by line and draw the full meaning
from it.  The first line is -


'Will sprawl now that the heat of day is best--'


'Who will?' asked Mrs. Beecher.

'I don't know.  That's what it says.'

'The next line will explain, no doubt.'


'Flat on his--'


'Dear me, I had no idea that Browning was like this!'

'Do read it, dear.'

'I couldn't possibly think of doing so.  With your permission we will
pass on to the next paragraph.'

'But we vowed not to skip.'

'But why read what cannot instruct or elevate us.  Let us begin this
next stanza, and hope for something better.  The first line is--I
wonder if it really can be as it is written.'

'Do please read it!'


'Setebos and Setebos and Setebos.'


The three students looked sadly at each other.  'This is worse than
anything I could have imagined,' said the reader.

'We mast skip that line.'

'But we are skipping everything.'

'It's a person's name,' said Mrs. Beecher.

'Or three persons.'

'No, only one, I think.'

'But why should he repeat it three times?'

'For emphasis!'

'Perhaps,' said Mrs. Beecher, 'it was Mr. Setebos, and Mrs. Setebos,
and a little Setebos.'

'Now, if you are going to make fun, I won't read.  But I think we
were wrong to say that we would take it line by line.  It would be
easier sentence by sentence.'

'Quite so.'

'Then we will include the next line, which finishes the sentence.  It
is, "thinketh he dwelleth in the cold of the moon."'

'Then it WAS only one Setebos!' cried Maude.

'So it appears.  It is easy to understand if one will only put it
into ordinary language.  This person Setebos was under the impression
that his life was spent in the moonlight.'

'But what nonsense it is!' cried Mrs. Beecher.  Mrs. Hunt Mortimer
looked at her reproachfully.  'It is very easy to call everything
which we do not understand "nonsense,"' said she.  'I have no doubt
that Browning had a profound meaning in this.'

'What was it, then?'

Mrs. Hunt Mortimer looked at the clock.

'I am very sorry to have to go,' said she, 'but really I have no
choice in the matter.  Just as we were getting on so nicely--it is
really most vexatious.  You'll come to my house next Wednesday, Mrs.
Crosse, won't you?  And you also, Mrs. Beecher.  Good-bye, and thanks
for SUCH a pleasant afternoon!'

But her skirts had hardly ceased to rustle in the passage before the
Browning Society had been dissolved by a two-thirds' vote of the
total membership.

'What is the use?' cried Mrs. Beecher.  'Two lines have positively
made my head ache, and there are two volumes.'

'We must change our poet.'

'His verbosity!' cried Mrs. Beecher.

'His Setebosity!' cried Maude.

'And dear Mrs. Hunt Mortimer pretending to like him!  Shall we
propose Tennyson next week?'

'It would be far better.'

'But Tennyson is quite simple, is he not?'

'Perfectly.'

'Then why should we meet to discuss him if there is nothing to
discuss?'

'You mean that we might as well each read him for herself.'

'I think it would be easier.'

'Why, of course it would.'

And so after one hour of precarious life, Mrs. Hunt Mortimer's Mutual
Improvement Society for the elucidation of Browning came to an
untimely end.



CHAPTER XVII--AN INVESTMENT



'I want your advice, Maude.'

She was looking very sweet and fresh in the morning sunlight.  She
wore a flowered, French print blouse--little sprigs of roses on a
white background--and a lace frill round her pretty, white, smooth
throat.  The buckle of her brown leather belt just gleamed over the
edge of the table-cloth.  In front of her were a litter of
correspondence, a white cup of coffee, and two empty eggshells--for
she was a perfectly healthy young animal with an excellent appetite.

'Well, dear, what is it?'

'I shall take the later train.  Then I need not hurry, and can walk
down at my ease.'

'How nice of you!'

'I am not sure that Dinton will think so.'

'Only one little hour of difference--what can it matter?'

'They don't run offices on those lines.  An hour means a good deal in
the City of London.'

'Oh, I do hate the City of London!  It is the only thing which ever
comes between us.'

'I suppose that it separates a good many loving couples every
morning.'

He had come across and an egg-cup had been upset.  Then he had been
scolded, and they sat together laughing upon the sofa.  When he had
finished admiring her little, shining, patent-leather, Louis shoes
and the two charming curves of open-work black stocking, she reminded
him that he had asked for her advice.

'Yes, dear, what was it?'  She knitted her brows and tried to look as
her father did when he considered a matter of business.  But then her
father was not hampered by having a young man's arm round his neck.
It is so hard to be business-like when any one is curling one's hair
round his finger.

'I have some money to invest.'

'O Frank, how clever of you!'

'It is only fifty pounds.'

'Never mind, dear, it is a beginning.'

'That is what I feel.  It is the foundation-stone of our fortunes.
And so I want Her Majesty to lay it--mustn't wrinkle your brow
though--that is not allowed.'

'But it is a great responsibility, Frank.'

'Yes, we must not lose it.'

'No, dear, we must not lose it.  Suppose we invest it in one of those
modern fifty-guinea pianos.  Our dear old Broadwood was an excellent
piano when I was a girl, but it is getting so squeaky in the upper
notes.  Perhaps they would allow us something for it.'

He shook his head.

'I know that we want one very badly, dear.  And such a musician as
you are should have the best instrument that money can buy.  I
promise you that when we have a little to turn round on, you shall
have a beauty.  But in the meantime we must not buy anything with
this money--I mean nothing for ourselves--we must invest it.  We
cannot tell what might happen.  I might fall ill.  I might die.'

'O Frank, how horrid you are this morning!'

'Well, we have to be ready for anything.  So I want to put this where
we can get it on an emergency, and where in the meantime it will
bring us some interest.  Now what shall we buy?'

'Papa always bought a house.'

'But we have not enough.'

'Not a little house?'

'No, not the smallest.'

'A mortgage, then?'

'The sum is too small.'

'Government stock, Frank--if you think it is safe.'

'Oh, it is safe enough.  But the interest is so low.'

'How much should we get?'

'Well, I suppose the fifty pounds would bring us in about thirty
shillings a year.'

'Thirty shillings!  O Frank!'

'Rather less than more.'

'Fancy a great rich nation like ours taking our fifty pounds and
treating us like that.  How MEAN of them!  Don't let them have it,
Frank.'

'No, I won't.'

'If they want it, they can make us a fair offer for it.'

'I think we'll try something else.'

'Well, they have only themselves to thank.  But you have some plan in
your head, Frank.  What is it?'

He brought the morning paper over from the table.  Then he folded it
so as to bring the financial columns to the top.

'I saw a fellow in the City yesterday who knows a great deal about
gold-mining.  I only had a few minutes' talk, but he strongly advised
me to have some shares in the El Dorado Proprietary Gold Mine.'

'What a nice name!  I wonder if they would let us have any?'

'Oh yes, they are to be bought in the open market.  It is like this,
Maude.  The mine was a very good one, and paid handsome dividends.
Then it had some misfortunes.  First, there was no water, and then
there was too much water, and the workings were flooded.  So, of
course, the price of the shares fell.  Now they are getting the mine
all right again, but the shares are still low.  It certainly seems a
very good chance to pick a few of them up.'

'Are they very dear, Frank?'

'I looked them up in the Mining Register before I came home
yesterday.  The original price of each share was ten shillings, but
as they have had these misfortunes, one would expect to find them
rather lower.'

'Ten shillings!  It does not seem much to pay for a share in a thing
with a name like that.'

'Here it is,' said he, pointing with a pencil to one name in a long
printed list.  'This one, between the Royal Bonanza and the Alabaster
Consols.  You see--El Dorado Proprietary!  Then after it you have
printed, 4.75--4.875.  I don't profess to know much about these
things, but that of course means the price.'

'Yes, dear, it is printed at the top of the column--"Yesterday's
prices."'

'Quito so.  Well, we know that the original price of each share was
ten shillings, and of course they must have dropped with a flood in
the mine, so that these figures must mean that the price yesterday
was four shillings and nine-pence, or thereabouts.'

'What a clear head for business you have, dear!'

'I think we can't do wrong in buying at that price.  You see, with
our fifty pounds we could buy two hundred of them, and then if they
went up again we could sell, and take our profit.'

'How delightful!  But suppose they don't go up.'

'Well, they can't go down.  I should not think that a share at four
shillings and ninepence COULD go down very much.  There is no room.
But it may go up to any extent.'

'Besides, your friend said that they would go up.'

'Yes, he seemed quite confident about it.  Well, what do you think,
Maude?  Is it good enough or not?'

'O Frank, I hardly dare advise you.  Just imagine if we were to lose
it all.  Do you think it would be wiser to get a hundred shares, and
then we could buy twenty-five pounds' worth of Royal Bonanza as well.
It would be impossible for them both to go wrong.'

'The Royal Bonanza shares are dear, and then we have had no
information about it.  I think we had better back our own opinion.'

'All right, Frank.'

'Then that is settled.  I have a telegraph-form here.'

'Could you not buy them yourself when you are in town?'

'No, you can't buy things yourself.  You have to do it through a
broker.'

'I always thought a broker was a horrid man, who came and took your
furniture away.'

'Ah, that's another kind of broker.  He comes afterwards.  I promised
Harrison that he should have any business which I could put in his
way, so here goes.  How is that?' -


'Harrison, 13a Throgmorton Street, E.C.--Buy two hundred El Dorado
Proprietaries.

'CROSSE, Woking.'


'Doesn't it sound rather peremptory, Frank?'

'No, no, that is mere business.'

'I hope he won't be offended.'

'I think I can answer for that.'

'You have not said the price.'

'One cannot say the price because one does not know it.  You see, it
is always going up and down.  By this time it may be a little higher
or a little lower than yesterday.  There cannot be much change, that
is certain.  Great Scot, Maude, it is ten-fifteen.  Three and a half
minutes for a quarter of a mile.  Good-bye, darling!  I just love you
in that bodice.  O Lord--good-bye!'


'Well, has anything happened?'

'Yes, you have come back.  Oh I am so glad to see you, you dear old
boy!'

'Take care of that window, darling!'

'Oh, my goodness, I hope he didn't see.  No, it's all right.  He was
looking the other way.  We have the gold shares all right.'

'Harrison has telegraphed?'

'Yes, here it is.' -


'Crosse, The Lindens, Woking.--Bought two hundred El Dorados at 4.75.

HARRISON.'


'That is capital.  I rather expected to see Harrison in the train.  I
shouldn't be surprised if he calls on his way from the station.  He
has to pass our door, you know, on his way to Maybury.'

'He is sure to call.'

'What are you holding there?'

'It's a paper.'

'What paper?'

'Who is it who talks about woman's curiosity?'

'Let me see it.'

'Well, sir, if you must know, it is the Financial Whisper.'

'Where in the world did you get it?'

'I knew that the Montresors took a financial paper.  I remember Mrs.
Montresor saying once how dreadfully dry it was.  So when you were
gone I sent Jemima round and borrowed it, and I have read it right
through to see if there was anything about our mine in it--OUR mine,
Frank; does it not sound splendid?'

'Well, is there anything?'

She clapped her hands with delight.

'Yes, there is.  "This prosperous mine--" that is what it says.  Look
here, it is under the heading of Australian Notes,' she held out the
paper and pointed, but his face fell as he looked.

'O Maude, it's preposterous.'

'What is preposterous?'

'The word is preposterous and not prosperous--"this preposterous
mine."'

'Frank!'  She turned her face away.

'Never mind, dear!  What's the odds?'

'O Frank, our first investment--our fifty pounds!  And to think that
I should have kept the paper as a surprise for you!'

'Well, the print is a little slurred, and it was a very natural
mistake.  After all, the paper may be wrong.  Oh don't, Maude, please
don't!  It's not worth it--all the gold on the earth is not worth it.
There's a sweet girlie!  Now, are you better?  Oh, damn those open
curtains!'

A tall and brisk young man with a glossy hat was coming through the
garden.  An instant later Jemima had ushered him in.

'Hullo, Harrison!'

'How do you do, Crosse?  How are you, Mrs. Crosse?'

'How do you do?  I'll just order tea if you will excuse me.'

Ordering tea seemed to involve a good deal of splashing water.  Maude
came back with a merrier face.

'Is this a good paper, Mr. Harrison?'

'What is it?  Financial Whisper!  No, the most venal rag in the
city.'

'Oh, I am so glad!'

'Why?'

'Well, you know, we bought some shares to-day, and it calls our mine
a preposterous one.'

'Oh, is that all.  Who cares what the Financial Whisper says!  It
would call the Bank of England a preposterous institution if it
thought it could bear Consols by doing so.  Its opinion is not worth
a halfpenny.  By the way, Crosse, it was about those shares that I
called.'

'I thought you might.  I have only just got back myself, and I saw by
your wire that you had bought them all right.'

'Yes, I thought I had better let you have your contract at once.
Settling day is on Monday, you know.'

'All right.  Thank you.  I will let you have a cheque.  What--what's
this?'

The contract had been laid face upwards upon the table.  Frank
Crosse's face grew whiter and his eyes larger as he stared at it.  It
ran in this way -


13a THROGMORTON STREET.

Bought for Francis Crosse, Esq.

(Subject to the Specific Rules and Regulations of the Stock
Exchange.)                           Pounds
200 El Dorado Proprietaries at 4.75    950   0   0
Stamps and Fees                          4  17   6
Commission                               7  10   0
                                       962   7   6

For the 7th inst.


'I fancy there is some mistake here, Harrison,' said he, speaking
with a very dry pair of lips.

'A mistake!'

'Yes, this is not at all what I expected.'

'O Frank!  Nearly a thousand pounds!' gasped Maude.

Harrison glanced from one of them to the other.  He saw that the
matter was serious.

'I am very sorry if there has been any mistake.  I tried to obey your
instructions.  You wanted two hundred El Dorados, did you not?'

'Yes, at four and ninepence.'

'Four and ninepence!  They are four pound fifteen each.'

'But I read that they were only ten shillings originally, and that
they had been falling.'

'Yes, they have been falling for months.  But they were as high as
ten pounds once.  They are down at four pound fifteen now.'

'Why on earth could the paper not say so?'

'When a fraction is used, it always means a fraction of a pound.'

'Good heavens!  And I have to find this sum before Monday.'

'Monday is settling day.'

'I can't do it, Harrison.  It is impossible.'

'Then there is the obvious alternative.'

'No, I had rather die.  I will never go bankrupt--never!'

Harrison began to laugh, and then turned stonily solemn as he met a
pair of reproachful grey eyes.

'It strikes me that you have not done much at this game, Crosse.'

'Never before--and by Heaven, never again!'

'You take it much too hard.  When I spoke of an alternative, I never
dreamed of bankruptcy.  All you have to do is to sell your stock to-
morrow morning, and pay the difference.'

'Can I do that?'

'Rather.  Why not?'

'What would the difference be?'

Harrison took an evening paper from his pocket.  'We deal in rails
chiefly, and I don't profess to keep in touch with the mining market.
We'll find the quotation here.  By Jove!'  He whistled between his
teeth.

'Well!' said Frank, and felt his wife's little warm palm fall upon
his hand under the table.

'The difference is in your favour.'

'In my favour?'

'Yes, listen to this.  "The mining markets, both the South African
and the Australian, opened dull, but grew more animated as the day
proceeded, prices closing at the best.  Out crops upon the Rand mark
a general advance of one-sixteenth to one-eighth.  The chief feature
in the Australian section was a sharp advance of five-eighths in El
Dorados, upon a telegram that the workings had been pumped dry."
Crosse, I congratulate you.'

'I can really sell them for more than I gave?'

'I should think so.  You have two hundred of them, and a profit of
ten shillings on each.'

'Maude, we'll have the whisky and the soda.  Harrison, you must have
a drink.  Why, that's a hundred pounds.'

'More than a hundred.'

'Without my paying anything?'

'Not a penny.'

'When does the Exchange open to-morrow?'

'The rattle goes at eleven.'

'Well, be there at eleven, Harrison.  Sell them at once.'

'You won't hold on and watch the market?'

'No, no--I won't have an easy moment until they are sold.'

'All right, my boy.  You can rely upon me.  You will get a cheque for
your balance on Tuesday or Wednesday.  Good evening!  I am so glad
that it has all ended well.'

'And the joke of it is, Maude,' said her husband, after they had
talked over the whole adventure from the beginning.  'The joke of it
is that we have still to find an investment for our original fifty
pounds.  I am inclined to put it into Consols after all.'

'Well,' said Maude, 'perhaps it would be the patriotic thing to do.'

Two days later the poor old Broadwood with the squeaky treble and the
wheezy bass was banished for ever from The Lindens, and there arrived
in its place a ninety-five-guinea cottage grand, all dark walnut and
gilding, with notes in it so deep and rich and resonant that Maude
could sit before it by the hour and find music enough in simply
touching one here and one there, and listening to the soft, sweet,
reverberant tones which came swelling from its depths.  Her El Dorado
piano, she called it, and tried to explain to lady visitors how her
husband had been so clever at business that he had earned it in a
single day.  As she was never very clear in her own mind how the
thing had occurred, she never succeeded in explaining it to any one
else, but a vague and solemn impression became gradually diffused
abroad that young Mr. Frank Crosse was a very remarkable man, and
that he had done something exceedingly clever in the matter of an
Australian mine.



CHAPTER XVIII--A THUNDERCLOUD



Blue skies and shining sun, but far down on the horizon one dark
cloud gathers and drifts slowly upwards unobserved.  Frank Crosse was
aware of its shadow when coming down to breakfast he saw an envelope
with a well-remembered handwriting beside his plate.  How he had
loved that writing once, how his heart had warmed and quickened at
the sight of it, how eagerly he had read it--and now a viper coiled
upon the white table-cloth would hardly have given him a greater
shock.  Contradictory, incalculable, whimsical life!  A year ago how
scornfully he would have laughed, what contemptuous unbelief would
have filled his soul, if he had been told that any letter of hers
could have struck him cold with the vague apprehension of coming
misfortune.  He tore off the envelope and threw it into the fire.
But before he could glance at the letter there was the quick patter
of his wife's feet upon the stair, and she burst, full of girlish
health and high spirits, into the little room.  She wore a pink
crepon dressing-gown, with cream guipure lace at the neck and wrists.
Pink ribbon outlined her trim waist.  The morning sun shone upon her,
and she seemed to him to be the daintiest, sweetest tiling upon
earth.  He had thrust his letter into his pocket as she entered.

'You will excuse the dressing-gown, Frank.'

'I just love you in it.  No, you mustn't pass.  Now you can go.'

'I was so afraid that you would breakfast without me that I had no
time to dress.  I shall have the whole day to finish in when you are
gone.  There now--Jemima has forgotten to warm the plates again!  And
your coffee is cold.  I wish you had not waited.'

'Better cold coffee with Maude's society.'

'I always thought men gave up complimenting their wives after they
married them.  I am so glad you don't.  I think on the whole that
women's ideas of men are unfair and severe.  The reason is that the
women who have met unpleasant men run about and make a noise, but the
women who are happy just keep quiet and enjoy themselves.  For
example, I have not time to write a book explaining to every one how
nice Frank Crosse is; but if he were nasty my life would be empty,
and so of course I should write my book.'

'I feel such a fraud when you talk like that.'

'That is part of your niceness.'

'Oh don't, Maude!  It really hurts me.'

'Why, Frank, what is the matter with you to-day?'

'Nothing, dear.'

'Oh yes, there is.  I can tell easily.'

'Perhaps I am not quite myself.'

'No, I am sure that you are not.  I believe that you have a cold
coming on.  O Frank, do take some ammoniated quinine.'

'Good heavens, no!'

'Please!  Please!'

'My dear girlie, there is nothing the matter with me.'

'But it is such splendid stuff.'

'Yes, I know.  But really I don't want it.'

'Have you had any letters, Frank?'

'Yes, one.'

'Anything important?'

'I have hardly glanced at it yet.'

'Glance at it now.'

'Oh, I will keep it for the train.  Good-bye, dearest.  It is time
that I was off.'

'If you would only take the ammoniated quinine.  You men are so proud
and obstinate.  Good-bye, darling.  Eight hours, and then I shall
begin to live again.'

He had a quiet corner of a carriage to himself, so he unfolded his
letter and read it.  Then he read it again with frowning brows and
compressed lips.  It ran in this way -


My Dearest Frankie,--I suppose that I should not address you like
this now that you are a good little married man, but the force of
custom is strong, and, after all, I knew you long before she did.  I
don't suppose you were aware of it, but there was a time when I could
very easily have made you marry me, in spite of all you may know
about my trivial life and adventures, but I thought it all over very
carefully, and I came to the conclusion that it was not good enough.
You were always a dear good chap yourself, but your prospects were
not quite dashing enough for your festive Violet.  I believe in a
merry time even if it is a short one.  But if I had really wanted to
settle down in a humdrum sort of way, you are the man whom I should
have chosen out of the whole batch of them.  I hope what I say won't
make you conceited, for one of your best points used to be your
modesty.

But for all that, my dear Frankie, I by no means give you up
altogether, and don't you make any mistake about that.  It was only
yesterday that I saw Charlie Scott, and he told me all about you, and
gave me your address.  Don't you bless him?  And yet I don't know.
Perhaps you have still a kindly thought of your old friend, and would
like to see her.

But you are going to see her whether you like or not, my dear boy, so
make up your mind to that.  You know how you used to chaff me about
my whims.  Well, I've got a whim now, and I'll have my way as usual.
I am going to see you to-morrow, and if you won't see me under my
conditions in London, I shall call at Woking in the evening.  Oh my
goodness, what a bombshell!  But you know that I am always as good as
my word.  So look out!

Now I'll give you your orders for the day, and don't you forget them.
To-morrow (Thursday, 14th, no excuses about the date) you will leave
your office at 3.30.  I know that you can when you like.  You will
drive to Mariani's, and you will find me at the door.  We shall go up
to our old private room, and we shall have tea together, and a dear
old chat about all sorts of things.  So come!  But if you don't,
there is a train which leaves Waterloo at 6.10 and reaches Woking at
7.  I will come by it and be just in time for dinner.  What a joke it
will be!

Good-bye, old boy!  I hope your wife does not read your letters, or
this will rather give her fits.

- Yours as ever, VIOLET WRIGHT.


At the first reading this letter filled him with anger.  To be wooed
by a very pretty woman is pleasant even to the most austere of
married men (and never again trust the one who denies it), but to be
wooed with a very dangerous threat mixed up with the wooing is no
such pleasant experience.  And it was no empty threat.  Violet was a
woman who prided herself upon being as good as her word.  She had
laughingly said with her accustomed frankness upon one occasion that
it was her sole remaining virtue.  If he did not go to Mariani's, she
would certainly come to Woking.  He shuddered to think of Maude being
annoyed by her.  It was one thing to speak in a general way to his
wife of prematrimonial experiences, and it was another to have this
woman forcing herself upon her and making a scene.  The idea was so
vulgar.  The sweet, pure atmosphere of The Lindens would never be the
same again.

No, there was no getting out of it.  He must go to Mariani's.  He was
sufficiently master of himself to know that no harm could come of
that.  His absolute love for his wife shielded him from all danger.
The very thought of infidelity nauseated him.  And then, as the idea
became more familiar to him, other emotions succeeded that of anger.
There was an audacity about his old flame, a spirit and devilment,
which appealed to his sporting instincts.  Besides, it was
complimentary to him, and flattering to his masculine vanity, that
she should not give him up without a struggle.  Merely as a friend it
would not be disagreeable to see her again.  Before he had reached
Clapham Junction his anger had departed, and by the time that he
arrived at Waterloo he was surprised to find himself looking forward
to the interview.

Mariani's is a quiet restaurant, famous for its lachryma christi
spumante, and situated in the network of sombre streets between Drury
Lane and Covent Garden.  The fact of its being in a by-street was not
unfavourable to its particular class of business.  Its customers were
very free from the modern vice of self-advertisement, and would even
take some trouble to avoid publicity.  Nor were they gregarious or
luxurious in their tastes.  A small, simple apartment was usually
more to their taste than a crowded salon, and they were even prepared
to pay a higher sum for it.

It was five minutes to four when Frank arrived, and the lady had not
yet appeared.  He stood near the door and waited.  Presently a hansom
rattled into the narrow street, and there she sat framed in its
concavity.  A pretty woman never looks prettier than in a hansom,
with the shadows behind to give their Rembrandt effect to the face in
front.  She raised a yellow kid hand, and flashed a smile at him.

'Just the same as ever,' said she, as he handed her down.

'So are you.'

'So glad you think so.  I am afraid I can't quite agree with you.
Thirty-four yesterday.  It's simply awful.  Thank you, I have some
change.  All right, cabby.  Well, have you got a room?'

'No.'

'But you'll come?'

'Oh yes, I should like to have a chat.'

The clean-shaven, round-faced manager, a man of suave voice and
diplomatic manner, was standing in the passage.  His strange life was
spent in standing in the passage.  He remembered the pair at once,
and smiled paternally.

'Not seen you for some time, sir!'

'No, I have been engaged.'

'Married,' said the lady.

'Dear me!' said the proprietor.  'Tea, sir?'

'And muffins.  You used to like the muffins.'

'Oh yes, muffins by all means.'

'Number ten,' said the proprietor, and a waiter showed them upstairs.
'All meals nine shillings each,' he whispered, as Frank passed him at
the door.  He was a new waiter, and so mistook every one for a new
customer, which is an error which runs through life.

It was a dingy little room with a round table covered by a soiled
cloth in the middle.  Two windows, discreetly blinded, let in a dim
London light.  An armchair stood at each side of the empty fireplace,
and an uncomfortable, old-fashioned, horsehair sofa lined the
opposite wall.  There were pink vases upon the mantelpiece, and a
portrait of Garibaldi above it.

The lady sat down and took off her gloves.  Frank stood by the window
and smoked a cigarette.  The waiter rattled and banged and jingled
with the final effect of producing a tea-tray and a hot-water dish.
'You'll ring if you want me, sir,' said he, and shut the door with
ostentatious completeness.

'Now we can talk,' said Frank, throwing his cigarette into the
fireplace.  'That waiter was getting on my nerves.'

'I say, I hope you're not angry.'

'What at?'

'Well, my saying I should come down to Woking, and all that.'

'I should have been angry if I thought you had meant it.'

'Oh, I meant it right enough.'

'But with what object?'

'Just to get level with you, Frankie, if you threw me over too
completely.  Hang it all, she has three hundred and sixty-five days
in the year!  Am I to be grudged a single hour?'

'Well, Violet, we won't quarrel about it.  You see I came all right.
Pull up your chair and have some tea.'

'You haven't even looked at me yet.  I won't take any tea until you
do.'

She stood up in front of him, and pushed up her veil.  It was a face
and a figure worth looking at.  Hazel eyes, dark chestnut hair, a
warm flush of pink in her cheeks, the features and outline of an old
Grecian goddess, but with more of Juno than of Venus, for she might
perhaps err a little upon the side of opulence.  There was a
challenge and defiance dancing in those dark devil-may-care eyes of
hers which might have roused a more cold-blooded man than her
companion.  Her dress was simple and dark, but admirably cut.  She
was clever enough to know that a pretty woman should concentrate
attention upon herself, and a plain one divert it to her adornments.

'Well?'

'By Jove, Violet, you look splendid.'

'Well?'

'The muffins are getting cold.'

'Frankie, what IS the matter with you?'

'Nothing is the matter.'

'Well?'

She put out her two hands and took hold of his.  That well-remembered
sweet, subtle scent of hers rose to his nostrils.  There is nothing
more insidious than a scent which carries suggestions and
associations.  'Frankie, you have not kissed me yet.'

She turned her smiling face upwards and sideways, and for an instant
he leaned forward towards it.  But he had himself in hand again in a
moment.  It gave him confidence to find how quickly and completely he
could do it.  With a laugh, still holding her two hands, he pushed
her back into the chair by the table.

'There's a good girl!' said he.  'Now we'll have some tea, and I'll
give you a small lecture while we do so.'

'You are a nice one to give lectures.'

'Oh, there's no such preacher as a converted sinner.'

'You really are converted then?'

'Rather.  Two lumps, if I remember right.  You ought to do this, not
I.  No milk, and very strong--how you keep your complexion I can't
imagine.  But you do keep it; my word, you do!  Now please don't look
so crossly at me.'

Her flushed cheeks and resentful eyes had drawn forth the
remonstrance.

'You ARE changed,' she said, with surprise as well as anger in her
voice.

'Why, of course I am.  I am married.'

'For that matter Charlie Scott is married.'

'Don't give Charlie Scott away.'

'I think I give myself away.  So you have lost all your love for me.
I thought it was to last for ever.'

'Now, do be sensible, Violet.'

'Sensible!  How I loathe that word!  A man only uses it when he is
going to do something cold-blooded and mean.  It is always the
beginning of the end.'

'What do you want me to do?'

'I want you to be my own Frankie--just the same as before.  Ah do,
Franck--don't leave me!  You know I would give any of them up for
you.  And you have a good influence over me--you have really!  You
call't think how hard I am with other people.  Ask Charlie Scott.  He
will tell you.  I've been so different since I have lost sight of
you.  Now, Frankie, don't be horrid to me!  Kiss and be nice!'  Again
her soft warm hand was upon his, and the faint sweet smell of violets
went to his blood like wine.  He jumped up, lit another cigarette,
and paced about the room.

'You shan't have a cigarette, Frankie.'

'Why not?'

'Because you said once it helped you to control yourself.  I don't
want you to control yourself.  I want you to feel as I feel.'

'Do sit down, like a good girl!'

'Cigarette out!'

'Don't be absurd, Violet!'

'Come, out with it, sir.'

'No, no, leave it alone!'

She had snatched it from his lips and thrown it into the grate.

'What is the use of that?  I have a case full.'

'They shall all follow the first.'

'Well, then, I won't smoke.'

'I'll see that you don't.'

'Well, what the better are you for that?'

'Now, be nice.'

'Go back to your chair and have some more tea.'

'Oh, bother the tea!'

'Well, I won't speak to you unless you sit down and behave yourself.'

'There now!  Speak away.'

'Look here, dear Violet, you must not talk about this any more.  Some
things are possible and some are impossible.  This is absolutely,
finally impossible.  We can never go back upon the past.  It is
finished and done with.'

'Then what did you come here for?'

'To bid you good-bye.'

'A Platonic good-bye.'

'Of course.'

'In a private room at Mariani's.'

'Why not?'

She laughed bitterly.

'You were always a little mad, Frankie.'

He leaned earnestly over the table.

'Look here, Violet, the chances are that we shall never meet again.'

'It takes two to say that.'

'Well, I mean that after to-day I should not meet you again.  If you
were not quite what you are it would be easier.  But as it is I find
it a little too much of a test.  No, don't mistake me or think that I
am weakening.  That is impossible.  But all the same I don't want to
go through it again.'

'So sorry if I have upset you.'

He disregarded her irony.

'We have been very good friends, Violet.  Why should we part as
enemies?'

'Why should we part at all?'

'We won't go back over that.  Now do please look facts in the face
and help me to do the right thing, for it would be so much easier if
you would help me.  If you were a very good and kind girl you would
shake my hand, like any other old pal, and wish me joy of my
marriage.  You know that I should do so if I knew that you were going
to be married.'

But the lady was not to be so easily appeased.  She took her tea in
silence or answered his remarks with monosyllables, while the
occasional flash of her dark eyes as she raised them was like the
distant lightning which heralds the storm.  Suddenly, with a swift
rustle of skirts, she was between the door and his chair.

'Now, Frankie, we have had about enough of this nonsense,' said she.
'Don't imagine that you are going to get out of this thing so easily.
I've got you, and I'll keep you.'

He faced round in his chair and looked helplessly at her with a hand
upon each knee.

'O Lord!  Don't begin it all over again,' said he.

'No, I won't,' she answered with an angry laugh.  'I'll try another
line this time, Master Frank.  I'm not the sort of woman who lets a
thing go easily when once I have set my heart upon it.  I won't try
coaxing any longer--'

'So glad,' he murmured.

'You may say what you like, but you can't do it, my boy.  I knew you
before she did, and I'll keep you, or else I'll make such a row that
you will be sorry that you ever put my back up.  It's all very fine
to sit there and preach, but it won't do, Frankie.  You can't slip
out of things as easily as all that.'

'Why should you turn nasty like this, Violet?  What do you think you
will gain by it?'

'I mean to gain YOU.  I like you, Frankie.  I'm not sure that I don't
really love you--real, real love, you know.  Any way, I don't intend
to let you go, and if you go against my will I give you my word that
I shall make it pretty sultry for you down at Woking.'

He stared moodily into his teacup.

'Besides, what rot it all is!' she continued, laying her hand upon
his shoulder.  'When did you begin to ride the high moral horse?  You
were just as cheerful as the rest of them when last I saw you.  You
speak as if a man ceased to live just because he is married.  What
has changed you?'

'I'll tell you what has changed me,' said he, looking up.  'My wife
has changed me.'

'Oh, bother your wife!'

A look which was new to her came over his face.

'Stop that!' said he sharply.

'Oh, no harm!  How has your wife made this wonderful change?'

His mood softened as his thoughts flew back to Woking.

'By her own goodness--the atmosphere that she makes round her.  If
you knew how wholesome she was, how delicate in her most intimate
thoughts, how fresh and how sweet and how pure, you would understand
that the thought of being false to her is horrible.  When I think of
her as she sat at breakfast this morning, so loving and so innocent--
'

He would have been more discreet if he had been less eloquent.  The
lady's temper suddenly overflowed.

'Innocent!' she cried.  'As innocent as I am.'

He sprang to his feet with eyes which were more angry than her own.

'Hold your tongue!  How dare you talk against my wife!  You are not
fit to mention her name.'

'I'll go to Woking,' she gasped.

'You can go to the devil!' said he, and rang the bell for his bill.
She stared at him with a surprise which had eclipsed her anger, while
she pulled on her gloves with little sharp twitches.  This was a new
Frank Crosse to her.  As long as a woman gets on very well with a
man, she is apt, at the back of her soul, to suspect him of weakness.
It is only when she differs from him that she can see the other side,
and it always comes as a surprise.  She liked him better than ever
for the revelation.

'I'm not joking,' she whispered, as they went down the stair.  'I'll
go, as sure as fate.'

He took no notice, but passed on down the street without a word of
farewell.  When he came to the turning he looked back.  She was
standing by the curb, with her proud head high in the air, while the
manager screamed loudly upon a whistle.  A cab swung round a distant
corner.  Crosse reached her before it did.

'I hope I haven't hurt your feelings,' said he.  'I spoke too
roughly.'

'Trying to coax me away from Woking,' she sneered.  'I'm coming all
the same.'

'That's your affair,' said he, as he handed her into the cab.



CHAPTER XIX--DANGER



Again the bright little dining-room, with the morning sun gleaming
upon the high silver coffee pot and the electro-plated toast-rack--
everything the same, down to the plates which Jemima had once again
forgotten to warm.  Maude, with the golden light playing upon the
fringes of her curls, and throwing two little epaulettes of the
daintiest pink across her shoulders, sat in silence, glancing across
from time to time with interrogative eyes at her husband.  He ate his
breakfast moodily, for he was very ill at ease.  There was a struggle
within him, for his conscience was pulling him one way and his
instincts the other.  Instincts are a fine old conservative force,
while conscience is a thing of yesterday, so it is usually safe to
prophesy which will sway the other.

The matter at issue was whether he should tell Maude about Violet
Wright.  If she were going to carry out her threat, then certainly it
would be better to prepare her.  But after all, his arguments of
yesterday might prevail with her when her first impetuous fit of
passion was over.  Why should he go half-way to meet danger?  If it
came, nothing which he could say would ward it off.  If it did not
come, there was no need for saying anything.  Conscience told him
that it would be better to be perfectly straight with his wife.
Instinct told him that though she would probably be sweet and
sympathetic over it, yet it would rankle in her mind and poison her
thoughts.  And perhaps for once, Instinct may have been better than
Conscience.  Do not ask too many questions, you young wife!  Do not
be too free with your reminiscences, you young husband.  There are
things which can be forgiven, but never, never, can they be
forgotten.  That highest thing on earth, the heart of a loving woman,
is too tender, too sacred, to be bruised by a wanton confidence.  You
are hers.  She is yours.  The future lies with both of you.  It is
wiser to leave the past alone.  The couples who boast that they have
never had a secret are sometimes happy because the boast is sometimes
untrue.

'You won't be late to-day, Frank,' said Maude at last, peeping round
the tall coffee-pot.

'No, dear, I won't.'

'You were yesterday, you know.'

'Yes, I know I was.'

'Were you kept at the office?'

'No, I had tea with a friend.'

'At his house?'

'No, no, at a restaurant.  Where has Jemima put my boots?  I wonder
if she has cleaned them.  I can never tell by looking.  Here they
are.  And my coat?  Anything I can get you in town?  Well, good-bye,
dear, good-bye!'  Maude had never seen him make so hurried an exit.

It is always a mystery to the City man how his wife puts in the seven
hours a day of loneliness while the E.C. has claimed him for its own.
She cannot explain it to him, for she can hardly explain it to
herself.  It is frittered away in a thousand little tasks, each
trivial in itself, and yet making in their sum the difference between
a well-ordered and a neglected household.  Under the illustrious
guidance of the omniscient Mrs. Beeton there is the usual routine to
be gone through.  The cook has to be seen, the larder examined, the
remains cunningly transformed into new and attractive shapes, the
dinner to be ordered (anything will do for lunch), and the new
supplies to be got in.  The husband accepts the excellent little
dinner, the fried sole, the ris de veau en caisse, the lemon pudding,
as if they had grown automatically out of the table-cloth.  He knows
nothing of the care, the judgment, the prevision which ring the
changes with every season, which never relax and never mistake.  He
enjoys the fruits, but he ignores the work which raised them.  And
yet the work goes cheerfully and uncomplainingly on.

Then when every preparation has been made for the dinner--that solemn
climax of the British day, there is plenty for Maude to do.  There is
the white chiffon to be taken out of the neck of that dress, and the
pink to be put in.  Amateur dressmaking is always going on at The
Lindens, and Frank has become more careful in his caresses since he
found one evening that his wife had a row of pins between her lips--
which is not a pleasant discovery to make with your own.  Then there
are drawers to be tidied, and silver to be cleaned, and the leaves of
the gutta-percha plant to be washed, and the feather which was damped
yesterday to be re-curled before the fire.  That leaves just time
before lunch to begin the new novel by glancing at the last two pages
to see what DID happen, and then the three minutes lunch of a lonely
woman.  So much for business, now for the more trying social duties.
The pink dressing-gown is shed and a trim little walking dress--
French grey cloth with white lisse in front and a grey zouave jacket-
-takes its place.  Visiting strangers is not nearly so hard when you
are pleased with your dress, and even entertaining becomes more easy
when your costumiere lives in Regent Street.  On Tuesdays Maude is at
home.  Every other day she hunts through her plate of cards, and is
overwhelmed by the sense of her rudeness towards her neighbours.  But
her task is never finished, though day after day she comes back jaded
with her exertions.  Strangers still call upon her--'hope it is not
too late to do the right thing, and to welcome,' etc., etc.--and they
have to be re-visited.  While she is visiting them, other cards
appear upon her hall table, and so the foolish and tiresome
convention continues to exhaust the time and the energies of its
victim.

Those original receptions were really very difficult.  Jemima
announced a name which might or might not bear some relation to the
visitor's.  The lady entered.  Her name might perhaps be Mrs. Baker.
Maude had no means of knowing who Mrs. Baker might be.  The visitor
seldom descended to an explanation.  Ten minutes of desultory and
forced conversation about pinewoods and golf and cremation.  A cup of
tea and a departure.  Then Maude would rush to the card-tray to try
to find out whom it was that she had been talking to, and what it was
all about.

Maude did not intend to go visiting that particular day, and she had
hoped that no one might visit her.  The hours of danger were almost
past, and it was close upon four o'clock, when there came a brisk
pull at the bell.

'Mrs. White,' said Jemima, opening the drawing-room door.

'Wright,' said the visitor, as she walked in--'Mrs. Violet Wright.'

Maude rose with her pleasant smile.  It was a peculiarly sweet and
kindly smile, for it was inspired by a gentle womanly desire to make
things pleasant for all who were around her.  Amiability was never
artificial with her, for she had the true instincts of a lady--those
instincts so often spoken of, so seldom, so very seldom seen.  Like a
gentleman, or a Christian, or any other ideal, it is but a poor
approximation which is commonly attained.

But the visitor did not respond to the pretty gesture of welcome, nor
did her handsome face return that sympathetic smile.  They stood for
an instant looking at each other, the one tall, masterful, mature,
the other sweet, girlish, and self-distrustful, but each beautiful
and engaging in her own way.  Lucky Master Frank, whose past and
present could take such a form; but luckier still if he could have
closed the past when the present opened.  The visitor was silent, but
her dark eyes looked critically and fixedly at her rival.  Maude,
setting the silence down to the shyness of a first visit, tried to
make matters easier.

'Please try this armchair.  No doubt you have had a tiring walk.  It
is still very warm in the afternoons.  I think it was so kind of you
to call.'

A faint smile flickered upon the dark face.

'Kind of me to call!' said she.

'Yes; for in a rising place like Woking, with so many new arrivals,
it must be quite a task for the older inhabitants to welcome them.  I
have been so surprised by the kindness which every one has shown.'

'Oh, I see,' said her visitor, 'you think that I live here.  I have
really just come down from London.'

'Indeed,' said Maude, and awaited an explanation.  As none was
forthcoming, she added, 'You will find Woking a very nice place.'

'A nice place to be buried in, alive or dead,' said her visitor.

There was something peculiarly ungracious in her tone and manner.  It
seemed to Maude that she had never before been alone with so singular
a person.  There was, in the first place, her striking and yet rather
sinister and voluptuous beauty.

Then there was the absolute carelessness of her manner, the quiet
assumption that she was outside the usual conventionalities of life.
It is a manner only to be met in English life, among some of the
highest of the high world, and some of the highest of the half world.
It was new to Maude, and it made her uncomfortable, while mingled
with it there was something else which made her feel for the first
time in her life that she had incurred the hostility of a fellow-
mortal.  It chilled her, and made her unhappy.

The visitor made no effort to sustain the conversation, but leaned
back in her chair and stared at her hostess with a very critical and
searching glance.  Those two questioning dark eyes played eagerly
over her from her brown curls down to the little shining shoe-tips
which peeped from under the grey skirt.  Especially they dwelt upon
her face, reading it and rereading it.  Never had Maude been so
inspected, and her instinct told her that the inspection was not
altogether a friendly one.

Violet Wright having examined her rival, proceeded now with the same
cool attention to take in her surroundings.  She looked round
deliberately at the furniture of the room, and reconstructed in her
own mind the life of the people who owned it.  Maude ventured upon
one or two conventional remarks, but her visitor was not to be
diverted to the weather or to the slowness of the South-Western train
service.  She continued her quiet and silent inspection.  Suddenly
she rose and swept across to the side-table.  A photograph of Frank
in his volunteer uniform stood upon it.

'This is your husband, Mr. Frank Crosse?'

'Yes, do you know him?'

'Slightly.  We have mutual friends.'  An ambiguous smile played
across her face as she spoke.  'This must have been taken after I saw
him.'

'It was taken just after our marriage.'

'Quite so.  He looks like a good little married man.  The photograph
is flattering.'

'Oh, you think so!' said Maude coldly.  'My own impression is that it
fails to do him justice.'

Her visitor laughed.  'Of course that WOULD be your impression,' said
she.

Maude's gentle soul began to rise in anger.

'It is the truth,' she cried.

'It is right that you should think so,' the other answered, with the
same irritating laugh.

'You must have known him very slightly if you can't see that it is
the truth.'

'Then I must have known him very slightly.'

Maude was very angry indeed.  She began to find sides to her own
nature the very existence of which she had never suspected.  She
tapped her little shoe upon the ground, and she sat with a pale face,
and compressed lips, and bright eyes, quite prepared to be very rude
indeed to this eccentric woman who ventured to criticise her Frank in
so free and easy a style.  Her visitor watched her, and a change had
come over her expression.  Maude's evident anger seemed to amuse and
interest her.  Her eyes lost their critical coldness, and softened
into approval.  She suddenly put her hand upon the other's shoulder
with so natural and yet masterful a gesture, that Maude found it
impossible to resent it.

'He is a lucky man to have such a warm little champion,' said she.

Her strong character and greater knowledge of the world gave her an
ascendency over the girlish wife such as age has over youth.  There
were not ten years between them, and yet Maude felt that for some
reason the conversation between them could not quite be upon equal
terms.  The quiet assurance of her visitor, whatever its cause, made
resentment or remonstrance difficult.  Besides, they were a pair of
very kindly as well as of very shrewd eyes which now looked down into
hers.

'You love him very much, then?'

'Of course I love him.  He is my husband.'

'Does it always follow?'

'You are married yourself.  Don't you love yours?'

'Oh, never mind mine.  HE'S all right.  Did you ever love any one
else?'

'No, not really.'

Maude was astonished at herself, and yet the questions were so
frankly put that a frank answer came naturally to them.  It pleased
her to lose that cold chill of dislike, and to feel that for some
reason her strange visitor had become more friendly to her.

'You lucky girl, you actually married the one love of your life!'

Maude smiled and nodded.

'What a splendid thing to do!  I thought it only happened in books.
How happy you must be!'

'I AM very, very happy.'

'Well, I dare say you deserve to be.  Besides, you really are very
pretty.  If ever you had a rival, I should think that it must be some
consolation to her to know that it was so charming a person who cut
her out.'

Maude laughed at the thought.

'I never had a rival,' said she.  'My husband never REALLY loved
until he met me.'

'Did he--oh yes, quite so!  That is so nice that you should both
start with a clean sheet!  I thought you were very handsome just now
when you were angry with me, but you are quite delightful with that
little flush upon your cheeks.  If I had been a man, your husband
would certainly have had one rival in his wooing.  And so he really
never loved any one but you?  I thought that also only happened in
books.'

There was a hard and ironic tone in the last sentences which jarred
upon Maude's sensitive nature.  She glanced up quickly and was
surprised at the look of pain which had come upon her companion's
face.  It relaxed into a serious serenity.

'That fits in beautifully,' said she.  'But there's one bit of advice
which I should like to give you, if you won't think it a liberty.
Don't be selfish in your married life.'

'Selfish!'

'Yes, there is a kind of family selfishness which is every bit as
bad--I am not sure that it is not worse--than personal selfishness.
People love each other, and they shut out the world, and have no
thought for any one else, and the whole universe can slide to
perdition so long as their love is not disturbed.  That is what I
call family selfishness.  It's a sin and a shame.'

Maude looked at this strange woman in amazement.  She was speaking
fast and hotly, like one whose bitter thoughts have been long penned
up for want of a suitable listener.

'Remember the women who have been less fortunate than you.  Remember
the thousands who are starving, dying, for want of love, and no love
comes their way; whose hearts yearn and faint for that which Nature
owes them, but Nature never pays her debt.  Remember the plain women.
Remember the lonely women.  Above all, remember your unfortunate
sisters; they, the most womanly of all, who have been ruined by their
own kindliness and trust and loving weakness.  It is that family
selfishness which turns every house in the land into a fort to be
held against these poor wanderers.  They make them evil, and then
they revile the very evil which they have made.  When I look back--'

She stopped with a sudden sob.  Her forearm fell upon the
mantelpiece, and her forehead upon her forearm.  In an instant Maude
was by her side, the tears running down her cheeks, for the sight of
grief was always grief to her, and her nerves were weakened by this
singular interview.

'Dear Mrs. Wright, don't cry!' she whispered, and her little white
hand passed in a soothing, hesitating gesture over the coil of rich
chestnut hair.  'Don't cry!  I am afraid you have suffered.  Oh, how
I wish I could help you!  Do tell me how I can help you.'

But Violet's occasional fits of weakness were never of a very long
duration.  She dashed her hand impatiently across her eyes,
straightened her tall figure, and laughed as she glanced at herself
in the mirror.

'Madame Celandine would be surprised if she could see how I have
treated one of her masterpieces,' said she, as she straightened her
crushed hat, and arranged her hair with those quick little deft pats
of the palm with which women can accomplish so much in so short a
time.  Rumpled finery sets the hands of every woman within sight of
it fidgeting, so Maude joined in at the patting and curling and
forgot all about her tears.

'There, that will have to do,' said Violet at last.  'I am so sorry
to have made such a fool of myself.  I don't err upon the sentimental
side as a rule.  I suppose it is about time that I thought of
catching my train for town.  I have a theatre engagement which I must
not miss.'

'How strange it is!' said Maude, looking at her own pretty tear-
marked face in the mirror.  'You have only been here a few minutes,
as time goes, and yet I feel that in some things I am more intimate
with you than with any woman I have ever met.  How can it be?  What
bond can there be to draw us together like this?  And it is the more
extraordinary, because I felt that you disliked me when you entered
the room, and I am sure that you won't be offended if I say that when
you had been here a little I thought that I disliked you.  But I
don't.  On the contrary, I wish you could come every day.  And I want
to come and see you also when I am in town.'

Maude, for all her amiability, was not gushing by nature, and this
long speech caused her great astonishment when she looked back upon
it.  But at the moment it came so naturally from her heart that she
never paused to think of its oddity.  Her enthusiasm was a little
chilled, however, by the way in which her advances were received.
Violet Wright's eyes were more kindly than ever, but she shook her
head.

'No, I don't suppose we shall ever meet again.  I don't think I could
ask you to visit me in London.  I wanted to see you, and I have seen
you, but that, I fear, must be the end of it.'

Maude's lip trembled in a way which it had when she was hurt.

'Why did you wish to see me, then?' she asked.

'On account of that slight acquaintance with your husband.  I thought
it would be interesting to see what sort of wife he had chosen.'

'I hope you are not disappointed,' said Maude, making a roguish face.

'He has done very well--better than I expected.'

'You had not much respect for his taste, then?'

'Oh yes, I always thought highly of his taste.'

'You have such a pretty way of putting things.  You know my husband
very slightly, but still I can see that you know the world very well.
I often wonder if I am really the best kind of woman that he could
have married.  Do you think I am, Mrs. Wright?'

Her visitor looked in silence for a little at the gentle grace and
dainty sympathetic charm of the woman before her.

'Yes,' she said slowly, as one who weighs her words.  'I think you
are.  You are a lady with a lady's soul in you.  A woman can draw a
man down very low, or she can make him live at his very highest.
Don't be soft with him.  Don't give way when you know that your way
is the higher way.  Pull him up, don't let him ever pull you down.
Then his respect for you will strengthen his love for you, and the
two together are so much greater than either one apart.  Your
instinct would be to do this, and therefore you are the best sort of
woman for him.'

Her opinion was given with so much thought, and yet so much decision,
that Maude glowed with pride and with pleasure.  There was knowledge
and authority behind the words of this unaccountable woman.

'How sweet you are!' she cried.  'I feel that what you say is true.
I feel that that is what a wife should be to her husband.  Please
God, I will be so to Frank!'

'And one other piece of advice before I leave you,' said Violet
Wright.  'Don't ever take your husband for granted.  Don't ever
accept his kiss or caress as a routine thing.  Don't ever relax those
little attentions which you showed him in the earliest days.  Don't
let the freshness go out of love, for the love may soon follow it,
even when duty keeps the man true.  It is the commonest mistake which
married women make.  It has caused more unhappiness than any other.
They do not realise it until it is too late.  Be keenly watchful for
your husband's wants and comforts.  It is not the comfort but the
attention which he values.  If it is not there he will say nothing,
if he is a good fellow, but he notices it all the same.  She has
changed, he thinks.  And from that moment he will begin to change
also.  Be on your guard against that.  It is very unselfish of me to
give you all this wise counsel.'

'It is very good of you, and I feel that it is all so true.  But why
is it unselfish of you?'

'I only meant that I had no interest in the matter.  What does it
matter to me whether you keep his love or not.  And yet I don't
know.'  She suddenly put her arms round Maude, and kissed her upon
the cheek.  'You are a good little sort, and I hope you will be
happy.'


Frank Crosse had disentangled himself from the rush of City men
emerging from the Woking station, and he was walking swiftly through
the gathering gloom along the vile, deeply-rutted road, which formed
a short cut to The Lindens.  Suddenly, with a sinking heart, he was
aware of a tall graceful figure which was sweeping towards him.
There could not be two women of that height, who carried themselves
in that fashion.

'Violet!'

'Hullo, Frankie!  I thought it might be you, but those tall hats and
black overcoats make every one alike.  Your wife will be glad to see
you.'

'Violet!  You have ruined our happiness.  How could you have the
heart to do it!  It is not for myself I speak, God knows.  But to
think of her feelings being so abused, her confidence so shaken--'

'All right, Frankie, there is nothing to be tragic about.'

'Haven't you been to my house?'

'Yes, I have.'

'And seen her?'

'Yes.'

'Well then--'

'I didn't give you away, my boy.  I was a model of discretion.  I
give you my word that it is all right.  And she's a dear little soul,
Frankie.  You're not worthy to varnish those pretty patent leathers
of hers.  You know you're not.  And by Jove, Frankie, if you had
stayed with me yesterday I should never have forgiven you--no, never!
I'll resign in her favour.  I will.  But in no one else's, and if
ever I hear of your going wrong, my boy, or doing anything but the
best with that sweet trusting woman, I'll make you curse the day that
ever you knew me--I will, by the living Jingo.'

'Do, Violet--you have my leave.'

'All right.  The least said the soonest mended.  Give me a kiss
before we part.'

She raised her veil, and he kissed her.  He was wearing some withered
flower in his overcoat, and she took it from him.

'It's a souvenir of our friendship, Frankie, and rather a good emblem
of it also.  So-long!' said she, as she turned down the weary road
which leads to the station.  A young golfer, getting in at Byfleet,
was surprised to see a handsome woman weeping bitterly in the corner
of a second-class carriage.  'Comm' up from roastin' somebody at that
damned crematory place,' was his explanation to his companion.

Frank had a long and animated account from Maude of the extraordinary
visitor whom she had entertained.  'It's such a pity, dear, that you
don't know her well, for I should really like to hear every detail
about her.  At first I thought she was mad, and then I thought she
was odious, and then finally she seemed to be the very wisest and
kindest woman that I had ever known.  She made me angry, and
frightened, and grieved, and grateful, and affectionate, one after
the other, and I never in my life was so taken out of myself by any
one.  She IS so sensible!'

'Sensible, is she?'

'And she said that I was--oh!  I can't repeat it--everything that is
nice.'

'Then she IS sensible.'

'And such a high opinion of your taste.'

'Had she indeed.'

'Do you know, Frank, I really believe that in a quiet, secret,
retiring sort of way she has been fond of you herself.'

'O Maude, what funny ideas you get sometimes!  I say, if we are going
out for dinner, it is high time that we began to dress.'



CHAPTER XX--NO. 5 CHEYNE ROW



Frank had brought home the Life of Carlyle, and Maude had been
dipping into it in the few spare half-hours which the many duties of
a young housekeeper left her.  At first it struck her as dry, but
from the moment that she understood that this was, among other
things, an account of the inner life of a husband and a wife, she
became keenly interested, and a passionate and unreasonable partisan.
For Frederick and Cromwell and the other great issues her feelings
were tolerant but lukewarm.  But the great sex-questions of 'How did
he treat her?' and of 'How did she stand it?' filled her with that
eternal and personal interest with which they affect every woman.
Her gentle nature seldom disliked any one, but certainly amongst
those whom she liked least, the gaunt figure of the Chelsea sage
began to bulk largely.  One night, as Frank sat reading in front of
the fire, he suddenly found his wife on her knees upon the rug, and a
pair of beseeching eyes upon his face.

'Frank, dear, I want you to make me a promise.'

'Well, what is it?'

'Will you grant it?'

'How can I tell you when I have not heard it?'

'How horrid you are, Frank!  A year ago you would have promised first
and asked afterwards.'

'But I am a shrewd old married man now.  Well, let me hear it.'

'I want you to promise me that you will never be a Carlyle.'

'No, no, never.'

'Really?'

'Really and truly.'

'You swear it?'

'Yes, I do.'

'O Frank, you can't think what a relief that is to me.  That dear,
good, helpful, little lady--it really made me cry this morning when I
thought how she had been used.'

'How, then?'

'I have been reading that green-covered book of yours, and he seemed
so cold and so sarcastic and so unsympathetic.  He never seemed to
appreciate all that she did for him.  He had no thought for her.  He
lived in his books and never in her--such a harsh, cruel man!'

Frank went upstairs, and returned with a volume in his hand.

'When you have finished the 'Life,' you must read this, dear.'

'What is it?'

'It is her letters.  They were arranged for publication after her
death, while her husband was still alive.  You know that--'

'Please take it for granted, darling, that I know nothing.  It is so
jolly to have some one before whom it is not necessary to keep up
appearances.  Now, begin at the beginning and go ahead.'  She
pillowed her head luxuriously against his knees.

'There's nothing to tell--or very little.  As you say, they had their
troubles in life.  The lady could take particularly good care of
herself, I believe.  She had a tongue like a lancet when she chose to
use it.  He, poor chap, was all liver and nerves, porridge-poisoned
in his youth.  No children to take the angles off them.  Half a dozen
little buffer states would have kept them at peace.  However, to hark
back to what I was about to say, he outlived her by fifteen years or
so.  During that time he collected these letters, and he has
annotated them.  You can read those notes here, and the man who wrote
those notes loved his wife and cherished her memory, if ever a man
did upon earth.'

The graceful head beside his knee shook impatiently.

'What is the use of that to the poor dead woman?  Why could not he
show his love by kindness and thought for her while she was alive?'

'I tell you, Maude, there were two sides to that.  Don't be so
prejudiced!  And remember that no one has ever blamed Carlyle as
bitterly as he has blamed himself.  I could read you bits of these
notes--'

'Well, do.'

'Here's the first letter, in which she is talking about how they
first moved into the house at Cheyne Row.  They spent their early
years in Scotland, you know, and he was a man going on to the forties
when he came to London.  The success of Sartor Resartus encouraged
them to the step.  Her letter describes all the incoming.  Here is
his comment, written after her death:  "In about a week all was swept
and garnished, fairly habitable; and continued incessantly to get
itself polished, civilised, and beautified to a degree that surprised
one.  I have elsewhere alluded to all that, and to my little
Jeannie's conduct of it; heroic, lovely, pathetic, mournfully
beautiful as in the light of Eternity that little scene of time now
looks to me.  From birth upwards she had lived in opulence, and now
became poor for me--so nobly poor.  No such house for beautiful
thrift, quiet, spontaneous, nay, as it were, unconscious minimum of
money reconciled to human comfort and human dignity, have I anywhere
looked upon where I have been."  Now, Maude, did that man appreciate
his wife?'

But the obstinate head still shook.

'Words, words,' said she.

'Yes, but words with the ring of truth in them.  Can't you tell real
feeling from sham?  I don't believe women can, or they would not be
so often taken in.  Here's the heading of the next letter:
"Mournfully beautiful is this letter to me, a clear little household
light shining pure and brilliant in the dark obstructive places of
the past"--a little later comes the note:  "Oh my poor little woman--
become poor for me."'

'I like to hear him talk like that.  Yes, I do like him better after
what you have said, Frank.'

'You must remember two things about him, Maude.  The first, that he
was a Scotchman, who are of all men the least likely to wear their
hearts upon their sleeves; the other, that his mind was always
grappling with some far-away subject which made him forget the
smaller things close by him.'

'But the smaller things are everything to a woman,' said Maude.  'If
ever you forget those smaller things, sir, to be as courteous to your
wife as you would be to any other lady, to be loving and thoughtful
and sympathetic, it will be no consolation to me to know that you
have written the grandest book that ever was.  I should just hate
that book, and I believe that in her inmost heart this poor lady
hated all the books that had taken her husband away from her.  I
wonder if their house is still standing.'

'Certainly it is.  Would you like to visit it?'

'I don't think there is anything I should like more.'

'Why, Maude, we are getting quite a distinguished circle of
acquaintances.  Mr. Pepys last month--and now the Carlyles.  Well, we
could not spend a Saturday afternoon better, so if you will meet me
to-morrow at Charing Cross, we shall have a cosy little lunch
together at Gatti's, and then go down to Chelsea.'


Maude was a rigid economist, and so was Frank in his way, for with
the grand self-respect of the middle classes the thought of debt was
unendurable to them.  A cab in preference to a 'bus gave both of them
a feeling of dissipation, but none the less they treated themselves
to one on the occasion of this, their little holiday.  It is a
delightful thing to snuggle up in, is a hansom; but in order to be
really trim and comfortable one has to put one's arm round one's
companion's waist.  No one can observe it there, for the vehicle is
built upon intelligent principles.  The cabman, it is true, can
overlook you through a hole in the roof.  This cabman did so, and
chuckled in his cravat.  'If that cove's wife could see him--huddup,
then!' said the cabman.

He was an intelligent cabman too, for having heard Frank say 'Thomas
Carlyle's house' after giving the address 5 Cheyne Row, he pulled up
on the Thames Embankment.  Right ahead of them was Chelsea Bridge,
seen through a dim, soft London haze--monstrous, Cyclopean, giant
arches springing over a vague river of molten metal, the whole
daintily blurred, as though out of focus.  The glamour of the London
haze, what is there upon earth so beautiful?  But it was not to
admire it that the cabman had halted.

'I beg your pardin', sir,' said he, in the softly insinuating way of
the Cockney, 'but I thought that maybe the lidy would like to see Mr.
Carlyle's statue.  That's 'im, sir, a-sittin' in the overcoat with
the book in 'is 'and.'

Frank and Maude got out and entered the small railed garden, in the
centre of which the pedestal rose.  It was very simple and plain--an
old man in a dressing-gown, with homely wornout boots, a book upon
his knee, his eyes and thoughts far away.  No more simple statue in
all London, but human to a surprising degree.  They stood for five
minutes and stared at it.

'Well,' said Frank at last, 'small as it is, I think it is worthy of
the man.'

'It is so natural.'

'You can see him think.  By Jove, it is splendid!'  Frank had enough
of the true artist to be able to feel that rush of enthusiasm which
adequate work should cause.  That old man, with his head shamefully
defiled by birds, was a positive joy to him.  Among the soulless,
pompous, unspeakable London statues, here at last there was one over
which it is pleasant to linger.

'What other one is there?'

'Gordon in Trafalgar Square.'

'Well, Gordon, perhaps.  But our Nelsons and Napiers and Havelocks--
to think that we could do no better than that for them!  Now, dear,
we have seen the man--let us look at the house!'

It had evidently been an old-fashioned building when first they came
to it.  1708 was the date at the corner of the street.  Six or seven
drab-coloured, flat-chested, dim-windowed houses stood in a line--
theirs wedged in the middle of them.  A poor medallion with a profile
head of him had been clumsily let into the wall.  Several worn steps
led to the thin high door with an old-fashioned fanlight above it.
Frank rang the bell, and a buxom cheerful matron came at the call.

'Names in this book, sir--AND address, if you please,' said the
cheery matron.  'One shilling each--thank you, sir.  First door to
the left, sir!  This was the dining-room, sir--'

But Frank had come to a dead stop in the dim, dull, wood-panelled
hall.  In front of them rose the stairs with old-fashioned banisters,
cracked, warped, and dusty.

'It's awful to think of, Maude--awful!  To think that she ran up
those stairs as a youngish woman--that he took them two at a time as
an active man, and then that they hobbled and limped down them, old
and weary and broken, and now both dead and gone for ever, and the
stairs standing, the very rails, the very treads--I don't know that I
ever felt so strongly what bubbles of the air we are, so fragile, so
utterly dissolved when the prick comes.'

'How COULD they be happy in such a house?' said Maude.  'I can feel
that there have been sorrow and trouble here.  There is an atmosphere
of gloom.'

The matron-attendant approved of emotion, but in its due order.  One
should be affected in the dining-room first, and then in the hall.
And so at her summons they followed her into the long, low, quaint
room in which this curious couple had lived their everyday life.
Little of the furniture was left, and the walls were lined with
collected pictures bearing upon the life of the Carlyles.

'There's the fireplace that he smoked his pipe up,' said Frank.

'Why up the fireplace?'

'She did not like the smell in the room.  He often at night took his
friends down into the kitchen.'

'Fancy my driving you into the kitchen.'

'Well, the habit of smoking was looked upon much less charitably at
that time.'

'And besides, he smoked clay pipes,' said the matron.  'This is
considered a good print of Mrs. Carlyle.'

It was a peaky eager face, with a great spirit looking out of it, and
possibilities of passion both for good and evil in the keen, alert
features.  Just beside her was the dour, grim outline of her husband.
Their life-histories were in those two portraits.

'Poor dear!' said Maude.

'Ay, you may say so,' said the matron, whose accent showed that she
was from the north of the Tweed.  'He was gey ill to live wi'.  His
own mither said so.  Now, what think you that room was for?'

It was little larger than a cupboard, without window or skylight,
opening out of the end of the dining-room.

'I can't imagine.'

'Well, sir, it was the powdering-room in the days when folk wore
wigs.  The powder made such a mess that they just had a room for
nothing else.  There was a hole in the door, and the man put his head
through the hole, and the barber on the other side powdered him out
of the flour-dredger.'

It was curious to be brought back in this fashion to those far-off
days, and to suddenly realise how many other people had played their
tragi-comedies within these walls.  Wigs!  Only the dressy people
wore wigs.  So people of fashion in the days of the early Georges
trod these same rooms where Carlyle grumbled and his wife fretted.
And they too had grumbled and fretted--or worse perhaps.  It was a
ghostly old house.

'This,' said the matron, when they had passed up the stair, 'used to
be the drawing-room.  That's their sofa.'

'Not THE sofa,' said Frank.

'Yes, sir, the sofa that is mentioned in the letters.'

'She was so proud of it, Maude.  Gave eighteen shillings for it, and
covered and stuffed it herself.  And that, I suppose, is THE screen.
She was a great housekeeper--brought up a spoiled child, according to
her own account, but a great housekeeper all the same.  What's that
writing in the case?'

'It is the history that he was at work on when he died--something
about the kings of Norway, sir.  Those are his corrections in blue.'

'I can't read them.'

'No more could any one else, sir.  Perhaps that's why the book has
never been published.  Those are the portraits of the kings of
Prussia, about whom he wrote a book.'

Frank looked with interest at the old engravings, one of the
schoolmaster face of the great Frederick, the other of the frog-like
features of Frederick William, the half-mad recruiter of the big
Potsdam grenadiers.  When he had finished, the matron had gone down
to open the door, and they were alone.  Maude's hand grasped his.

'Is it not strange, dear?' she said.  'Here they lived, the most
talented couple in the world, and yet with all their wisdom they
missed what we have got--what perhaps that good woman who showed us
round has got--the only thing, as it seems to me, that is really
worth living for.  What are all the wit and all the learning and all
the insight into things compared to love.'

'By Jove, little woman, in all this house of wise sayings, no wiser
or deeper saying has been said than that.  Well, thank God, we have
that anyhow!'  And he kissed his wife, while six grand electors of
Brandenburg and kings of Prussia looked fiercely out upon them from
the wall.

They sat down together in two old chairs in the window, and they
looked out into the dingy street, and Frank tried to recount all the
great men--'the other great men, as Maude said, half chaffing and
half earnest--who had looked through those panes.  Tennyson, Ruskin,
Emerson, Mill, Froude, Mazzini, Leigh Hunt--he had got so far when
the matron returned.

There was a case in the corner with some of the wreckage from those
vanished vessels.  Notes from old Goethe in a singularly neat boyish
writing inscribed upon little ornamented cards.  Here, too, were
small inscriptions which had lain upon presents from Carlyle to his
wife.  It was pleasant among all that jangling of the past to think
of the love which had written them, and that other love which had so
carefully preserved them.  On one was written:  'All good attend my
darling through this gulf of time and through the long ocean it is
leading to.  Amen.  Amen.  T. C.'  On another, dated 1850, and
attached evidently to some birthday present, was:  'Many years to my
poor little Jeannie, and may the worst of them be past.  No good that
is in me to give her shall ever be wanting while I live.  May God
bless her.'  How strange that this apostle of reticence should have
such privacies as these laid open before the curious public within so
few years of his death!

'This is her bedroom,' said the matron.

'And here is the old red bed,' cried Frank.  It looked bare and gaunt
and dreary with its uncurtained posts.

'The bed belonged to Mrs. Carlyle's mother,' the matron explained.
'It's the same bed that Mrs. Carlyle talks about in her letters when
she says how she pulled it to pieces.'

'Why did she pull it to pieces?' asked Maude.

'Better not inquire, dear.'

'Indeed you're right, sir.  If you get them into these old houses, it
is very hard to get them out.  A cleaner woman than Mrs. Carlyle
never came out of Scotland.  This little room behind was his
dressing-room.  There's his stick in the corner.  Look what's written
upon the window!'


Decidedly it was a ghostly house.  Scratched upon one of the panes
with a diamond was the following piece of information--'John Harbel
Knowles cleaned all the windows in this house, and painted part, in
the eighteenth year of age.  March 7th, 1794.'


'Who was HE?' asked Maude.

'Nobody knows, miss!'  It was characteristic of Maude that she was so
gentle in her bearing that every one always took it for granted that
she was Miss.  Frank examined the writing carefully.

'He was the son of the house and a young aristocrat who had never
done a stroke of work before in his life,' said he.

The matron was surprised.

'What makes you say that, sir?'

'What would a workman do with such a name as John Harbel Knowles, or
with a diamond ring for that matter?  And who would dare to disfigure
a window so, if he were not of the family?  And why should he be so
proud of his work, unless work was a new and wondrous thing to him.
To paint PART of the windows also sounds like the amateur and not the
workman.  So I repeat that it was the first achievement of the son of
the house.'

'Well, indeed, I dare say you are right, though I never thought of it
before,' said the matron.  'Now this, up here, is Carlyle's own room,
in which he slept for forty-seven years.  In the case is a cast of
his head taken after death.'

It was strange and rather ghastly to see a plaster head in this room
where the head of flesh had so often lain.  Maude and Frank stood
beside it, and gazed long and silently while the matron, half-bored
and half-sympathetic, waited for them to move on.  It was an aquiline
face, very different from any picture which they had seen, sunken
cheeks, an old man's toothless mouth, a hawk nose, a hollow eye--the
gaunt timbers of what had once been a goodly house.  There was
repose, and something of surprise also, in the features--also a very
subtle serenity and dignity.

'The distance from the ear to the forehead is said to be only
equalled by Napoleon and by Gladstone.  That's what they SAY,' said
the matron, with Scotch caution.

'It's the face of a noble man when all is said and done,' said Frank.
'I believe that the true Thomas Carlyle without the dyspepsia, and
the true Jane Welsh without the nerves, are knowing and loving each
other in some further life.'

'It is sweet to think so,' cried Maude.  'Oh, I do hope that it is
so!  How dear death would be if we could only be certain of that!'

The matron smiled complacently in the superior wisdom of the Shorter
Catechism.  'There is neither marriage nor giving in marriage,' said
she, shaking her head.  'This is the spare bedroom, sir, where Mr.
Emerson slept when he was here.  And now if you will step this way I
will show you the study.'

It was the singular room which Carlyle had constructed in the hopes
that he could shut out all the noises of the universe, the crowing of
cocks, and the jingling of a young lady's five-finger exercise in
particular.  It had cost him a hundred odd pounds, and had ended in
being unendurably hot in summer, impossibly cold in winter, and so
constructed acoustically that it reverberated every sound in the
neighbourhood.  For once even his wild and whirling words could
hardly match the occasion--not all his kraft sprachen would be too
much.  For the rest it was at least a roomy and lofty apartment, with
space for many books, and for an irritable man to wander to and fro.
Prints there were of many historical notables, and slips of letters
and of memoranda in a long glass case.

'That is one of his clay pipes,' said the matron.  'He had them all
sent through to him from Glasgow.  And that is the pen with which he
wrote Frederick.'

It was a worn, stubby old quill, much the worse for its monstrous
task.  It at least of all quill pens might rest content with having
done its work in the world.  Some charred paper beside it caught
Frank's eye.

'Oh look, Maude,' he cried.  'This is a little bit of the burned
French Revolution.'

'Oh, I remember.  He lent the only copy to a friend, and it was
burned by mistake.'

'What a blow!  What a frightful blow!  And to think that his first
comment to his wife was, "Well, Mill, poor fellow, is very much cut
up about this."  There is Carlyle at his best.  And here is actually
a shred of the old manuscript.  How beautifully he wrote in those
days!'

'Read this, sir,' said the matron.

It was part of a letter from Carlyle to his publisher about his
ruined work.  'Do not pity me,' said he; 'forward me rather as a
runner that is tripped but will not lie there, but run and run
again.'

'See what positive misfortune can do for a man,' said Frank.  'It
raised him to a hero.  And yet he could not stand the test of a
crowing cock.  How infinitely complex is the human soul--how
illimitably great and how pitiably small!  Now, if ever I have a
study of my own, this is what I want engraved upon the wall.  This
alone is well worth our pilgrimage to Chelsea.'

It was a short exclamation which had caught his eye.

'Rest!  Rest!  Shall I not have all eternity to rest in!'  That
serene plaster face down yonder gave force to the brave words.  Frank
copied them down onto the back of one of Maude's cards.

And now they had finished the rooms, but the matron, catching a glow
from these enthusiastic pilgrims, had yet other things to show them.
There was the back garden.  Here was the green pottery seat upon
which the unphilosophic philosopher had smoked his pipe--a singularly
cold and uncomfortable perch.  And here was where Mrs. Carlyle had
tried to build a tent and to imagine herself in the country.  And
here was the famous walnut tree--or at least the stumpy bole thereof.
And here was where the dog Nero was buried, best known of small white
mongrels.

And last of all there was the subterranean and gloomy kitchen, in
which there had lived that long succession of serving-maids of whom
we gain shadowy glimpses in the Letters and in the Journal.  Poor
souls, dwellers in the gloom, working so hard for others, so bitterly
reviled when by chance some weakness of humanity comes to break, for
an instant, the routine of their constant labour, so limited in their
hopes and in their pleasures, they are of all folk upon this planet
those for whom a man's heart may most justly soften.  So said Frank
as he gazed around him in the dark-cornered room.  'And never one
word of sympathy for them, or of anything save scorn in all his
letters.  His pen upholding human dignity, but where was the dignity
of these poor girls for whom he has usually one bitter line of
biography in his notes to his wife's letters?  It's the worst thing I
have against him.'

'Jemima wouldn't have stood it,' said Maude.

It was pleasant to be out in the open air once more, but they were in
the pine groves of Woking before Maude had quite shaken off the gloom
of that dark, ghost-haunted house.  'After all, you are only twenty-
seven,' she remarked as they walked up from the station.  She had a
way of occasionally taking a subject by the middle in that way.

'What then, dear?'

'When Carlyle was only twenty-seven I don't suppose he knew he was
going to do all this.'

'No, I don't suppose so.'

'And his wife--if he were married then--would feel as I do to you.'

'No doubt.'

'Then what guarantee have I that you won't do it after all?'

'Do what?'

'Why, turn out a second Carlyle.'

'Hear me swear!' cried Frank, and they turned laughing into their own
little gateway at the Lindens.



CHAPTER XXI--THE LAST NOTE OF THE DUET



Our young married couples may feel that two is company and three is
none, but there comes a little noisy intruder to break into their
sweet intimacy.  The coming of the third is the beginning of a new
life for them as well as for it--a life which is more useful and more
permanent, but never so concentrated as before.  That little pink
thing with the blinking eyes will divert some of the love and some of
the attention, and the very trouble which its coming has caused will
set its mother's heart yearning over it.  Not so the man.  Some vague
resentment mixes with his pride of paternity, and his wife's
sufferings rankle in his memory when she has herself forgotten them.
His pity, his fears, his helplessness, and his discomfort, give him a
share in the domestic tragedy.  It is not without cause that in some
societies it is the man and not the woman who receives the condolence
and the sympathy.

There came a time when Maude was bad, and there came months when she
was better, and then there were indications that a day was
approaching, the very thought of which was a shadow upon her
husband's life.  For her part, with the steadfast, gentle courage of
a woman, she faced the future with a sweet serenity.  But to him it
was a nightmare--an actual nightmare which brought him up damp and
quivering in those gray hours of the dawn, when dark shadows fall
upon the spirit of man.  He had a steady nerve for that which
affected himself, a nerve which would keep him quiet and motionless
in a dentist's chair, but what philosophy or hardihood can steel one
against the pain which those whom we love have to endure.  He fretted
and chafed, and always with the absurd delusion that his fretting and
chafing were successfully concealed.  A hundred failures never
convince a man how impossible it is to deceive a woman who loves him.
Maude watched him demurely, and made her plans.

'Do you know, dear,' said she, one evening, 'if you can get a week of
your holidays now, I think it would be a very good thing for you to
accept that invitation of Mr. Mildmay's, and spend a few days in
golfing at Norwich.'

Frank stared at her open-eyed.

'What!  Now!'

'Yes, dear, now--at once.'

'But NOW of all times.'

Maude looked at him with that glance of absolute obvious candour
which a woman never uses unless she has intent to deceive.

'Yes, dear--but only next week.  I thought it would brace you up for-
-well, for the week afterwards.'

'You think the week afterwards?'

'Yes, dear.  It would help me so, if I knew that you were in your
best form.'

'_I_!  What can it matter what form _I_ am in.  But in any case, it
is out of the question.'

'But you could get leave.'

'Oh yes, easily enough.'

'Then do go.'

'And leave you at such a time!'

'No, no, you would be back.'

'You can't be so sure of that.  No, Maude, I should never forgive
myself.  Such an idea would never enter my head.'

'But for my sake--!'

'That's enough, Maude.  It is settled.'

Master Frank had a heavy foot when he did bring it down, and his wife
recognised a decisive thud this time.  With a curious double current
of feeling, she was pleased and disappointed at the same time, but
more pleased than disappointed, so she kissed the marrer of her
plots.

'What an obstinate old boy it is!  But of course you know best, and I
should much rather have you at home.  As you say, one can never be
certain.'

In a conflict of wits the woman may lose a battle, but the odds are
that she will win the campaign.  The man dissipates over many things,
while she concentrates upon the one.  Maude had made up her mind
absolutely upon one point, and she meant to attain it.  She tried
here, she tried there, through a friend, through her mother, but
Frank was still immovable.  The ordeal coming upon herself never
disturbed her for an instant.  But the thought that Frank would
suffer was unendurable.  She put herself in his place, and realised
what it would be to him if he were in the house at such a time.  With
many cunning devices she tried to lure him off, but still, in his
stubborn way, he refused to be misled.  And then suddenly she
realised that it was too late.

It was early one morning that the conviction came home to her, but
he, at her side, knew nothing of it.  He came up to her before he
left for the City.

'You have not eaten anything, dear.'

'No, Frank, I am not hungry.'

'Perhaps, after you get up--'

'Well, dear, I thought of staying in bed.'

'You are not--?'

'What nonsense, dear!  I want to keep very quiet until next week,
when I may need all my strength.'

'Dear girl, I would gladly give ten years of my life to have next
week past.'

'Silly old boy!  But I do think it would be wiser if I were to keep
in bed.'

'Yes, yes, do.'

'I have a little headache.  Nothing to speak of, but just a little.'

'Don't you think Dr. Jordan had better give you something for it.'

'Do you think so?  Well, just as you like.  You might call as you
pass, and tell him to step up.'

And so, upon a false mission, the doctor was summoned to her side,
but found a very real mission waiting for him when he got there.  She
had written a note for Frank the moment that he had left the house,
and he found both it and a conspiracy of silence waiting for him when
he returned in the late afternoon.  The note was upon the hall-table,
and he eagerly tore it open.

'My dear boy,' said this mendacious epistle, 'my head is still rather
bad, and Dr. Jordan thought that it would be wiser if I were to have
an undisturbed rest, but I will send down to you when I feel better.
Until then I had best, perhaps, remain alone.  Mr. Harrison sent
round to say that he would come to help you to pot the bulbs, so that
will give you something to do.  Don't bother about me, for I only
want a little rest.--MAUDE.'

It seemed very unnatural to him to come back and not to hear the
swift rustle of the dress which followed always so quickly upon the
creak of his latch-key that they might have been the same sound.  The
hall and dining-room seemed unhomely without the bright welcoming
face.  He wandered about in a discontented fashion upon his tiptoes,
and then, looking through the window, he saw Harrison his neighbour
coming up the path with a straw basket in his hand.  He opened the
door for him with his finger upon his lips.

'Don't make a row, Harrison,' said he, 'my wife's bad.'

Harrison whistled softly.

'Not--?'

'No, no, not that.  Only a headache, but she is not to be disturbed.
We expect THAT next week.  Come in here and smoke a pipe with me.  It
was very kind of you to bring the bulbs.'

'I am going back for some more.'

'Wait a little.  You can go back presently.  Sit down and light your
pipe.  There is some one moving about upstairs.  It must be that
heavy-footed Jemima.  I hope she won't wake Maude up.  I suppose one
must expect such attacks at such a time.'

'Yes, my wife was just the same.  No, thank you, I've just had some
tea.  You look worried, Crosse.  Don't take things too hard.'

'I can't get the thought of next week out of my head.  If anything
goes wrong--well there, what can I do?  I never knew how a man's
nerves may be harrowed before.  And she is such a saint, Harrison--
such an absolutely unselfish saint!  You'll never guess what she
tried to do.'

'What, then?'

'She knew what it would mean to me--what it will mean to me--to sit
here in impotence while she goes through this horrible business.  She
guessed in some extraordinary way what my secret feelings were about
it.  And she actually tried to deceive me as to when it was to occur-
-tried to get me out of the house on one pretext or another until it
was all over.  That was her plot, and, by Jove, she tried it so
cleverly that she would have managed it if something had not put me
on my guard.  She was a little too eager, unnaturally so, and I saw
through her game.  But think of it, the absolute unselfishness of it.
To consider ME at such a time, and to face her trouble alone and
unsupported in order to make it easier for me.  She wanted me to go
to Norwich and play golf.'

'She must have thought you pretty guileless, Crosse, to be led away
so easily.'

'Yes, it was a hopeless attempt to deceive me on such a point, or to
dream for an instant that my instincts would not tell me when she had
need of me.  But none the less it was beautiful and characteristic.
You don't mind my talking of these things, Harrison?'

'My dear chap, it is just what you need.  You have been bottling
things up too much.  Your health will break down under it.  After
all, it is not so serious as all that.  The danger is very much
exaggerated.'

'You think so.'

'I've had the experience twice now.  You'll go to the City some fine
morning, and when you come back the whole thing will be over.'

'Indeed it won't.  I have made arrangements at the office, and from
the hour that she first seems bad I will never stir from the house.
For all she may say, I know very well that it gives her strength and
courage to feel that I am there.'

'You may not know that it is coming on?'

Frank laughed incredulously.

'We'll see about that,' said he.  'And you think from your
experience, Harrison, that it is not so very bad after all?'

'Oh no.  It soon passes.'

'Soon!  What do you mean by soon?'

'Jordan was there six hours the first time.'

'Good God!  Six hours!'  Frank wiped his forehead.  'They must have
seemed six years.'

'They WERE rather long.  I kept on working in the garden.  That's the
tip.  Keep on doing something and it helps you along wonderfully.'

'That's a good suggestion, Harrison.  What a curious smell there is
in the air!  Do you notice a sort of low, sweetish, spirity kind of
scent?  Well, perhaps it's my imagination.  I dare say that my nerves
are a bit strung up these days.  But that is a capital idea of yours
about having some work to do.  I should like to work madly for those
hours.  Have everything up out of the back garden and plant it all
again in the front.'

Harrison laughed.

'I'll tell you something less heroic,' said he; 'you could keep all
these bulbs, and pot them then.  By the way, I'll go round and get
the others.  Don't bother about the door.  I shall leave it open, for
I won't be five minutes.'

'And I'll put these in the greenhouse,' said Frank.  He took the
basket of bulbs and he laid them all out on the wooden shelf of the
tiny conservatory which leaned against the back of the house.  When
he came out there was a kitten making a noise somewhere.  It was a
low sound, but persistent, coming in burst after burst.  He took the
rake and jabbed with the handle amongst the laurel bushes under their
bedroom window.  The beast might waken Maude, and so it was worth
some trouble to dislodge it.  He could not see it, but when he had
poked among the bushes and cried 'Skat!' several times, the crying
died away, and he carried his empty basket into the dining-room.
There he lit his pipe again, and waited for Harrison's return.

There was that bothersome kitten again.  He could hear it mewing away
somewhere.  It did not sound so loud as in the garden, so perhaps it
would not matter.  He felt very much inclined to steal upstairs upon
tiptoe and see if Maude were stirring yet.  After all, if Jemima, or
whoever it was, could go clumping about in heavy boots over his head,
there was no fear that he could do any harm.  And yet she had said
that she would ring or send word the moment she could see him, and so
perhaps he had better wait where he was.  He put his head out of the
window and cried 'Shoo!' into the laurel bushes several times.  Then
he sat in the armchair with his back to the door.  Steps came heavily
along the hall, and he saw dimly with the back corner of his eye that
some one was in the doorway carrying something.  He thought that
really Harrison might have brought the bulbs in more quietly, and so
he treated him with some coldness, and did not turn round to him.

'Put it in the out-house,' said he.

'Why the out-house?'

'We keep them there.  But you can put it under the sideboard, or in
the coal-scuttle, or where you like as long as you don't make any
more noise.'

'Why, surely, Crosse--'  But Frank suddenly sprang out of his chair.

'I'm blessed if that infernal kitten isn't somewhere in the room!'

And there when he turned was the grim, kindly face of old Doctor
Jordan facing him.  He carried in the crook of his arm a brown shawl
with something round and small muffled up in it.  There was one slit
in front, and through this came a fist about the size of a marble,
the thumb doubled under the tiny fingers, and the whole limb giving
circular waves, as if the owner were cheering lustily at his own
successful arrival.  'Here am I, good people, hurrah! hurrah!
hurrah!' cried the waving hand.  Then as the slit in the shawl
widened Frank saw that behind the energetic fist there was a huge
open mouth, a little button of a nose, and two eyes which were so
resolutely screwed up that it seemed as if the owner had made a
resolution never under any circumstances to take the least notice of
this new world into which it had been transported.  Frank dropped his
pipe and stood staring at this apparition.

'What!  What's that?'

'The baby!'

'Baby?  Whose baby?'

'Your baby, of course.'

'My baby!  Where--where did you get it?'

Doctor Jordan burst out laughing.

'You are like a man who has just been wakened out of his sleep,' said
he.  'Why, Crosse, your wife has been bad all day, but she's all
right now, and here's your son and heir--a finer lad of the age I
never saw--fighting weight about seven pounds.'

Frank was a very proud man at the roots of his nature.  He did not
readily give himself away.  Perhaps if he had been quite alone he
might at that moment, as the great wave of joy washed through his
soul, bearing all his fears and forebodings away upon its crest, have
dropped upon his knees in prayer.  But prayer comes not from the knee
but from the heart, and the whole strength of his nature breathed
itself out in silent thanks to that great Fate which goes its way
regardless either of thanks or reproaches.  The doctor saw a pale
self-contained young man before him, and thought him strangely
wanting in emotion.

'Well!' said he, impatiently.  'Is she all right?'

'Yes.  Won't you take your son?'

'Could she see me?'

'I don't suppose five minutes would do any harm.'

Dr. Jordan said afterwards that it was three steps which took Frank
up the fifteen stairs.  The nurse who met him at the corner looks
back on it as the escape of her lifetime.  Maude lay in bed with a
face as pale as the pillow which framed it.  Her lips were bloodless
but smiling.

'Frank!'

'My own dear sweet girlie!'

'You never knew.  Did you, Frank?  Tell me that you never knew.'

And at that anxious question the foolish pride which keeps the
emotions of the strong man buried down in his soul as though they
were the least honourable part of his nature, fell suddenly to
nothing, and Frank dropped with his head beside the white face upon
the pillow, and lay with his arm across the woman whom he loved, and
sobbed as he had not sobbed since his childhood.  Her cheek was wet
with his tears.  He never saw the doctor until he came beside him and
touched him on the shoulder.

'I think you had better go now,' said he.

'Sorry to be a fool, doctor,' said Frank, blushing hotly in his
clumsy English fashion.  'It's just more than I can stand.'

'Sir,' the doctor answered, 'I owe you an apology, for I had done you
an injustice.  Meanwhile your son is about to be dressed, and there
is hardly room for three men in one bedroom.'

So Frank went down into the darkening room below, and mechanically
lighting his pipe, he sat with his elbows upon his knees and stared
out into the gathering gloom where one bright evening star twinkled
in a violet sky.  The gentle hush of the gloaming was around him, and
some late bird was calling outside amongst the laurels.  Above he
heard the shuffling of feet, the murmur of voices, and then amid it
all those thin glutinous cries, HIS voice, the voice of this new man
with all a man's possibilities for good and for evil, who had taken
up his dwelling with them.  And as he listened to those cries, a
gentle sadness was mixed with his joy, for he felt that things were
now for ever changed--that whatever sweet harmonies of life might
still be awaiting him, from this hour onwards, they might form
themselves into the subtlest and loveliest of chords, but it must
always be as a trio, and never as the dear duet of the past.



CHAPTER XXII--THE TRIO



(Extract from a letter to the Author from Mrs. Frank Crosse.)

'It is very singular that you should say with such confidence that
you know that our baby is a splendid one, and further on you say that
in some ways it differs from any other baby.  It is so true, but
neither Frank nor I can imagine how you knew.  We both think it so
CLEVER of you to have found it out.  When you write to us, do please
tell us how you discovered it.

'I want to tell you something about baby, since you so kindly ask me,
but Frank says there is no use my beginning as there is only one
quire of paper in the house.  As a matter of fact, I shall be quite
short, which is not because I have not plenty to say--you cannot
think what a DEAR he is--but because he may wake up at any moment.
After that happens I can only write with one hand, while I wave a
feather fan with the other, and it is so difficult then to say
exactly what you mean.  In any case you know that I have not the
habit of collecting and writing down my ideas, so please forgive me
if this seems a stupid letter.  Frank could have done it splendidly.
But he has so many sweet and quite REMARKABLE ways, that I ought to
be able to put some of them down for you.

'It will be easier perhaps if I imagine a day of him--and one of his
days is very much like another.  No one could ever say that he was
irregular in his habits.  First thing in the morning I go over to his
cot to see if he is awake yet--though, of course, I know that he
can't be, for he always lets us know--the darling!  However, I go
over all the same, and I find everything quiet and nothing visible of
baby, but a tiny, turned-up nose.  It is so exactly Frank's nose,
only that his is curved the other way.  Then, as I bend over his cot,
there is a small sigh, such a soft, comfortable sound!  Then a sort
of earthquake takes place under the eider down, and a tightly
clenched fist appears and is waved in the air.  He has such a
pleasant, cheerful way of waving his fists.  Then one eye is half
opened, as if he were looking round to see if it were safe to open
the other one, and then he gives a long, sorrowful wail as he
realises that his bottle is not where he left it when he went to
sleep.  In a moment he is in my arms and quite happy again, playing
with the lace round the neck of my pink dressing-gown.  When he finds
that his nice warm bath is all ready for him, he becomes quite
jovial, and laughs and chuckles to himself.  Something awfully funny
must have happened to him before ever he came into this world at all,
for nothing that has occurred since could account for the intense
expression of amusement that one can often see in his eyes.  When he
laughs, Frank says that he looks like some jolly old clean-shaven
toothless friar--so chubby and good-humoured.  He takes the greatest
interest in everything in the room, watches the nurse moving about,
looks out of the window, and examines my hair and my dress very
critically.  He loves to see untidy hair and a bright tie, or a
brooch will often catch his eye, and make him smile.  His smile is
the most wonderful thing!  As he lies gazing with his great serious
blue eyes, his whole face suddenly lights up, his mouth turns up at
one corner in the most irresistible way, and his cheeks all go off
into dimples.  He looks so sweet and innocent, and at the same time
so humorous and wicked, that his foolish mother wants to laugh at him
and to weep over him at the same time.

'Then comes his bath, and there is a sad display of want of faith
upon his part.  He enjoys the process, but he is convinced that only
his own exertions keep him from drowning, so his little fists are
desperately clenched, his legs kick up and down the whole time, and
he watches every movement of mother and nurse with suspicion.  He
enjoys being dressed, and smiles at first, and then he suddenly
remembers that he has not had his breakfast.  Then the smiles vanish,
the small round face grows so red and angry, and all covered with
little wrinkles, and there is a dismal wailing--poor darling!  If the
bottle is not instantly forthcoming he will howl loudly, and beat the
air with his fists until he gets it.  He DOES remind me so of his
father sometimes.  He is always hunting for his bottle, and will
seize my finger, or a bit of my dress, or anything, and carry it to
his mouth, and when he finds it isn't what he wants, he throws it
away very angrily.  When finally he does get the bottle, he becomes
at once the most contented being in the whole world, and sucks away
with such great long pulls, and such dear little grunts in between.
Then afterwards, a well-washed, well-fed atom, he is ready to look
about him and observe things.  I am sure that he has his father's
brains, and that he is storing up all sorts of impressions and
observations for future use, for he notices EVERYTHING.  I used to
think that babies were stupid and indifferent--and perhaps other
babies are--but HE is never indifferent.  Sometimes he is pleased and
amused, and sometimes angry, and sometimes gravely interested, but he
is always wide awake and taking things in.  When I go into his room,
he always looks at my head, and if I have my garden hat with the
flowers, he is so pleased.  He much prefers chiffon to silk.

'Almost the first thing that struck me when I saw him, and it strikes
me more and more, was, how could any one have got the idea of
original sin?  The people who believe in it can never have looked
into a baby's eyes.  I love to watch them, and sometimes fancy I can
see a faint shade of reminiscence in them, as if he had still some
memories of another life, and could tell me things if he could only
speak.  One day as I sat beside his cot--Oh dear!  I hear his Majesty
calling.  So sorry!  Good-bye.--Yours very truly,

MAUDE CROSSE.'

P.S.--I have not time to read this over, but I may say, in case I
omitted it before, that he really is a very remarkable baby.'





CHAPTER I. MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES.


IN the year 1878 I took my degree of Doctor of Medicine of the
University of London, and proceeded to Netley to go through the course
prescribed for surgeons in the army. Having completed my studies there,
I was duly attached to the Fifth Northumberland Fusiliers as Assistant
Surgeon. The regiment was stationed in India at the time, and before
I could join it, the second Afghan war had broken out. On landing at
Bombay, I learned that my corps had advanced through the passes, and
was already deep in the enemy's country. I followed, however, with many
other officers who were in the same situation as myself, and succeeded
in reaching Candahar in safety, where I found my regiment, and at once
entered upon my new duties.

The campaign brought honours and promotion to many, but for me it had
nothing but misfortune and disaster. I was removed from my brigade and
attached to the Berkshires, with whom I served at the fatal battle of
Maiwand. There I was struck on the shoulder by a Jezail bullet, which
shattered the bone and grazed the subclavian artery. I should have
fallen into the hands of the murderous Ghazis had it not been for the
devotion and courage shown by Murray, my orderly, who threw me across a
pack-horse, and succeeded in bringing me safely to the British lines.

Worn with pain, and weak from the prolonged hardships which I had
undergone, I was removed, with a great train of wounded sufferers, to
the base hospital at Peshawar. Here I rallied, and had already improved
so far as to be able to walk about the wards, and even to bask a little
upon the verandah, when I was struck down by enteric fever, that curse
of our Indian possessions. For months my life was despaired of, and
when at last I came to myself and became convalescent, I was so weak and
emaciated that a medical board determined that not a day should be lost
in sending me back to England. I was dispatched, accordingly, in the
troopship "Orontes," and landed a month later on Portsmouth jetty, with
my health irretrievably ruined, but with permission from a paternal
government to spend the next nine months in attempting to improve it.

I had neither kith nor kin in England, and was therefore as free as
air--or as free as an income of eleven shillings and sixpence a day will
permit a man to be. Under such circumstances, I naturally gravitated to
London, that great cesspool into which all the loungers and idlers of
the Empire are irresistibly drained. There I stayed for some time at
a private hotel in the Strand, leading a comfortless, meaningless
existence, and spending such money as I had, considerably more freely
than I ought. So alarming did the state of my finances become, that
I soon realized that I must either leave the metropolis and rusticate
somewhere in the country, or that I must make a complete alteration in
my style of living. Choosing the latter alternative, I began by making
up my mind to leave the hotel, and to take up my quarters in some less
pretentious and less expensive domicile.

On the very day that I had come to this conclusion, I was standing at
the Criterion Bar, when some one tapped me on the shoulder, and turning
round I recognized young Stamford, who had been a dresser under me at
Barts. The sight of a friendly face in the great wilderness of London is
a pleasant thing indeed to a lonely man. In old days Stamford had never
been a particular crony of mine, but now I hailed him with enthusiasm,
and he, in his turn, appeared to be delighted to see me. In the
exuberance of my joy, I asked him to lunch with me at the Holborn, and
we started off together in a hansom.

"Whatever have you been doing with yourself, Watson?" he asked in
undisguised wonder, as we rattled through the crowded London streets.
"You are as thin as a lath and as brown as a nut."

I gave him a short sketch of my adventures, and had hardly concluded it
by the time that we reached our destination.

"Poor devil!" he said, commiseratingly, after he had listened to my
misfortunes. "What are you up to now?"

"Looking for lodgings." [3] I answered. "Trying to solve the problem
as to whether it is possible to get comfortable rooms at a reasonable
price."

"That's a strange thing," remarked my companion; "you are the second man
to-day that has used that expression to me."

"And who was the first?" I asked.

"A fellow who is working at the chemical laboratory up at the hospital.
He was bemoaning himself this morning because he could not get someone
to go halves with him in some nice rooms which he had found, and which
were too much for his purse."

"By Jove!" I cried, "if he really wants someone to share the rooms and
the expense, I am the very man for him. I should prefer having a partner
to being alone."

Young Stamford looked rather strangely at me over his wine-glass. "You
don't know Sherlock Holmes yet," he said; "perhaps you would not care
for him as a constant companion."

"Why, what is there against him?"

"Oh, I didn't say there was anything against him. He is a little queer
in his ideas--an enthusiast in some branches of science. As far as I
know he is a decent fellow enough."

"A medical student, I suppose?" said I.

"No--I have no idea what he intends to go in for. I believe he is well
up in anatomy, and he is a first-class chemist; but, as far as I know,
he has never taken out any systematic medical classes. His studies are
very desultory and eccentric, but he has amassed a lot of out-of-the way
knowledge which would astonish his professors."

"Did you never ask him what he was going in for?" I asked.

"No; he is not a man that it is easy to draw out, though he can be
communicative enough when the fancy seizes him."

"I should like to meet him," I said. "If I am to lodge with anyone, I
should prefer a man of studious and quiet habits. I am not strong
enough yet to stand much noise or excitement. I had enough of both in
Afghanistan to last me for the remainder of my natural existence. How
could I meet this friend of yours?"

"He is sure to be at the laboratory," returned my companion. "He either
avoids the place for weeks, or else he works there from morning to
night. If you like, we shall drive round together after luncheon."

"Certainly," I answered, and the conversation drifted away into other
channels.

As we made our way to the hospital after leaving the Holborn, Stamford
gave me a few more particulars about the gentleman whom I proposed to
take as a fellow-lodger.

"You mustn't blame me if you don't get on with him," he said; "I know
nothing more of him than I have learned from meeting him occasionally in
the laboratory. You proposed this arrangement, so you must not hold me
responsible."

"If we don't get on it will be easy to part company," I answered. "It
seems to me, Stamford," I added, looking hard at my companion, "that you
have some reason for washing your hands of the matter. Is this fellow's
temper so formidable, or what is it? Don't be mealy-mouthed about it."

"It is not easy to express the inexpressible," he answered with a laugh.
"Holmes is a little too scientific for my tastes--it approaches to
cold-bloodedness. I could imagine his giving a friend a little pinch of
the latest vegetable alkaloid, not out of malevolence, you understand,
but simply out of a spirit of inquiry in order to have an accurate idea
of the effects. To do him justice, I think that he would take it himself
with the same readiness. He appears to have a passion for definite and
exact knowledge."

"Very right too."

"Yes, but it may be pushed to excess. When it comes to beating the
subjects in the dissecting-rooms with a stick, it is certainly taking
rather a bizarre shape."

"Beating the subjects!"

"Yes, to verify how far bruises may be produced after death. I saw him
at it with my own eyes."

"And yet you say he is not a medical student?"

"No. Heaven knows what the objects of his studies are. But here we
are, and you must form your own impressions about him." As he spoke, we
turned down a narrow lane and passed through a small side-door, which
opened into a wing of the great hospital. It was familiar ground to me,
and I needed no guiding as we ascended the bleak stone staircase and
made our way down the long corridor with its vista of whitewashed
wall and dun-coloured doors. Near the further end a low arched passage
branched away from it and led to the chemical laboratory.

This was a lofty chamber, lined and littered with countless bottles.
Broad, low tables were scattered about, which bristled with retorts,
test-tubes, and little Bunsen lamps, with their blue flickering flames.
There was only one student in the room, who was bending over a distant
table absorbed in his work. At the sound of our steps he glanced round
and sprang to his feet with a cry of pleasure. "I've found it! I've
found it," he shouted to my companion, running towards us with a
test-tube in his hand. "I have found a re-agent which is precipitated
by hoemoglobin, [4] and by nothing else." Had he discovered a gold mine,
greater delight could not have shone upon his features.

"Dr. Watson, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said Stamford, introducing us.

"How are you?" he said cordially, gripping my hand with a strength
for which I should hardly have given him credit. "You have been in
Afghanistan, I perceive."

"How on earth did you know that?" I asked in astonishment.

"Never mind," said he, chuckling to himself. "The question now is about
hoemoglobin. No doubt you see the significance of this discovery of
mine?"

"It is interesting, chemically, no doubt," I answered, "but
practically----"

"Why, man, it is the most practical medico-legal discovery for years.
Don't you see that it gives us an infallible test for blood stains. Come
over here now!" He seized me by the coat-sleeve in his eagerness, and
drew me over to the table at which he had been working. "Let us have
some fresh blood," he said, digging a long bodkin into his finger, and
drawing off the resulting drop of blood in a chemical pipette. "Now, I
add this small quantity of blood to a litre of water. You perceive that
the resulting mixture has the appearance of pure water. The proportion
of blood cannot be more than one in a million. I have no doubt, however,
that we shall be able to obtain the characteristic reaction." As he
spoke, he threw into the vessel a few white crystals, and then added
some drops of a transparent fluid. In an instant the contents assumed a
dull mahogany colour, and a brownish dust was precipitated to the bottom
of the glass jar.

"Ha! ha!" he cried, clapping his hands, and looking as delighted as a
child with a new toy. "What do you think of that?"

"It seems to be a very delicate test," I remarked.

"Beautiful! beautiful! The old Guiacum test was very clumsy and
uncertain. So is the microscopic examination for blood corpuscles. The
latter is valueless if the stains are a few hours old. Now, this appears
to act as well whether the blood is old or new. Had this test been
invented, there are hundreds of men now walking the earth who would long
ago have paid the penalty of their crimes."

"Indeed!" I murmured.

"Criminal cases are continually hinging upon that one point. A man is
suspected of a crime months perhaps after it has been committed. His
linen or clothes are examined, and brownish stains discovered upon them.
Are they blood stains, or mud stains, or rust stains, or fruit stains,
or what are they? That is a question which has puzzled many an expert,
and why? Because there was no reliable test. Now we have the Sherlock
Holmes' test, and there will no longer be any difficulty."

His eyes fairly glittered as he spoke, and he put his hand over his
heart and bowed as if to some applauding crowd conjured up by his
imagination.

"You are to be congratulated," I remarked, considerably surprised at his
enthusiasm.

"There was the case of Von Bischoff at Frankfort last year. He would
certainly have been hung had this test been in existence. Then there was
Mason of Bradford, and the notorious Muller, and Lefevre of Montpellier,
and Samson of new Orleans. I could name a score of cases in which it
would have been decisive."

"You seem to be a walking calendar of crime," said Stamford with a
laugh. "You might start a paper on those lines. Call it the 'Police News
of the Past.'"

"Very interesting reading it might be made, too," remarked Sherlock
Holmes, sticking a small piece of plaster over the prick on his finger.
"I have to be careful," he continued, turning to me with a smile, "for I
dabble with poisons a good deal." He held out his hand as he spoke, and
I noticed that it was all mottled over with similar pieces of plaster,
and discoloured with strong acids.

"We came here on business," said Stamford, sitting down on a high
three-legged stool, and pushing another one in my direction with
his foot. "My friend here wants to take diggings, and as you were
complaining that you could get no one to go halves with you, I thought
that I had better bring you together."

Sherlock Holmes seemed delighted at the idea of sharing his rooms with
me. "I have my eye on a suite in Baker Street," he said, "which would
suit us down to the ground. You don't mind the smell of strong tobacco,
I hope?"

"I always smoke 'ship's' myself," I answered.

"That's good enough. I generally have chemicals about, and occasionally
do experiments. Would that annoy you?"

"By no means."

"Let me see--what are my other shortcomings. I get in the dumps at
times, and don't open my mouth for days on end. You must not think I am
sulky when I do that. Just let me alone, and I'll soon be right. What
have you to confess now? It's just as well for two fellows to know the
worst of one another before they begin to live together."

I laughed at this cross-examination. "I keep a bull pup," I said, "and
I object to rows because my nerves are shaken, and I get up at all sorts
of ungodly hours, and I am extremely lazy. I have another set of vices
when I'm well, but those are the principal ones at present."

"Do you include violin-playing in your category of rows?" he asked,
anxiously.

"It depends on the player," I answered. "A well-played violin is a treat
for the gods--a badly-played one----"

"Oh, that's all right," he cried, with a merry laugh. "I think we may
consider the thing as settled--that is, if the rooms are agreeable to
you."

"When shall we see them?"

"Call for me here at noon to-morrow, and we'll go together and settle
everything," he answered.

"All right--noon exactly," said I, shaking his hand.

We left him working among his chemicals, and we walked together towards
my hotel.

"By the way," I asked suddenly, stopping and turning upon Stamford, "how
the deuce did he know that I had come from Afghanistan?"

My companion smiled an enigmatical smile. "That's just his little
peculiarity," he said. "A good many people have wanted to know how he
finds things out."

"Oh! a mystery is it?" I cried, rubbing my hands. "This is very piquant.
I am much obliged to you for bringing us together. 'The proper study of
mankind is man,' you know."

"You must study him, then," Stamford said, as he bade me good-bye.
"You'll find him a knotty problem, though. I'll wager he learns more
about you than you about him. Good-bye."

"Good-bye," I answered, and strolled on to my hotel, considerably
interested in my new acquaintance.




CHAPTER II. THE SCIENCE OF DEDUCTION.


WE met next day as he had arranged, and inspected the rooms at No. 221B,
[5] Baker Street, of which he had spoken at our meeting. They
consisted of a couple of comfortable bed-rooms and a single large
airy sitting-room, cheerfully furnished, and illuminated by two broad
windows. So desirable in every way were the apartments, and so moderate
did the terms seem when divided between us, that the bargain was
concluded upon the spot, and we at once entered into possession.
That very evening I moved my things round from the hotel, and on the
following morning Sherlock Holmes followed me with several boxes and
portmanteaus. For a day or two we were busily employed in unpacking and
laying out our property to the best advantage. That done, we
gradually began to settle down and to accommodate ourselves to our new
surroundings.

Holmes was certainly not a difficult man to live with. He was quiet
in his ways, and his habits were regular. It was rare for him to be
up after ten at night, and he had invariably breakfasted and gone out
before I rose in the morning. Sometimes he spent his day at the chemical
laboratory, sometimes in the dissecting-rooms, and occasionally in long
walks, which appeared to take him into the lowest portions of the City.
Nothing could exceed his energy when the working fit was upon him; but
now and again a reaction would seize him, and for days on end he would
lie upon the sofa in the sitting-room, hardly uttering a word or moving
a muscle from morning to night. On these occasions I have noticed such
a dreamy, vacant expression in his eyes, that I might have suspected him
of being addicted to the use of some narcotic, had not the temperance
and cleanliness of his whole life forbidden such a notion.

As the weeks went by, my interest in him and my curiosity as to his
aims in life, gradually deepened and increased. His very person and
appearance were such as to strike the attention of the most casual
observer. In height he was rather over six feet, and so excessively
lean that he seemed to be considerably taller. His eyes were sharp and
piercing, save during those intervals of torpor to which I have alluded;
and his thin, hawk-like nose gave his whole expression an air of
alertness and decision. His chin, too, had the prominence and squareness
which mark the man of determination. His hands were invariably
blotted with ink and stained with chemicals, yet he was possessed of
extraordinary delicacy of touch, as I frequently had occasion to observe
when I watched him manipulating his fragile philosophical instruments.

The reader may set me down as a hopeless busybody, when I confess how
much this man stimulated my curiosity, and how often I endeavoured
to break through the reticence which he showed on all that concerned
himself. Before pronouncing judgment, however, be it remembered, how
objectless was my life, and how little there was to engage my attention.
My health forbade me from venturing out unless the weather was
exceptionally genial, and I had no friends who would call upon me and
break the monotony of my daily existence. Under these circumstances, I
eagerly hailed the little mystery which hung around my companion, and
spent much of my time in endeavouring to unravel it.

He was not studying medicine. He had himself, in reply to a question,
confirmed Stamford's opinion upon that point. Neither did he appear to
have pursued any course of reading which might fit him for a degree in
science or any other recognized portal which would give him an entrance
into the learned world. Yet his zeal for certain studies was remarkable,
and within eccentric limits his knowledge was so extraordinarily ample
and minute that his observations have fairly astounded me. Surely no man
would work so hard or attain such precise information unless he had some
definite end in view. Desultory readers are seldom remarkable for the
exactness of their learning. No man burdens his mind with small matters
unless he has some very good reason for doing so.

His ignorance was as remarkable as his knowledge. Of contemporary
literature, philosophy and politics he appeared to know next to nothing.
Upon my quoting Thomas Carlyle, he inquired in the naivest way who he
might be and what he had done. My surprise reached a climax, however,
when I found incidentally that he was ignorant of the Copernican Theory
and of the composition of the Solar System. That any civilized human
being in this nineteenth century should not be aware that the earth
travelled round the sun appeared to be to me such an extraordinary fact
that I could hardly realize it.

"You appear to be astonished," he said, smiling at my expression of
surprise. "Now that I do know it I shall do my best to forget it."

"To forget it!"

"You see," he explained, "I consider that a man's brain originally is
like a little empty attic, and you have to stock it with such furniture
as you choose. A fool takes in all the lumber of every sort that he
comes across, so that the knowledge which might be useful to him gets
crowded out, or at best is jumbled up with a lot of other things so that
he has a difficulty in laying his hands upon it. Now the skilful workman
is very careful indeed as to what he takes into his brain-attic. He will
have nothing but the tools which may help him in doing his work, but of
these he has a large assortment, and all in the most perfect order. It
is a mistake to think that that little room has elastic walls and can
distend to any extent. Depend upon it there comes a time when for every
addition of knowledge you forget something that you knew before. It is
of the highest importance, therefore, not to have useless facts elbowing
out the useful ones."

"But the Solar System!" I protested.

"What the deuce is it to me?" he interrupted impatiently; "you say
that we go round the sun. If we went round the moon it would not make a
pennyworth of difference to me or to my work."

I was on the point of asking him what that work might be, but something
in his manner showed me that the question would be an unwelcome one. I
pondered over our short conversation, however, and endeavoured to draw
my deductions from it. He said that he would acquire no knowledge which
did not bear upon his object. Therefore all the knowledge which he
possessed was such as would be useful to him. I enumerated in my own
mind all the various points upon which he had shown me that he was
exceptionally well-informed. I even took a pencil and jotted them down.
I could not help smiling at the document when I had completed it. It ran
in this way--


SHERLOCK HOLMES--his limits.

  1. Knowledge of Literature.--Nil.
  2.              Philosophy.--Nil.
  3.              Astronomy.--Nil.
  4.              Politics.--Feeble.
  5.              Botany.--Variable.  Well up in belladonna,
                              opium, and poisons generally.
                              Knows nothing of practical gardening.
  6.              Geology.--Practical, but limited.
                               Tells at a glance different soils
                               from each other.  After walks has
                               shown me splashes upon his trousers,
                               and told me by their colour and
                               consistence in what part of London
                               he had received them.
  7.              Chemistry.--Profound.
  8.              Anatomy.--Accurate, but unsystematic.
  9.              Sensational Literature.--Immense.  He appears
                              to know every detail of every horror
                              perpetrated in the century.
  10. Plays the violin well.
  11. Is an expert singlestick player, boxer, and swordsman.
  12. Has a good practical knowledge of British law.


When I had got so far in my list I threw it into the fire in despair.
"If I can only find what the fellow is driving at by reconciling all
these accomplishments, and discovering a calling which needs them all,"
I said to myself, "I may as well give up the attempt at once."

I see that I have alluded above to his powers upon the violin. These
were very remarkable, but as eccentric as all his other accomplishments.
That he could play pieces, and difficult pieces, I knew well, because
at my request he has played me some of Mendelssohn's Lieder, and other
favourites. When left to himself, however, he would seldom produce any
music or attempt any recognized air. Leaning back in his arm-chair of
an evening, he would close his eyes and scrape carelessly at the fiddle
which was thrown across his knee. Sometimes the chords were sonorous and
melancholy. Occasionally they were fantastic and cheerful. Clearly they
reflected the thoughts which possessed him, but whether the music aided
those thoughts, or whether the playing was simply the result of a whim
or fancy was more than I could determine. I might have rebelled against
these exasperating solos had it not been that he usually terminated them
by playing in quick succession a whole series of my favourite airs as a
slight compensation for the trial upon my patience.

During the first week or so we had no callers, and I had begun to think
that my companion was as friendless a man as I was myself. Presently,
however, I found that he had many acquaintances, and those in the most
different classes of society. There was one little sallow rat-faced,
dark-eyed fellow who was introduced to me as Mr. Lestrade, and who came
three or four times in a single week. One morning a young girl called,
fashionably dressed, and stayed for half an hour or more. The same
afternoon brought a grey-headed, seedy visitor, looking like a Jew
pedlar, who appeared to me to be much excited, and who was closely
followed by a slip-shod elderly woman. On another occasion an old
white-haired gentleman had an interview with my companion; and on
another a railway porter in his velveteen uniform. When any of these
nondescript individuals put in an appearance, Sherlock Holmes used to
beg for the use of the sitting-room, and I would retire to my bed-room.
He always apologized to me for putting me to this inconvenience. "I have
to use this room as a place of business," he said, "and these people
are my clients." Again I had an opportunity of asking him a point blank
question, and again my delicacy prevented me from forcing another man to
confide in me. I imagined at the time that he had some strong reason for
not alluding to it, but he soon dispelled the idea by coming round to
the subject of his own accord.

It was upon the 4th of March, as I have good reason to remember, that I
rose somewhat earlier than usual, and found that Sherlock Holmes had not
yet finished his breakfast. The landlady had become so accustomed to my
late habits that my place had not been laid nor my coffee prepared. With
the unreasonable petulance of mankind I rang the bell and gave a curt
intimation that I was ready. Then I picked up a magazine from the table
and attempted to while away the time with it, while my companion munched
silently at his toast. One of the articles had a pencil mark at the
heading, and I naturally began to run my eye through it.

Its somewhat ambitious title was "The Book of Life," and it attempted to
show how much an observant man might learn by an accurate and systematic
examination of all that came in his way. It struck me as being a
remarkable mixture of shrewdness and of absurdity. The reasoning was
close and intense, but the deductions appeared to me to be far-fetched
and exaggerated. The writer claimed by a momentary expression, a twitch
of a muscle or a glance of an eye, to fathom a man's inmost thoughts.
Deceit, according to him, was an impossibility in the case of one
trained to observation and analysis. His conclusions were as infallible
as so many propositions of Euclid. So startling would his results appear
to the uninitiated that until they learned the processes by which he had
arrived at them they might well consider him as a necromancer.

"From a drop of water," said the writer, "a logician could infer the
possibility of an Atlantic or a Niagara without having seen or heard of
one or the other. So all life is a great chain, the nature of which is
known whenever we are shown a single link of it. Like all other arts,
the Science of Deduction and Analysis is one which can only be acquired
by long and patient study nor is life long enough to allow any mortal
to attain the highest possible perfection in it. Before turning to
those moral and mental aspects of the matter which present the greatest
difficulties, let the enquirer begin by mastering more elementary
problems. Let him, on meeting a fellow-mortal, learn at a glance to
distinguish the history of the man, and the trade or profession to
which he belongs. Puerile as such an exercise may seem, it sharpens the
faculties of observation, and teaches one where to look and what to look
for. By a man's finger nails, by his coat-sleeve, by his boot, by his
trouser knees, by the callosities of his forefinger and thumb, by his
expression, by his shirt cuffs--by each of these things a man's calling
is plainly revealed. That all united should fail to enlighten the
competent enquirer in any case is almost inconceivable."

"What ineffable twaddle!" I cried, slapping the magazine down on the
table, "I never read such rubbish in my life."

"What is it?" asked Sherlock Holmes.

"Why, this article," I said, pointing at it with my egg spoon as I sat
down to my breakfast. "I see that you have read it since you have marked
it. I don't deny that it is smartly written. It irritates me though. It
is evidently the theory of some arm-chair lounger who evolves all these
neat little paradoxes in the seclusion of his own study. It is not
practical. I should like to see him clapped down in a third class
carriage on the Underground, and asked to give the trades of all his
fellow-travellers. I would lay a thousand to one against him."

"You would lose your money," Sherlock Holmes remarked calmly. "As for
the article I wrote it myself."

"You!"

"Yes, I have a turn both for observation and for deduction. The
theories which I have expressed there, and which appear to you to be so
chimerical are really extremely practical--so practical that I depend
upon them for my bread and cheese."

"And how?" I asked involuntarily.

"Well, I have a trade of my own. I suppose I am the only one in the
world. I'm a consulting detective, if you can understand what that is.
Here in London we have lots of Government detectives and lots of private
ones. When these fellows are at fault they come to me, and I manage to
put them on the right scent. They lay all the evidence before me, and I
am generally able, by the help of my knowledge of the history of
crime, to set them straight. There is a strong family resemblance about
misdeeds, and if you have all the details of a thousand at your finger
ends, it is odd if you can't unravel the thousand and first. Lestrade
is a well-known detective. He got himself into a fog recently over a
forgery case, and that was what brought him here."

"And these other people?"

"They are mostly sent on by private inquiry agencies. They are
all people who are in trouble about something, and want a little
enlightening. I listen to their story, they listen to my comments, and
then I pocket my fee."

"But do you mean to say," I said, "that without leaving your room you
can unravel some knot which other men can make nothing of, although they
have seen every detail for themselves?"

"Quite so. I have a kind of intuition that way. Now and again a case
turns up which is a little more complex. Then I have to bustle about and
see things with my own eyes. You see I have a lot of special knowledge
which I apply to the problem, and which facilitates matters wonderfully.
Those rules of deduction laid down in that article which aroused your
scorn, are invaluable to me in practical work. Observation with me is
second nature. You appeared to be surprised when I told you, on our
first meeting, that you had come from Afghanistan."

"You were told, no doubt."

"Nothing of the sort. I _knew_ you came from Afghanistan. From long
habit the train of thoughts ran so swiftly through my mind, that I
arrived at the conclusion without being conscious of intermediate steps.
There were such steps, however. The train of reasoning ran, 'Here is a
gentleman of a medical type, but with the air of a military man. Clearly
an army doctor, then. He has just come from the tropics, for his face is
dark, and that is not the natural tint of his skin, for his wrists are
fair. He has undergone hardship and sickness, as his haggard face says
clearly. His left arm has been injured. He holds it in a stiff and
unnatural manner. Where in the tropics could an English army doctor have
seen much hardship and got his arm wounded? Clearly in Afghanistan.' The
whole train of thought did not occupy a second. I then remarked that you
came from Afghanistan, and you were astonished."

"It is simple enough as you explain it," I said, smiling. "You remind
me of Edgar Allen Poe's Dupin. I had no idea that such individuals did
exist outside of stories."

Sherlock Holmes rose and lit his pipe. "No doubt you think that you are
complimenting me in comparing me to Dupin," he observed. "Now, in my
opinion, Dupin was a very inferior fellow. That trick of his of breaking
in on his friends' thoughts with an apropos remark after a quarter of
an hour's silence is really very showy and superficial. He had some
analytical genius, no doubt; but he was by no means such a phenomenon as
Poe appeared to imagine."

"Have you read Gaboriau's works?" I asked. "Does Lecoq come up to your
idea of a detective?"

Sherlock Holmes sniffed sardonically. "Lecoq was a miserable bungler,"
he said, in an angry voice; "he had only one thing to recommend him, and
that was his energy. That book made me positively ill. The question was
how to identify an unknown prisoner. I could have done it in twenty-four
hours. Lecoq took six months or so. It might be made a text-book for
detectives to teach them what to avoid."

I felt rather indignant at having two characters whom I had admired
treated in this cavalier style. I walked over to the window, and stood
looking out into the busy street. "This fellow may be very clever," I
said to myself, "but he is certainly very conceited."

"There are no crimes and no criminals in these days," he said,
querulously. "What is the use of having brains in our profession. I know
well that I have it in me to make my name famous. No man lives or has
ever lived who has brought the same amount of study and of natural
talent to the detection of crime which I have done. And what is the
result? There is no crime to detect, or, at most, some bungling villany
with a motive so transparent that even a Scotland Yard official can see
through it."

I was still annoyed at his bumptious style of conversation. I thought it
best to change the topic.

"I wonder what that fellow is looking for?" I asked, pointing to a
stalwart, plainly-dressed individual who was walking slowly down the
other side of the street, looking anxiously at the numbers. He had
a large blue envelope in his hand, and was evidently the bearer of a
message.

"You mean the retired sergeant of Marines," said Sherlock Holmes.

"Brag and bounce!" thought I to myself. "He knows that I cannot verify
his guess."

The thought had hardly passed through my mind when the man whom we were
watching caught sight of the number on our door, and ran rapidly across
the roadway. We heard a loud knock, a deep voice below, and heavy steps
ascending the stair.

"For Mr. Sherlock Holmes," he said, stepping into the room and handing
my friend the letter.

Here was an opportunity of taking the conceit out of him. He little
thought of this when he made that random shot. "May I ask, my lad," I
said, in the blandest voice, "what your trade may be?"

"Commissionaire, sir," he said, gruffly. "Uniform away for repairs."

"And you were?" I asked, with a slightly malicious glance at my
companion.

"A sergeant, sir, Royal Marine Light Infantry, sir. No answer? Right,
sir."

He clicked his heels together, raised his hand in a salute, and was
gone.




CHAPTER III. THE LAURISTON GARDEN MYSTERY [6]


I CONFESS that I was considerably startled by this fresh proof of the
practical nature of my companion's theories. My respect for his powers
of analysis increased wondrously. There still remained some lurking
suspicion in my mind, however, that the whole thing was a pre-arranged
episode, intended to dazzle me, though what earthly object he could have
in taking me in was past my comprehension. When I looked at him he
had finished reading the note, and his eyes had assumed the vacant,
lack-lustre expression which showed mental abstraction.

"How in the world did you deduce that?" I asked.

"Deduce what?" said he, petulantly.

"Why, that he was a retired sergeant of Marines."

"I have no time for trifles," he answered, brusquely; then with a smile,
"Excuse my rudeness. You broke the thread of my thoughts; but perhaps
it is as well. So you actually were not able to see that that man was a
sergeant of Marines?"

"No, indeed."

"It was easier to know it than to explain why I knew it. If you
were asked to prove that two and two made four, you might find some
difficulty, and yet you are quite sure of the fact. Even across the
street I could see a great blue anchor tattooed on the back of the
fellow's hand. That smacked of the sea. He had a military carriage,
however, and regulation side whiskers. There we have the marine. He was
a man with some amount of self-importance and a certain air of command.
You must have observed the way in which he held his head and swung
his cane. A steady, respectable, middle-aged man, too, on the face of
him--all facts which led me to believe that he had been a sergeant."

"Wonderful!" I ejaculated.

"Commonplace," said Holmes, though I thought from his expression that he
was pleased at my evident surprise and admiration. "I said just now that
there were no criminals. It appears that I am wrong--look at this!" He
threw me over the note which the commissionaire had brought. [7]

"Why," I cried, as I cast my eye over it, "this is terrible!"

"It does seem to be a little out of the common," he remarked, calmly.
"Would you mind reading it to me aloud?"

This is the letter which I read to him----


"MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,--

"There has been a bad business during the night at 3, Lauriston Gardens,
off the Brixton Road. Our man on the beat saw a light there about two in
the morning, and as the house was an empty one, suspected that something
was amiss. He found the door open, and in the front room, which is bare
of furniture, discovered the body of a gentleman, well dressed, and
having cards in his pocket bearing the name of 'Enoch J. Drebber,
Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.A.' There had been no robbery, nor is there any
evidence as to how the man met his death. There are marks of blood in
the room, but there is no wound upon his person. We are at a loss as to
how he came into the empty house; indeed, the whole affair is a puzzler.
If you can come round to the house any time before twelve, you will find
me there. I have left everything _in statu quo_ until I hear from you.
If you are unable to come I shall give you fuller details, and would
esteem it a great kindness if you would favour me with your opinion.
Yours faithfully,

"TOBIAS GREGSON."


"Gregson is the smartest of the Scotland Yarders," my friend remarked;
"he and Lestrade are the pick of a bad lot. They are both quick and
energetic, but conventional--shockingly so. They have their knives
into one another, too. They are as jealous as a pair of professional
beauties. There will be some fun over this case if they are both put
upon the scent."

I was amazed at the calm way in which he rippled on. "Surely there is
not a moment to be lost," I cried, "shall I go and order you a cab?"

"I'm not sure about whether I shall go. I am the most incurably lazy
devil that ever stood in shoe leather--that is, when the fit is on me,
for I can be spry enough at times."

"Why, it is just such a chance as you have been longing for."

"My dear fellow, what does it matter to me. Supposing I unravel the
whole matter, you may be sure that Gregson, Lestrade, and Co. will
pocket all the credit. That comes of being an unofficial personage."

"But he begs you to help him."

"Yes. He knows that I am his superior, and acknowledges it to me; but
he would cut his tongue out before he would own it to any third person.
However, we may as well go and have a look. I shall work it out on my
own hook. I may have a laugh at them if I have nothing else. Come on!"

He hustled on his overcoat, and bustled about in a way that showed that
an energetic fit had superseded the apathetic one.

"Get your hat," he said.

"You wish me to come?"

"Yes, if you have nothing better to do." A minute later we were both in
a hansom, driving furiously for the Brixton Road.

It was a foggy, cloudy morning, and a dun-coloured veil hung over the
house-tops, looking like the reflection of the mud-coloured streets
beneath. My companion was in the best of spirits, and prattled away
about Cremona fiddles, and the difference between a Stradivarius and
an Amati. As for myself, I was silent, for the dull weather and the
melancholy business upon which we were engaged, depressed my spirits.

"You don't seem to give much thought to the matter in hand," I said at
last, interrupting Holmes' musical disquisition.

"No data yet," he answered. "It is a capital mistake to theorize before
you have all the evidence. It biases the judgment."

"You will have your data soon," I remarked, pointing with my finger;
"this is the Brixton Road, and that is the house, if I am not very much
mistaken."

"So it is. Stop, driver, stop!" We were still a hundred yards or so from
it, but he insisted upon our alighting, and we finished our journey upon
foot.

Number 3, Lauriston Gardens wore an ill-omened and minatory look. It was
one of four which stood back some little way from the street, two being
occupied and two empty. The latter looked out with three tiers of vacant
melancholy windows, which were blank and dreary, save that here and
there a "To Let" card had developed like a cataract upon the bleared
panes. A small garden sprinkled over with a scattered eruption of sickly
plants separated each of these houses from the street, and was traversed
by a narrow pathway, yellowish in colour, and consisting apparently of a
mixture of clay and of gravel. The whole place was very sloppy from the
rain which had fallen through the night. The garden was bounded by a
three-foot brick wall with a fringe of wood rails upon the top, and
against this wall was leaning a stalwart police constable, surrounded by
a small knot of loafers, who craned their necks and strained their eyes
in the vain hope of catching some glimpse of the proceedings within.

I had imagined that Sherlock Holmes would at once have hurried into the
house and plunged into a study of the mystery. Nothing appeared to be
further from his intention. With an air of nonchalance which, under the
circumstances, seemed to me to border upon affectation, he lounged up
and down the pavement, and gazed vacantly at the ground, the sky, the
opposite houses and the line of railings. Having finished his scrutiny,
he proceeded slowly down the path, or rather down the fringe of grass
which flanked the path, keeping his eyes riveted upon the ground. Twice
he stopped, and once I saw him smile, and heard him utter an exclamation
of satisfaction. There were many marks of footsteps upon the wet clayey
soil, but since the police had been coming and going over it, I was
unable to see how my companion could hope to learn anything from it.
Still I had had such extraordinary evidence of the quickness of his
perceptive faculties, that I had no doubt that he could see a great deal
which was hidden from me.

At the door of the house we were met by a tall, white-faced,
flaxen-haired man, with a notebook in his hand, who rushed forward and
wrung my companion's hand with effusion. "It is indeed kind of you to
come," he said, "I have had everything left untouched."

"Except that!" my friend answered, pointing at the pathway. "If a herd
of buffaloes had passed along there could not be a greater mess. No
doubt, however, you had drawn your own conclusions, Gregson, before you
permitted this."

"I have had so much to do inside the house," the detective said
evasively. "My colleague, Mr. Lestrade, is here. I had relied upon him
to look after this."

Holmes glanced at me and raised his eyebrows sardonically. "With two
such men as yourself and Lestrade upon the ground, there will not be
much for a third party to find out," he said.

Gregson rubbed his hands in a self-satisfied way. "I think we have done
all that can be done," he answered; "it's a queer case though, and I
knew your taste for such things."

"You did not come here in a cab?" asked Sherlock Holmes.

"No, sir."

"Nor Lestrade?"

"No, sir."

"Then let us go and look at the room." With which inconsequent remark he
strode on into the house, followed by Gregson, whose features expressed
his astonishment.

A short passage, bare planked and dusty, led to the kitchen and offices.
Two doors opened out of it to the left and to the right. One of these
had obviously been closed for many weeks. The other belonged to the
dining-room, which was the apartment in which the mysterious affair had
occurred. Holmes walked in, and I followed him with that subdued feeling
at my heart which the presence of death inspires.

It was a large square room, looking all the larger from the absence
of all furniture. A vulgar flaring paper adorned the walls, but it was
blotched in places with mildew, and here and there great strips had
become detached and hung down, exposing the yellow plaster beneath.
Opposite the door was a showy fireplace, surmounted by a mantelpiece of
imitation white marble. On one corner of this was stuck the stump of a
red wax candle. The solitary window was so dirty that the light was
hazy and uncertain, giving a dull grey tinge to everything, which was
intensified by the thick layer of dust which coated the whole apartment.

All these details I observed afterwards. At present my attention was
centred upon the single grim motionless figure which lay stretched upon
the boards, with vacant sightless eyes staring up at the discoloured
ceiling. It was that of a man about forty-three or forty-four years of
age, middle-sized, broad shouldered, with crisp curling black hair, and
a short stubbly beard. He was dressed in a heavy broadcloth frock coat
and waistcoat, with light-coloured trousers, and immaculate collar
and cuffs. A top hat, well brushed and trim, was placed upon the floor
beside him. His hands were clenched and his arms thrown abroad, while
his lower limbs were interlocked as though his death struggle had been a
grievous one. On his rigid face there stood an expression of horror,
and as it seemed to me, of hatred, such as I have never seen upon human
features. This malignant and terrible contortion, combined with the low
forehead, blunt nose, and prognathous jaw gave the dead man a singularly
simious and ape-like appearance, which was increased by his writhing,
unnatural posture. I have seen death in many forms, but never has
it appeared to me in a more fearsome aspect than in that dark grimy
apartment, which looked out upon one of the main arteries of suburban
London.

Lestrade, lean and ferret-like as ever, was standing by the doorway, and
greeted my companion and myself.

"This case will make a stir, sir," he remarked. "It beats anything I
have seen, and I am no chicken."

"There is no clue?" said Gregson.

"None at all," chimed in Lestrade.

Sherlock Holmes approached the body, and, kneeling down, examined it
intently. "You are sure that there is no wound?" he asked, pointing to
numerous gouts and splashes of blood which lay all round.

"Positive!" cried both detectives.

"Then, of course, this blood belongs to a second individual--[8]
presumably the murderer, if murder has been committed. It reminds me of
the circumstances attendant on the death of Van Jansen, in Utrecht, in
the year '34. Do you remember the case, Gregson?"

"No, sir."

"Read it up--you really should. There is nothing new under the sun. It
has all been done before."

As he spoke, his nimble fingers were flying here, there, and everywhere,
feeling, pressing, unbuttoning, examining, while his eyes wore the same
far-away expression which I have already remarked upon. So swiftly was
the examination made, that one would hardly have guessed the minuteness
with which it was conducted. Finally, he sniffed the dead man's lips,
and then glanced at the soles of his patent leather boots.

"He has not been moved at all?" he asked.

"No more than was necessary for the purposes of our examination."

"You can take him to the mortuary now," he said. "There is nothing more
to be learned."

Gregson had a stretcher and four men at hand. At his call they entered
the room, and the stranger was lifted and carried out. As they raised
him, a ring tinkled down and rolled across the floor. Lestrade grabbed
it up and stared at it with mystified eyes.

"There's been a woman here," he cried. "It's a woman's wedding-ring."

He held it out, as he spoke, upon the palm of his hand. We all gathered
round him and gazed at it. There could be no doubt that that circlet of
plain gold had once adorned the finger of a bride.

"This complicates matters," said Gregson. "Heaven knows, they were
complicated enough before."

"You're sure it doesn't simplify them?" observed Holmes. "There's
nothing to be learned by staring at it. What did you find in his
pockets?"

"We have it all here," said Gregson, pointing to a litter of objects
upon one of the bottom steps of the stairs. "A gold watch, No. 97163, by
Barraud, of London. Gold Albert chain, very heavy and solid. Gold ring,
with masonic device. Gold pin--bull-dog's head, with rubies as eyes.
Russian leather card-case, with cards of Enoch J. Drebber of Cleveland,
corresponding with the E. J. D. upon the linen. No purse, but loose
money to the extent of seven pounds thirteen. Pocket edition of
Boccaccio's 'Decameron,' with name of Joseph Stangerson upon the
fly-leaf. Two letters--one addressed to E. J. Drebber and one to Joseph
Stangerson."

"At what address?"

"American Exchange, Strand--to be left till called for. They are both
from the Guion Steamship Company, and refer to the sailing of their
boats from Liverpool. It is clear that this unfortunate man was about to
return to New York."

"Have you made any inquiries as to this man, Stangerson?"

"I did it at once, sir," said Gregson. "I have had advertisements
sent to all the newspapers, and one of my men has gone to the American
Exchange, but he has not returned yet."

"Have you sent to Cleveland?"

"We telegraphed this morning."

"How did you word your inquiries?"

"We simply detailed the circumstances, and said that we should be glad
of any information which could help us."

"You did not ask for particulars on any point which appeared to you to
be crucial?"

"I asked about Stangerson."

"Nothing else? Is there no circumstance on which this whole case appears
to hinge? Will you not telegraph again?"

"I have said all I have to say," said Gregson, in an offended voice.

Sherlock Holmes chuckled to himself, and appeared to be about to make
some remark, when Lestrade, who had been in the front room while we
were holding this conversation in the hall, reappeared upon the scene,
rubbing his hands in a pompous and self-satisfied manner.

"Mr. Gregson," he said, "I have just made a discovery of the highest
importance, and one which would have been overlooked had I not made a
careful examination of the walls."

The little man's eyes sparkled as he spoke, and he was evidently in
a state of suppressed exultation at having scored a point against his
colleague.

"Come here," he said, bustling back into the room, the atmosphere of
which felt clearer since the removal of its ghastly inmate. "Now, stand
there!"

He struck a match on his boot and held it up against the wall.

"Look at that!" he said, triumphantly.

I have remarked that the paper had fallen away in parts. In this
particular corner of the room a large piece had peeled off, leaving a
yellow square of coarse plastering. Across this bare space there was
scrawled in blood-red letters a single word--

                         RACHE.


"What do you think of that?" cried the detective, with the air of a
showman exhibiting his show. "This was overlooked because it was in the
darkest corner of the room, and no one thought of looking there. The
murderer has written it with his or her own blood. See this smear where
it has trickled down the wall! That disposes of the idea of suicide
anyhow. Why was that corner chosen to write it on? I will tell you. See
that candle on the mantelpiece. It was lit at the time, and if it was
lit this corner would be the brightest instead of the darkest portion of
the wall."

"And what does it mean now that you _have_ found it?" asked Gregson in a
depreciatory voice.

"Mean? Why, it means that the writer was going to put the female name
Rachel, but was disturbed before he or she had time to finish. You mark
my words, when this case comes to be cleared up you will find that a
woman named Rachel has something to do with it. It's all very well for
you to laugh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. You may be very smart and clever, but
the old hound is the best, when all is said and done."

"I really beg your pardon!" said my companion, who had ruffled the
little man's temper by bursting into an explosion of laughter. "You
certainly have the credit of being the first of us to find this out,
and, as you say, it bears every mark of having been written by the other
participant in last night's mystery. I have not had time to examine this
room yet, but with your permission I shall do so now."

As he spoke, he whipped a tape measure and a large round magnifying
glass from his pocket. With these two implements he trotted noiselessly
about the room, sometimes stopping, occasionally kneeling, and once
lying flat upon his face. So engrossed was he with his occupation that
he appeared to have forgotten our presence, for he chattered away to
himself under his breath the whole time, keeping up a running fire
of exclamations, groans, whistles, and little cries suggestive of
encouragement and of hope. As I watched him I was irresistibly reminded
of a pure-blooded well-trained foxhound as it dashes backwards and
forwards through the covert, whining in its eagerness, until it comes
across the lost scent. For twenty minutes or more he continued his
researches, measuring with the most exact care the distance between
marks which were entirely invisible to me, and occasionally applying his
tape to the walls in an equally incomprehensible manner. In one place
he gathered up very carefully a little pile of grey dust from the floor,
and packed it away in an envelope. Finally, he examined with his glass
the word upon the wall, going over every letter of it with the most
minute exactness. This done, he appeared to be satisfied, for he
replaced his tape and his glass in his pocket.

"They say that genius is an infinite capacity for taking pains," he
remarked with a smile. "It's a very bad definition, but it does apply to
detective work."

Gregson and Lestrade had watched the manoeuvres [9] of their amateur
companion with considerable curiosity and some contempt. They evidently
failed to appreciate the fact, which I had begun to realize, that
Sherlock Holmes' smallest actions were all directed towards some
definite and practical end.

"What do you think of it, sir?" they both asked.

"It would be robbing you of the credit of the case if I was to presume
to help you," remarked my friend. "You are doing so well now that it
would be a pity for anyone to interfere." There was a world of
sarcasm in his voice as he spoke. "If you will let me know how your
investigations go," he continued, "I shall be happy to give you any help
I can. In the meantime I should like to speak to the constable who found
the body. Can you give me his name and address?"

Lestrade glanced at his note-book. "John Rance," he said. "He is off
duty now. You will find him at 46, Audley Court, Kennington Park Gate."

Holmes took a note of the address.

"Come along, Doctor," he said; "we shall go and look him up. I'll tell
you one thing which may help you in the case," he continued, turning to
the two detectives. "There has been murder done, and the murderer was a
man. He was more than six feet high, was in the prime of life, had
small feet for his height, wore coarse, square-toed boots and smoked a
Trichinopoly cigar. He came here with his victim in a four-wheeled cab,
which was drawn by a horse with three old shoes and one new one on his
off fore leg. In all probability the murderer had a florid face, and the
finger-nails of his right hand were remarkably long. These are only a
few indications, but they may assist you."

Lestrade and Gregson glanced at each other with an incredulous smile.

"If this man was murdered, how was it done?" asked the former.

"Poison," said Sherlock Holmes curtly, and strode off. "One other thing,
Lestrade," he added, turning round at the door: "'Rache,' is the German
for 'revenge;' so don't lose your time looking for Miss Rachel."

With which Parthian shot he walked away, leaving the two rivals
open-mouthed behind him.




CHAPTER IV. WHAT JOHN RANCE HAD TO TELL.


IT was one o'clock when we left No. 3, Lauriston Gardens. Sherlock
Holmes led me to the nearest telegraph office, whence he dispatched a
long telegram. He then hailed a cab, and ordered the driver to take us
to the address given us by Lestrade.

"There is nothing like first hand evidence," he remarked; "as a matter
of fact, my mind is entirely made up upon the case, but still we may as
well learn all that is to be learned."

"You amaze me, Holmes," said I. "Surely you are not as sure as you
pretend to be of all those particulars which you gave."

"There's no room for a mistake," he answered. "The very first thing
which I observed on arriving there was that a cab had made two ruts with
its wheels close to the curb. Now, up to last night, we have had no rain
for a week, so that those wheels which left such a deep impression must
have been there during the night. There were the marks of the horse's
hoofs, too, the outline of one of which was far more clearly cut than
that of the other three, showing that that was a new shoe. Since the cab
was there after the rain began, and was not there at any time during the
morning--I have Gregson's word for that--it follows that it must have
been there during the night, and, therefore, that it brought those two
individuals to the house."

"That seems simple enough," said I; "but how about the other man's
height?"

"Why, the height of a man, in nine cases out of ten, can be told from
the length of his stride. It is a simple calculation enough, though
there is no use my boring you with figures. I had this fellow's stride
both on the clay outside and on the dust within. Then I had a way of
checking my calculation. When a man writes on a wall, his instinct leads
him to write about the level of his own eyes. Now that writing was just
over six feet from the ground. It was child's play."

"And his age?" I asked.

"Well, if a man can stride four and a-half feet without the smallest
effort, he can't be quite in the sere and yellow. That was the breadth
of a puddle on the garden walk which he had evidently walked across.
Patent-leather boots had gone round, and Square-toes had hopped over.
There is no mystery about it at all. I am simply applying to ordinary
life a few of those precepts of observation and deduction which I
advocated in that article. Is there anything else that puzzles you?"

"The finger nails and the Trichinopoly," I suggested.

"The writing on the wall was done with a man's forefinger dipped in
blood. My glass allowed me to observe that the plaster was slightly
scratched in doing it, which would not have been the case if the man's
nail had been trimmed. I gathered up some scattered ash from the floor.
It was dark in colour and flakey--such an ash as is only made by a
Trichinopoly. I have made a special study of cigar ashes--in fact, I
have written a monograph upon the subject. I flatter myself that I can
distinguish at a glance the ash of any known brand, either of cigar
or of tobacco. It is just in such details that the skilled detective
differs from the Gregson and Lestrade type."

"And the florid face?" I asked.

"Ah, that was a more daring shot, though I have no doubt that I was
right. You must not ask me that at the present state of the affair."

I passed my hand over my brow. "My head is in a whirl," I remarked; "the
more one thinks of it the more mysterious it grows. How came these two
men--if there were two men--into an empty house? What has become of the
cabman who drove them? How could one man compel another to take poison?
Where did the blood come from? What was the object of the murderer,
since robbery had no part in it? How came the woman's ring there? Above
all, why should the second man write up the German word RACHE before
decamping? I confess that I cannot see any possible way of reconciling
all these facts."

My companion smiled approvingly.

"You sum up the difficulties of the situation succinctly and well," he
said. "There is much that is still obscure, though I have quite made up
my mind on the main facts. As to poor Lestrade's discovery it was simply
a blind intended to put the police upon a wrong track, by suggesting
Socialism and secret societies. It was not done by a German. The A, if
you noticed, was printed somewhat after the German fashion. Now, a real
German invariably prints in the Latin character, so that we may safely
say that this was not written by one, but by a clumsy imitator who
overdid his part. It was simply a ruse to divert inquiry into a wrong
channel. I'm not going to tell you much more of the case, Doctor. You
know a conjuror gets no credit when once he has explained his trick,
and if I show you too much of my method of working, you will come to the
conclusion that I am a very ordinary individual after all."

"I shall never do that," I answered; "you have brought detection as near
an exact science as it ever will be brought in this world."

My companion flushed up with pleasure at my words, and the earnest way
in which I uttered them. I had already observed that he was as sensitive
to flattery on the score of his art as any girl could be of her beauty.

"I'll tell you one other thing," he said. "Patent leathers [10] and
Square-toes came in the same cab, and they walked down the pathway
together as friendly as possible--arm-in-arm, in all probability.
When they got inside they walked up and down the room--or rather,
Patent-leathers stood still while Square-toes walked up and down. I
could read all that in the dust; and I could read that as he walked he
grew more and more excited. That is shown by the increased length of his
strides. He was talking all the while, and working himself up, no doubt,
into a fury. Then the tragedy occurred. I've told you all I know myself
now, for the rest is mere surmise and conjecture. We have a good working
basis, however, on which to start. We must hurry up, for I want to go to
Halle's concert to hear Norman Neruda this afternoon."

This conversation had occurred while our cab had been threading its way
through a long succession of dingy streets and dreary by-ways. In the
dingiest and dreariest of them our driver suddenly came to a stand.
"That's Audley Court in there," he said, pointing to a narrow slit in
the line of dead-coloured brick. "You'll find me here when you come
back."

Audley Court was not an attractive locality. The narrow passage led us
into a quadrangle paved with flags and lined by sordid dwellings. We
picked our way among groups of dirty children, and through lines of
discoloured linen, until we came to Number 46, the door of which
was decorated with a small slip of brass on which the name Rance was
engraved. On enquiry we found that the constable was in bed, and we were
shown into a little front parlour to await his coming.

He appeared presently, looking a little irritable at being disturbed in
his slumbers. "I made my report at the office," he said.

Holmes took a half-sovereign from his pocket and played with it
pensively. "We thought that we should like to hear it all from your own
lips," he said.

"I shall be most happy to tell you anything I can," the constable
answered with his eyes upon the little golden disk.

"Just let us hear it all in your own way as it occurred."

Rance sat down on the horsehair sofa, and knitted his brows as though
determined not to omit anything in his narrative.

"I'll tell it ye from the beginning," he said. "My time is from ten at
night to six in the morning. At eleven there was a fight at the 'White
Hart'; but bar that all was quiet enough on the beat. At one o'clock it
began to rain, and I met Harry Murcher--him who has the Holland Grove
beat--and we stood together at the corner of Henrietta Street a-talkin'.
Presently--maybe about two or a little after--I thought I would take
a look round and see that all was right down the Brixton Road. It was
precious dirty and lonely. Not a soul did I meet all the way down,
though a cab or two went past me. I was a strollin' down, thinkin'
between ourselves how uncommon handy a four of gin hot would be, when
suddenly the glint of a light caught my eye in the window of that same
house. Now, I knew that them two houses in Lauriston Gardens was empty
on account of him that owns them who won't have the drains seed to,
though the very last tenant what lived in one of them died o' typhoid
fever. I was knocked all in a heap therefore at seeing a light in
the window, and I suspected as something was wrong. When I got to the
door----"

"You stopped, and then walked back to the garden gate," my companion
interrupted. "What did you do that for?"

Rance gave a violent jump, and stared at Sherlock Holmes with the utmost
amazement upon his features.

"Why, that's true, sir," he said; "though how you come to know it,
Heaven only knows. Ye see, when I got up to the door it was so still and
so lonesome, that I thought I'd be none the worse for some one with me.
I ain't afeared of anything on this side o' the grave; but I thought
that maybe it was him that died o' the typhoid inspecting the drains
what killed him. The thought gave me a kind o' turn, and I walked back
to the gate to see if I could see Murcher's lantern, but there wasn't no
sign of him nor of anyone else."

"There was no one in the street?"

"Not a livin' soul, sir, nor as much as a dog. Then I pulled myself
together and went back and pushed the door open. All was quiet inside,
so I went into the room where the light was a-burnin'. There was a
candle flickerin' on the mantelpiece--a red wax one--and by its light I
saw----"

"Yes, I know all that you saw. You walked round the room several times,
and you knelt down by the body, and then you walked through and tried
the kitchen door, and then----"

John Rance sprang to his feet with a frightened face and suspicion in
his eyes. "Where was you hid to see all that?" he cried. "It seems to me
that you knows a deal more than you should."

Holmes laughed and threw his card across the table to the constable.
"Don't get arresting me for the murder," he said. "I am one of the
hounds and not the wolf; Mr. Gregson or Mr. Lestrade will answer for
that. Go on, though. What did you do next?"

Rance resumed his seat, without however losing his mystified expression.
"I went back to the gate and sounded my whistle. That brought Murcher
and two more to the spot."

"Was the street empty then?"

"Well, it was, as far as anybody that could be of any good goes."

"What do you mean?"

The constable's features broadened into a grin. "I've seen many a drunk
chap in my time," he said, "but never anyone so cryin' drunk as
that cove. He was at the gate when I came out, a-leanin' up agin the
railings, and a-singin' at the pitch o' his lungs about Columbine's
New-fangled Banner, or some such stuff. He couldn't stand, far less
help."

"What sort of a man was he?" asked Sherlock Holmes.

John Rance appeared to be somewhat irritated at this digression. "He was
an uncommon drunk sort o' man," he said. "He'd ha' found hisself in the
station if we hadn't been so took up."

"His face--his dress--didn't you notice them?" Holmes broke in
impatiently.

"I should think I did notice them, seeing that I had to prop him up--me
and Murcher between us. He was a long chap, with a red face, the lower
part muffled round----"

"That will do," cried Holmes. "What became of him?"

"We'd enough to do without lookin' after him," the policeman said, in an
aggrieved voice. "I'll wager he found his way home all right."

"How was he dressed?"

"A brown overcoat."

"Had he a whip in his hand?"

"A whip--no."

"He must have left it behind," muttered my companion. "You didn't happen
to see or hear a cab after that?"

"No."

"There's a half-sovereign for you," my companion said, standing up and
taking his hat. "I am afraid, Rance, that you will never rise in the
force. That head of yours should be for use as well as ornament. You
might have gained your sergeant's stripes last night. The man whom you
held in your hands is the man who holds the clue of this mystery, and
whom we are seeking. There is no use of arguing about it now; I tell you
that it is so. Come along, Doctor."

We started off for the cab together, leaving our informant incredulous,
but obviously uncomfortable.

"The blundering fool," Holmes said, bitterly, as we drove back to our
lodgings. "Just to think of his having such an incomparable bit of good
luck, and not taking advantage of it."

"I am rather in the dark still. It is true that the description of this
man tallies with your idea of the second party in this mystery. But why
should he come back to the house after leaving it? That is not the way
of criminals."

"The ring, man, the ring: that was what he came back for. If we have no
other way of catching him, we can always bait our line with the ring. I
shall have him, Doctor--I'll lay you two to one that I have him. I must
thank you for it all. I might not have gone but for you, and so have
missed the finest study I ever came across: a study in scarlet, eh?
Why shouldn't we use a little art jargon. There's the scarlet thread of
murder running through the colourless skein of life, and our duty is
to unravel it, and isolate it, and expose every inch of it. And now
for lunch, and then for Norman Neruda. Her attack and her bowing
are splendid. What's that little thing of Chopin's she plays so
magnificently: Tra-la-la-lira-lira-lay."

Leaning back in the cab, this amateur bloodhound carolled away like a
lark while I meditated upon the many-sidedness of the human mind.




CHAPTER V. OUR ADVERTISEMENT BRINGS A VISITOR.


OUR morning's exertions had been too much for my weak health, and I was
tired out in the afternoon. After Holmes' departure for the concert, I
lay down upon the sofa and endeavoured to get a couple of hours' sleep.
It was a useless attempt. My mind had been too much excited by all that
had occurred, and the strangest fancies and surmises crowded into
it. Every time that I closed my eyes I saw before me the distorted
baboon-like countenance of the murdered man. So sinister was the
impression which that face had produced upon me that I found it
difficult to feel anything but gratitude for him who had removed its
owner from the world. If ever human features bespoke vice of the most
malignant type, they were certainly those of Enoch J. Drebber, of
Cleveland. Still I recognized that justice must be done, and that the
depravity of the victim was no condonment [11] in the eyes of the law.

The more I thought of it the more extraordinary did my companion's
hypothesis, that the man had been poisoned, appear. I remembered how he
had sniffed his lips, and had no doubt that he had detected something
which had given rise to the idea. Then, again, if not poison, what
had caused the man's death, since there was neither wound nor marks of
strangulation? But, on the other hand, whose blood was that which lay so
thickly upon the floor? There were no signs of a struggle, nor had the
victim any weapon with which he might have wounded an antagonist. As
long as all these questions were unsolved, I felt that sleep would be
no easy matter, either for Holmes or myself. His quiet self-confident
manner convinced me that he had already formed a theory which explained
all the facts, though what it was I could not for an instant conjecture.

He was very late in returning--so late, that I knew that the concert
could not have detained him all the time. Dinner was on the table before
he appeared.

"It was magnificent," he said, as he took his seat. "Do you remember
what Darwin says about music? He claims that the power of producing and
appreciating it existed among the human race long before the power of
speech was arrived at. Perhaps that is why we are so subtly influenced
by it. There are vague memories in our souls of those misty centuries
when the world was in its childhood."

"That's rather a broad idea," I remarked.

"One's ideas must be as broad as Nature if they are to interpret
Nature," he answered. "What's the matter? You're not looking quite
yourself. This Brixton Road affair has upset you."

"To tell the truth, it has," I said. "I ought to be more case-hardened
after my Afghan experiences. I saw my own comrades hacked to pieces at
Maiwand without losing my nerve."

"I can understand. There is a mystery about this which stimulates the
imagination; where there is no imagination there is no horror. Have you
seen the evening paper?"

"No."

"It gives a fairly good account of the affair. It does not mention the
fact that when the man was raised up, a woman's wedding ring fell upon
the floor. It is just as well it does not."

"Why?"

"Look at this advertisement," he answered. "I had one sent to every
paper this morning immediately after the affair."

He threw the paper across to me and I glanced at the place indicated. It
was the first announcement in the "Found" column. "In Brixton Road,
this morning," it ran, "a plain gold wedding ring, found in the roadway
between the 'White Hart' Tavern and Holland Grove. Apply Dr. Watson,
221B, Baker Street, between eight and nine this evening."

"Excuse my using your name," he said. "If I used my own some of these
dunderheads would recognize it, and want to meddle in the affair."

"That is all right," I answered. "But supposing anyone applies, I have
no ring."

"Oh yes, you have," said he, handing me one. "This will do very well. It
is almost a facsimile."

"And who do you expect will answer this advertisement."

"Why, the man in the brown coat--our florid friend with the square toes.
If he does not come himself he will send an accomplice."

"Would he not consider it as too dangerous?"

"Not at all. If my view of the case is correct, and I have every reason
to believe that it is, this man would rather risk anything than lose the
ring. According to my notion he dropped it while stooping over Drebber's
body, and did not miss it at the time. After leaving the house he
discovered his loss and hurried back, but found the police already in
possession, owing to his own folly in leaving the candle burning. He had
to pretend to be drunk in order to allay the suspicions which might have
been aroused by his appearance at the gate. Now put yourself in that
man's place. On thinking the matter over, it must have occurred to him
that it was possible that he had lost the ring in the road after leaving
the house. What would he do, then? He would eagerly look out for the
evening papers in the hope of seeing it among the articles found. His
eye, of course, would light upon this. He would be overjoyed. Why should
he fear a trap? There would be no reason in his eyes why the finding
of the ring should be connected with the murder. He would come. He will
come. You shall see him within an hour?"

"And then?" I asked.

"Oh, you can leave me to deal with him then. Have you any arms?"

"I have my old service revolver and a few cartridges."

"You had better clean it and load it. He will be a desperate man,
and though I shall take him unawares, it is as well to be ready for
anything."

I went to my bedroom and followed his advice. When I returned with
the pistol the table had been cleared, and Holmes was engaged in his
favourite occupation of scraping upon his violin.

"The plot thickens," he said, as I entered; "I have just had an answer
to my American telegram. My view of the case is the correct one."

"And that is?" I asked eagerly.

"My fiddle would be the better for new strings," he remarked. "Put your
pistol in your pocket. When the fellow comes speak to him in an ordinary
way. Leave the rest to me. Don't frighten him by looking at him too
hard."

"It is eight o'clock now," I said, glancing at my watch.

"Yes. He will probably be here in a few minutes. Open the door slightly.
That will do. Now put the key on the inside. Thank you! This is a
queer old book I picked up at a stall yesterday--'De Jure inter
Gentes'--published in Latin at Liege in the Lowlands, in 1642. Charles'
head was still firm on his shoulders when this little brown-backed
volume was struck off."

"Who is the printer?"

"Philippe de Croy, whoever he may have been. On the fly-leaf, in very
faded ink, is written 'Ex libris Guliolmi Whyte.' I wonder who William
Whyte was. Some pragmatical seventeenth century lawyer, I suppose. His
writing has a legal twist about it. Here comes our man, I think."

As he spoke there was a sharp ring at the bell. Sherlock Holmes rose
softly and moved his chair in the direction of the door. We heard the
servant pass along the hall, and the sharp click of the latch as she
opened it.

"Does Dr. Watson live here?" asked a clear but rather harsh voice. We
could not hear the servant's reply, but the door closed, and some one
began to ascend the stairs. The footfall was an uncertain and shuffling
one. A look of surprise passed over the face of my companion as he
listened to it. It came slowly along the passage, and there was a feeble
tap at the door.

"Come in," I cried.

At my summons, instead of the man of violence whom we expected, a very
old and wrinkled woman hobbled into the apartment. She appeared to be
dazzled by the sudden blaze of light, and after dropping a curtsey, she
stood blinking at us with her bleared eyes and fumbling in her pocket
with nervous, shaky fingers. I glanced at my companion, and his face
had assumed such a disconsolate expression that it was all I could do to
keep my countenance.

The old crone drew out an evening paper, and pointed at our
advertisement. "It's this as has brought me, good gentlemen," she said,
dropping another curtsey; "a gold wedding ring in the Brixton Road. It
belongs to my girl Sally, as was married only this time twelvemonth,
which her husband is steward aboard a Union boat, and what he'd say if
he come 'ome and found her without her ring is more than I can think, he
being short enough at the best o' times, but more especially when he
has the drink. If it please you, she went to the circus last night along
with----"

"Is that her ring?" I asked.

"The Lord be thanked!" cried the old woman; "Sally will be a glad woman
this night. That's the ring."

"And what may your address be?" I inquired, taking up a pencil.

"13, Duncan Street, Houndsditch. A weary way from here."

"The Brixton Road does not lie between any circus and Houndsditch," said
Sherlock Holmes sharply.

The old woman faced round and looked keenly at him from her little
red-rimmed eyes. "The gentleman asked me for _my_ address," she said.
"Sally lives in lodgings at 3, Mayfield Place, Peckham."

"And your name is----?"

"My name is Sawyer--her's is Dennis, which Tom Dennis married her--and
a smart, clean lad, too, as long as he's at sea, and no steward in the
company more thought of; but when on shore, what with the women and what
with liquor shops----"

"Here is your ring, Mrs. Sawyer," I interrupted, in obedience to a sign
from my companion; "it clearly belongs to your daughter, and I am glad
to be able to restore it to the rightful owner."

With many mumbled blessings and protestations of gratitude the old crone
packed it away in her pocket, and shuffled off down the stairs. Sherlock
Holmes sprang to his feet the moment that she was gone and rushed into
his room. He returned in a few seconds enveloped in an ulster and
a cravat. "I'll follow her," he said, hurriedly; "she must be an
accomplice, and will lead me to him. Wait up for me." The hall door had
hardly slammed behind our visitor before Holmes had descended the stair.
Looking through the window I could see her walking feebly along the
other side, while her pursuer dogged her some little distance behind.
"Either his whole theory is incorrect," I thought to myself, "or else he
will be led now to the heart of the mystery." There was no need for him
to ask me to wait up for him, for I felt that sleep was impossible until
I heard the result of his adventure.

It was close upon nine when he set out. I had no idea how long he might
be, but I sat stolidly puffing at my pipe and skipping over the pages
of Henri Murger's "Vie de Bohème." Ten o'clock passed, and I heard the
footsteps of the maid as they pattered off to bed. Eleven, and the
more stately tread of the landlady passed my door, bound for the same
destination. It was close upon twelve before I heard the sharp sound of
his latch-key. The instant he entered I saw by his face that he had not
been successful. Amusement and chagrin seemed to be struggling for the
mastery, until the former suddenly carried the day, and he burst into a
hearty laugh.

"I wouldn't have the Scotland Yarders know it for the world," he cried,
dropping into his chair; "I have chaffed them so much that they would
never have let me hear the end of it. I can afford to laugh, because I
know that I will be even with them in the long run."

"What is it then?" I asked.

"Oh, I don't mind telling a story against myself. That creature had
gone a little way when she began to limp and show every sign of being
foot-sore. Presently she came to a halt, and hailed a four-wheeler which
was passing. I managed to be close to her so as to hear the address, but
I need not have been so anxious, for she sang it out loud enough to
be heard at the other side of the street, 'Drive to 13, Duncan Street,
Houndsditch,' she cried. This begins to look genuine, I thought, and
having seen her safely inside, I perched myself behind. That's an art
which every detective should be an expert at. Well, away we rattled, and
never drew rein until we reached the street in question. I hopped off
before we came to the door, and strolled down the street in an easy,
lounging way. I saw the cab pull up. The driver jumped down, and I saw
him open the door and stand expectantly. Nothing came out though. When
I reached him he was groping about frantically in the empty cab, and
giving vent to the finest assorted collection of oaths that ever I
listened to. There was no sign or trace of his passenger, and I fear it
will be some time before he gets his fare. On inquiring at Number 13
we found that the house belonged to a respectable paperhanger, named
Keswick, and that no one of the name either of Sawyer or Dennis had ever
been heard of there."

"You don't mean to say," I cried, in amazement, "that that tottering,
feeble old woman was able to get out of the cab while it was in motion,
without either you or the driver seeing her?"

"Old woman be damned!" said Sherlock Holmes, sharply. "We were the old
women to be so taken in. It must have been a young man, and an
active one, too, besides being an incomparable actor. The get-up was
inimitable. He saw that he was followed, no doubt, and used this means
of giving me the slip. It shows that the man we are after is not as
lonely as I imagined he was, but has friends who are ready to risk
something for him. Now, Doctor, you are looking done-up. Take my advice
and turn in."

I was certainly feeling very weary, so I obeyed his injunction. I
left Holmes seated in front of the smouldering fire, and long into the
watches of the night I heard the low, melancholy wailings of his violin,
and knew that he was still pondering over the strange problem which he
had set himself to unravel.




CHAPTER VI. TOBIAS GREGSON SHOWS WHAT HE CAN DO.


THE papers next day were full of the "Brixton Mystery," as they termed
it. Each had a long account of the affair, and some had leaders upon it
in addition. There was some information in them which was new to me. I
still retain in my scrap-book numerous clippings and extracts bearing
upon the case. Here is a condensation of a few of them:--

The _Daily Telegraph_ remarked that in the history of crime there had
seldom been a tragedy which presented stranger features. The German
name of the victim, the absence of all other motive, and the sinister
inscription on the wall, all pointed to its perpetration by political
refugees and revolutionists. The Socialists had many branches in
America, and the deceased had, no doubt, infringed their unwritten laws,
and been tracked down by them. After alluding airily to the Vehmgericht,
aqua tofana, Carbonari, the Marchioness de Brinvilliers, the Darwinian
theory, the principles of Malthus, and the Ratcliff Highway murders, the
article concluded by admonishing the Government and advocating a closer
watch over foreigners in England.

The _Standard_ commented upon the fact that lawless outrages of the sort
usually occurred under a Liberal Administration. They arose from the
unsettling of the minds of the masses, and the consequent weakening
of all authority. The deceased was an American gentleman who had
been residing for some weeks in the Metropolis. He had stayed at the
boarding-house of Madame Charpentier, in Torquay Terrace, Camberwell.
He was accompanied in his travels by his private secretary, Mr. Joseph
Stangerson. The two bade adieu to their landlady upon Tuesday, the
4th inst., and departed to Euston Station with the avowed intention of
catching the Liverpool express. They were afterwards seen together upon
the platform. Nothing more is known of them until Mr. Drebber's body
was, as recorded, discovered in an empty house in the Brixton Road,
many miles from Euston. How he came there, or how he met his fate, are
questions which are still involved in mystery. Nothing is known of the
whereabouts of Stangerson. We are glad to learn that Mr. Lestrade and
Mr. Gregson, of Scotland Yard, are both engaged upon the case, and it
is confidently anticipated that these well-known officers will speedily
throw light upon the matter.

The _Daily News_ observed that there was no doubt as to the crime being
a political one. The despotism and hatred of Liberalism which animated
the Continental Governments had had the effect of driving to our shores
a number of men who might have made excellent citizens were they not
soured by the recollection of all that they had undergone. Among these
men there was a stringent code of honour, any infringement of which was
punished by death. Every effort should be made to find the secretary,
Stangerson, and to ascertain some particulars of the habits of the
deceased. A great step had been gained by the discovery of the address
of the house at which he had boarded--a result which was entirely due to
the acuteness and energy of Mr. Gregson of Scotland Yard.

Sherlock Holmes and I read these notices over together at breakfast, and
they appeared to afford him considerable amusement.

"I told you that, whatever happened, Lestrade and Gregson would be sure
to score."

"That depends on how it turns out."

"Oh, bless you, it doesn't matter in the least. If the man is caught, it
will be _on account_ of their exertions; if he escapes, it will be _in
spite_ of their exertions. It's heads I win and tails you lose. Whatever
they do, they will have followers. 'Un sot trouve toujours un plus sot
qui l'admire.'"

"What on earth is this?" I cried, for at this moment there came the
pattering of many steps in the hall and on the stairs, accompanied by
audible expressions of disgust upon the part of our landlady.

"It's the Baker Street division of the detective police force," said my
companion, gravely; and as he spoke there rushed into the room half a
dozen of the dirtiest and most ragged street Arabs that ever I clapped
eyes on.

"'Tention!" cried Holmes, in a sharp tone, and the six dirty little
scoundrels stood in a line like so many disreputable statuettes. "In
future you shall send up Wiggins alone to report, and the rest of you
must wait in the street. Have you found it, Wiggins?"

"No, sir, we hain't," said one of the youths.

"I hardly expected you would. You must keep on until you do. Here are
your wages." [13] He handed each of them a shilling.

"Now, off you go, and come back with a better report next time."

He waved his hand, and they scampered away downstairs like so many rats,
and we heard their shrill voices next moment in the street.

"There's more work to be got out of one of those little beggars than
out of a dozen of the force," Holmes remarked. "The mere sight of an
official-looking person seals men's lips. These youngsters, however, go
everywhere and hear everything. They are as sharp as needles, too; all
they want is organisation."

"Is it on this Brixton case that you are employing them?" I asked.

"Yes; there is a point which I wish to ascertain. It is merely a matter
of time. Hullo! we are going to hear some news now with a vengeance!
Here is Gregson coming down the road with beatitude written upon every
feature of his face. Bound for us, I know. Yes, he is stopping. There he
is!"

There was a violent peal at the bell, and in a few seconds the
fair-haired detective came up the stairs, three steps at a time, and
burst into our sitting-room.

"My dear fellow," he cried, wringing Holmes' unresponsive hand,
"congratulate me! I have made the whole thing as clear as day."

A shade of anxiety seemed to me to cross my companion's expressive face.

"Do you mean that you are on the right track?" he asked.

"The right track! Why, sir, we have the man under lock and key."

"And his name is?"

"Arthur Charpentier, sub-lieutenant in Her Majesty's navy," cried
Gregson, pompously, rubbing his fat hands and inflating his chest.

Sherlock Holmes gave a sigh of relief, and relaxed into a smile.

"Take a seat, and try one of these cigars," he said. "We are anxious to
know how you managed it. Will you have some whiskey and water?"

"I don't mind if I do," the detective answered. "The tremendous
exertions which I have gone through during the last day or two have worn
me out. Not so much bodily exertion, you understand, as the strain upon
the mind. You will appreciate that, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, for we are both
brain-workers."

"You do me too much honour," said Holmes, gravely. "Let us hear how you
arrived at this most gratifying result."

The detective seated himself in the arm-chair, and puffed complacently
at his cigar. Then suddenly he slapped his thigh in a paroxysm of
amusement.

"The fun of it is," he cried, "that that fool Lestrade, who thinks
himself so smart, has gone off upon the wrong track altogether. He is
after the secretary Stangerson, who had no more to do with the crime
than the babe unborn. I have no doubt that he has caught him by this
time."

The idea tickled Gregson so much that he laughed until he choked.

"And how did you get your clue?"

"Ah, I'll tell you all about it. Of course, Doctor Watson, this is
strictly between ourselves. The first difficulty which we had to contend
with was the finding of this American's antecedents. Some people would
have waited until their advertisements were answered, or until parties
came forward and volunteered information. That is not Tobias Gregson's
way of going to work. You remember the hat beside the dead man?"

"Yes," said Holmes; "by John Underwood and Sons, 129, Camberwell Road."

Gregson looked quite crest-fallen.

"I had no idea that you noticed that," he said. "Have you been there?"

"No."

"Ha!" cried Gregson, in a relieved voice; "you should never neglect a
chance, however small it may seem."

"To a great mind, nothing is little," remarked Holmes, sententiously.

"Well, I went to Underwood, and asked him if he had sold a hat of that
size and description. He looked over his books, and came on it at once.
He had sent the hat to a Mr. Drebber, residing at Charpentier's Boarding
Establishment, Torquay Terrace. Thus I got at his address."

"Smart--very smart!" murmured Sherlock Holmes.

"I next called upon Madame Charpentier," continued the detective.
"I found her very pale and distressed. Her daughter was in the room,
too--an uncommonly fine girl she is, too; she was looking red about
the eyes and her lips trembled as I spoke to her. That didn't escape
my notice. I began to smell a rat. You know the feeling, Mr. Sherlock
Holmes, when you come upon the right scent--a kind of thrill in your
nerves. 'Have you heard of the mysterious death of your late boarder Mr.
Enoch J. Drebber, of Cleveland?' I asked.

"The mother nodded. She didn't seem able to get out a word. The daughter
burst into tears. I felt more than ever that these people knew something
of the matter.

"'At what o'clock did Mr. Drebber leave your house for the train?' I
asked.

"'At eight o'clock,' she said, gulping in her throat to keep down her
agitation. 'His secretary, Mr. Stangerson, said that there were two
trains--one at 9.15 and one at 11. He was to catch the first. [14]

"'And was that the last which you saw of him?'

"A terrible change came over the woman's face as I asked the question.
Her features turned perfectly livid. It was some seconds before she
could get out the single word 'Yes'--and when it did come it was in a
husky unnatural tone.

"There was silence for a moment, and then the daughter spoke in a calm
clear voice.

"'No good can ever come of falsehood, mother,' she said. 'Let us be
frank with this gentleman. We _did_ see Mr. Drebber again.'

"'God forgive you!' cried Madame Charpentier, throwing up her hands and
sinking back in her chair. 'You have murdered your brother.'

"'Arthur would rather that we spoke the truth,' the girl answered
firmly.

"'You had best tell me all about it now,' I said. 'Half-confidences are
worse than none. Besides, you do not know how much we know of it.'

"'On your head be it, Alice!' cried her mother; and then, turning to me,
'I will tell you all, sir. Do not imagine that my agitation on behalf
of my son arises from any fear lest he should have had a hand in this
terrible affair. He is utterly innocent of it. My dread is, however,
that in your eyes and in the eyes of others he may appear to be
compromised. That however is surely impossible. His high character, his
profession, his antecedents would all forbid it.'

"'Your best way is to make a clean breast of the facts,' I answered.
'Depend upon it, if your son is innocent he will be none the worse.'

"'Perhaps, Alice, you had better leave us together,' she said, and her
daughter withdrew. 'Now, sir,' she continued, 'I had no intention of
telling you all this, but since my poor daughter has disclosed it I
have no alternative. Having once decided to speak, I will tell you all
without omitting any particular.'

"'It is your wisest course,' said I.

"'Mr. Drebber has been with us nearly three weeks. He and his secretary,
Mr. Stangerson, had been travelling on the Continent. I noticed a
"Copenhagen" label upon each of their trunks, showing that that had been
their last stopping place. Stangerson was a quiet reserved man, but his
employer, I am sorry to say, was far otherwise. He was coarse in his
habits and brutish in his ways. The very night of his arrival he became
very much the worse for drink, and, indeed, after twelve o'clock in the
day he could hardly ever be said to be sober. His manners towards the
maid-servants were disgustingly free and familiar. Worst of all, he
speedily assumed the same attitude towards my daughter, Alice, and spoke
to her more than once in a way which, fortunately, she is too innocent
to understand. On one occasion he actually seized her in his arms and
embraced her--an outrage which caused his own secretary to reproach him
for his unmanly conduct.'

"'But why did you stand all this,' I asked. 'I suppose that you can get
rid of your boarders when you wish.'

"Mrs. Charpentier blushed at my pertinent question. 'Would to God that
I had given him notice on the very day that he came,' she said. 'But
it was a sore temptation. They were paying a pound a day each--fourteen
pounds a week, and this is the slack season. I am a widow, and my boy in
the Navy has cost me much. I grudged to lose the money. I acted for the
best. This last was too much, however, and I gave him notice to leave on
account of it. That was the reason of his going.'

"'Well?'

"'My heart grew light when I saw him drive away. My son is on leave
just now, but I did not tell him anything of all this, for his temper
is violent, and he is passionately fond of his sister. When I closed the
door behind them a load seemed to be lifted from my mind. Alas, in
less than an hour there was a ring at the bell, and I learned that Mr.
Drebber had returned. He was much excited, and evidently the worse for
drink. He forced his way into the room, where I was sitting with my
daughter, and made some incoherent remark about having missed his train.
He then turned to Alice, and before my very face, proposed to her that
she should fly with him. "You are of age," he said, "and there is no law
to stop you. I have money enough and to spare. Never mind the old girl
here, but come along with me now straight away. You shall live like a
princess." Poor Alice was so frightened that she shrunk away from him,
but he caught her by the wrist and endeavoured to draw her towards the
door. I screamed, and at that moment my son Arthur came into the room.
What happened then I do not know. I heard oaths and the confused sounds
of a scuffle. I was too terrified to raise my head. When I did look up
I saw Arthur standing in the doorway laughing, with a stick in his hand.
"I don't think that fine fellow will trouble us again," he said. "I will
just go after him and see what he does with himself." With those words
he took his hat and started off down the street. The next morning we
heard of Mr. Drebber's mysterious death.'

"This statement came from Mrs. Charpentier's lips with many gasps and
pauses. At times she spoke so low that I could hardly catch the words. I
made shorthand notes of all that she said, however, so that there should
be no possibility of a mistake."

"It's quite exciting," said Sherlock Holmes, with a yawn. "What happened
next?"

"When Mrs. Charpentier paused," the detective continued, "I saw that the
whole case hung upon one point. Fixing her with my eye in a way which
I always found effective with women, I asked her at what hour her son
returned.

"'I do not know,' she answered.

"'Not know?'

"'No; he has a latch-key, and he let himself in.'

"'After you went to bed?'

"'Yes.'

"'When did you go to bed?'

"'About eleven.'

"'So your son was gone at least two hours?'

"'Yes.'

"'Possibly four or five?'

"'Yes.'

"'What was he doing during that time?'

"'I do not know,' she answered, turning white to her very lips.

"Of course after that there was nothing more to be done. I found
out where Lieutenant Charpentier was, took two officers with me, and
arrested him. When I touched him on the shoulder and warned him to come
quietly with us, he answered us as bold as brass, 'I suppose you
are arresting me for being concerned in the death of that scoundrel
Drebber,' he said. We had said nothing to him about it, so that his
alluding to it had a most suspicious aspect."

"Very," said Holmes.

"He still carried the heavy stick which the mother described him as
having with him when he followed Drebber. It was a stout oak cudgel."

"What is your theory, then?"

"Well, my theory is that he followed Drebber as far as the Brixton Road.
When there, a fresh altercation arose between them, in the course of
which Drebber received a blow from the stick, in the pit of the stomach,
perhaps, which killed him without leaving any mark. The night was so
wet that no one was about, so Charpentier dragged the body of his victim
into the empty house. As to the candle, and the blood, and the writing
on the wall, and the ring, they may all be so many tricks to throw the
police on to the wrong scent."

"Well done!" said Holmes in an encouraging voice. "Really, Gregson, you
are getting along. We shall make something of you yet."

"I flatter myself that I have managed it rather neatly," the detective
answered proudly. "The young man volunteered a statement, in which he
said that after following Drebber some time, the latter perceived him,
and took a cab in order to get away from him. On his way home he met an
old shipmate, and took a long walk with him. On being asked where this
old shipmate lived, he was unable to give any satisfactory reply. I
think the whole case fits together uncommonly well. What amuses me is to
think of Lestrade, who had started off upon the wrong scent. I am afraid
he won't make much of [15] Why, by Jove, here's the very man himself!"

It was indeed Lestrade, who had ascended the stairs while we were
talking, and who now entered the room. The assurance and jauntiness
which generally marked his demeanour and dress were, however, wanting.
His face was disturbed and troubled, while his clothes were disarranged
and untidy. He had evidently come with the intention of consulting
with Sherlock Holmes, for on perceiving his colleague he appeared to be
embarrassed and put out. He stood in the centre of the room, fumbling
nervously with his hat and uncertain what to do. "This is a most
extraordinary case," he said at last--"a most incomprehensible affair."

"Ah, you find it so, Mr. Lestrade!" cried Gregson, triumphantly. "I
thought you would come to that conclusion. Have you managed to find the
Secretary, Mr. Joseph Stangerson?"

"The Secretary, Mr. Joseph Stangerson," said Lestrade gravely, "was
murdered at Halliday's Private Hotel about six o'clock this morning."




CHAPTER VII. LIGHT IN THE DARKNESS.


THE intelligence with which Lestrade greeted us was so momentous and so
unexpected, that we were all three fairly dumfoundered. Gregson sprang
out of his chair and upset the remainder of his whiskey and water. I
stared in silence at Sherlock Holmes, whose lips were compressed and his
brows drawn down over his eyes.

"Stangerson too!" he muttered. "The plot thickens."

"It was quite thick enough before," grumbled Lestrade, taking a chair.
"I seem to have dropped into a sort of council of war."

"Are you--are you sure of this piece of intelligence?" stammered
Gregson.

"I have just come from his room," said Lestrade. "I was the first to
discover what had occurred."

"We have been hearing Gregson's view of the matter," Holmes observed.
"Would you mind letting us know what you have seen and done?"

"I have no objection," Lestrade answered, seating himself. "I freely
confess that I was of the opinion that Stangerson was concerned in
the death of Drebber. This fresh development has shown me that I was
completely mistaken. Full of the one idea, I set myself to find out
what had become of the Secretary. They had been seen together at Euston
Station about half-past eight on the evening of the third. At two in the
morning Drebber had been found in the Brixton Road. The question which
confronted me was to find out how Stangerson had been employed between
8.30 and the time of the crime, and what had become of him afterwards.
I telegraphed to Liverpool, giving a description of the man, and warning
them to keep a watch upon the American boats. I then set to work calling
upon all the hotels and lodging-houses in the vicinity of Euston. You
see, I argued that if Drebber and his companion had become separated,
the natural course for the latter would be to put up somewhere in the
vicinity for the night, and then to hang about the station again next
morning."

"They would be likely to agree on some meeting-place beforehand,"
remarked Holmes.

"So it proved. I spent the whole of yesterday evening in making
enquiries entirely without avail. This morning I began very early, and
at eight o'clock I reached Halliday's Private Hotel, in Little George
Street. On my enquiry as to whether a Mr. Stangerson was living there,
they at once answered me in the affirmative.

"'No doubt you are the gentleman whom he was expecting,' they said. 'He
has been waiting for a gentleman for two days.'

"'Where is he now?' I asked.

"'He is upstairs in bed. He wished to be called at nine.'

"'I will go up and see him at once,' I said.

"It seemed to me that my sudden appearance might shake his nerves and
lead him to say something unguarded. The Boots volunteered to show me
the room: it was on the second floor, and there was a small corridor
leading up to it. The Boots pointed out the door to me, and was about to
go downstairs again when I saw something that made me feel sickish, in
spite of my twenty years' experience. From under the door there curled
a little red ribbon of blood, which had meandered across the passage and
formed a little pool along the skirting at the other side. I gave a cry,
which brought the Boots back. He nearly fainted when he saw it. The door
was locked on the inside, but we put our shoulders to it, and knocked it
in. The window of the room was open, and beside the window, all huddled
up, lay the body of a man in his nightdress. He was quite dead, and had
been for some time, for his limbs were rigid and cold. When we turned
him over, the Boots recognized him at once as being the same gentleman
who had engaged the room under the name of Joseph Stangerson. The cause
of death was a deep stab in the left side, which must have penetrated
the heart. And now comes the strangest part of the affair. What do you
suppose was above the murdered man?"

I felt a creeping of the flesh, and a presentiment of coming horror,
even before Sherlock Holmes answered.

"The word RACHE, written in letters of blood," he said.

"That was it," said Lestrade, in an awe-struck voice; and we were all
silent for a while.

There was something so methodical and so incomprehensible about the
deeds of this unknown assassin, that it imparted a fresh ghastliness to
his crimes. My nerves, which were steady enough on the field of battle
tingled as I thought of it.

"The man was seen," continued Lestrade. "A milk boy, passing on his way
to the dairy, happened to walk down the lane which leads from the mews
at the back of the hotel. He noticed that a ladder, which usually lay
there, was raised against one of the windows of the second floor, which
was wide open. After passing, he looked back and saw a man descend the
ladder. He came down so quietly and openly that the boy imagined him to
be some carpenter or joiner at work in the hotel. He took no particular
notice of him, beyond thinking in his own mind that it was early for him
to be at work. He has an impression that the man was tall, had a reddish
face, and was dressed in a long, brownish coat. He must have stayed in
the room some little time after the murder, for we found blood-stained
water in the basin, where he had washed his hands, and marks on the
sheets where he had deliberately wiped his knife."

I glanced at Holmes on hearing the description of the murderer, which
tallied so exactly with his own. There was, however, no trace of
exultation or satisfaction upon his face.

"Did you find nothing in the room which could furnish a clue to the
murderer?" he asked.

"Nothing. Stangerson had Drebber's purse in his pocket, but it seems
that this was usual, as he did all the paying. There was eighty odd
pounds in it, but nothing had been taken. Whatever the motives of these
extraordinary crimes, robbery is certainly not one of them. There were
no papers or memoranda in the murdered man's pocket, except a single
telegram, dated from Cleveland about a month ago, and containing
the words, 'J. H. is in Europe.' There was no name appended to this
message."

"And there was nothing else?" Holmes asked.

"Nothing of any importance. The man's novel, with which he had read
himself to sleep was lying upon the bed, and his pipe was on a chair
beside him. There was a glass of water on the table, and on the
window-sill a small chip ointment box containing a couple of pills."

Sherlock Holmes sprang from his chair with an exclamation of delight.

"The last link," he cried, exultantly. "My case is complete."

The two detectives stared at him in amazement.

"I have now in my hands," my companion said, confidently, "all the
threads which have formed such a tangle. There are, of course, details
to be filled in, but I am as certain of all the main facts, from the
time that Drebber parted from Stangerson at the station, up to the
discovery of the body of the latter, as if I had seen them with my own
eyes. I will give you a proof of my knowledge. Could you lay your hand
upon those pills?"

"I have them," said Lestrade, producing a small white box; "I took them
and the purse and the telegram, intending to have them put in a place of
safety at the Police Station. It was the merest chance my taking these
pills, for I am bound to say that I do not attach any importance to
them."

"Give them here," said Holmes. "Now, Doctor," turning to me, "are those
ordinary pills?"

They certainly were not. They were of a pearly grey colour, small,
round, and almost transparent against the light. "From their lightness
and transparency, I should imagine that they are soluble in water," I
remarked.

"Precisely so," answered Holmes. "Now would you mind going down and
fetching that poor little devil of a terrier which has been bad so long,
and which the landlady wanted you to put out of its pain yesterday."

I went downstairs and carried the dog upstair in my arms. It's laboured
breathing and glazing eye showed that it was not far from its end.
Indeed, its snow-white muzzle proclaimed that it had already exceeded
the usual term of canine existence. I placed it upon a cushion on the
rug.

"I will now cut one of these pills in two," said Holmes, and drawing his
penknife he suited the action to the word. "One half we return into the
box for future purposes. The other half I will place in this wine glass,
in which is a teaspoonful of water. You perceive that our friend, the
Doctor, is right, and that it readily dissolves."

"This may be very interesting," said Lestrade, in the injured tone of
one who suspects that he is being laughed at, "I cannot see, however,
what it has to do with the death of Mr. Joseph Stangerson."

"Patience, my friend, patience! You will find in time that it has
everything to do with it. I shall now add a little milk to make the
mixture palatable, and on presenting it to the dog we find that he laps
it up readily enough."

As he spoke he turned the contents of the wine glass into a saucer and
placed it in front of the terrier, who speedily licked it dry. Sherlock
Holmes' earnest demeanour had so far convinced us that we all sat in
silence, watching the animal intently, and expecting some startling
effect. None such appeared, however. The dog continued to lie stretched
upon tho [16] cushion, breathing in a laboured way, but apparently
neither the better nor the worse for its draught.

Holmes had taken out his watch, and as minute followed minute without
result, an expression of the utmost chagrin and disappointment appeared
upon his features. He gnawed his lip, drummed his fingers upon the
table, and showed every other symptom of acute impatience. So great
was his emotion, that I felt sincerely sorry for him, while the two
detectives smiled derisively, by no means displeased at this check which
he had met.

"It can't be a coincidence," he cried, at last springing from his chair
and pacing wildly up and down the room; "it is impossible that it should
be a mere coincidence. The very pills which I suspected in the case of
Drebber are actually found after the death of Stangerson. And yet they
are inert. What can it mean? Surely my whole chain of reasoning cannot
have been false. It is impossible! And yet this wretched dog is none the
worse. Ah, I have it! I have it!" With a perfect shriek of delight he
rushed to the box, cut the other pill in two, dissolved it, added milk,
and presented it to the terrier. The unfortunate creature's tongue
seemed hardly to have been moistened in it before it gave a convulsive
shiver in every limb, and lay as rigid and lifeless as if it had been
struck by lightning.

Sherlock Holmes drew a long breath, and wiped the perspiration from his
forehead. "I should have more faith," he said; "I ought to know by
this time that when a fact appears to be opposed to a long train of
deductions, it invariably proves to be capable of bearing some other
interpretation. Of the two pills in that box one was of the most deadly
poison, and the other was entirely harmless. I ought to have known that
before ever I saw the box at all."

This last statement appeared to me to be so startling, that I could
hardly believe that he was in his sober senses. There was the dead dog,
however, to prove that his conjecture had been correct. It seemed to me
that the mists in my own mind were gradually clearing away, and I began
to have a dim, vague perception of the truth.

"All this seems strange to you," continued Holmes, "because you failed
at the beginning of the inquiry to grasp the importance of the single
real clue which was presented to you. I had the good fortune to seize
upon that, and everything which has occurred since then has served to
confirm my original supposition, and, indeed, was the logical sequence
of it. Hence things which have perplexed you and made the case more
obscure, have served to enlighten me and to strengthen my conclusions.
It is a mistake to confound strangeness with mystery. The most
commonplace crime is often the most mysterious because it presents no
new or special features from which deductions may be drawn. This murder
would have been infinitely more difficult to unravel had the body of
the victim been simply found lying in the roadway without any of
those _outré_ and sensational accompaniments which have rendered
it remarkable. These strange details, far from making the case more
difficult, have really had the effect of making it less so."

Mr. Gregson, who had listened to this address with considerable
impatience, could contain himself no longer. "Look here, Mr. Sherlock
Holmes," he said, "we are all ready to acknowledge that you are a smart
man, and that you have your own methods of working. We want something
more than mere theory and preaching now, though. It is a case of taking
the man. I have made my case out, and it seems I was wrong. Young
Charpentier could not have been engaged in this second affair. Lestrade
went after his man, Stangerson, and it appears that he was wrong too.
You have thrown out hints here, and hints there, and seem to know more
than we do, but the time has come when we feel that we have a right to
ask you straight how much you do know of the business. Can you name the
man who did it?"

"I cannot help feeling that Gregson is right, sir," remarked Lestrade.
"We have both tried, and we have both failed. You have remarked more
than once since I have been in the room that you had all the evidence
which you require. Surely you will not withhold it any longer."

"Any delay in arresting the assassin," I observed, "might give him time
to perpetrate some fresh atrocity."

Thus pressed by us all, Holmes showed signs of irresolution. He
continued to walk up and down the room with his head sunk on his chest
and his brows drawn down, as was his habit when lost in thought.

"There will be no more murders," he said at last, stopping abruptly and
facing us. "You can put that consideration out of the question. You have
asked me if I know the name of the assassin. I do. The mere knowing of
his name is a small thing, however, compared with the power of laying
our hands upon him. This I expect very shortly to do. I have good hopes
of managing it through my own arrangements; but it is a thing which
needs delicate handling, for we have a shrewd and desperate man to deal
with, who is supported, as I have had occasion to prove, by another who
is as clever as himself. As long as this man has no idea that anyone
can have a clue there is some chance of securing him; but if he had the
slightest suspicion, he would change his name, and vanish in an instant
among the four million inhabitants of this great city. Without meaning
to hurt either of your feelings, I am bound to say that I consider these
men to be more than a match for the official force, and that is why I
have not asked your assistance. If I fail I shall, of course, incur all
the blame due to this omission; but that I am prepared for. At present
I am ready to promise that the instant that I can communicate with you
without endangering my own combinations, I shall do so."

Gregson and Lestrade seemed to be far from satisfied by this assurance,
or by the depreciating allusion to the detective police. The former had
flushed up to the roots of his flaxen hair, while the other's beady eyes
glistened with curiosity and resentment. Neither of them had time to
speak, however, before there was a tap at the door, and the spokesman
of the street Arabs, young Wiggins, introduced his insignificant and
unsavoury person.

"Please, sir," he said, touching his forelock, "I have the cab
downstairs."

"Good boy," said Holmes, blandly. "Why don't you introduce this pattern
at Scotland Yard?" he continued, taking a pair of steel handcuffs from
a drawer. "See how beautifully the spring works. They fasten in an
instant."

"The old pattern is good enough," remarked Lestrade, "if we can only
find the man to put them on."

"Very good, very good," said Holmes, smiling. "The cabman may as well
help me with my boxes. Just ask him to step up, Wiggins."

I was surprised to find my companion speaking as though he were about
to set out on a journey, since he had not said anything to me about it.
There was a small portmanteau in the room, and this he pulled out and
began to strap. He was busily engaged at it when the cabman entered the
room.

"Just give me a help with this buckle, cabman," he said, kneeling over
his task, and never turning his head.

The fellow came forward with a somewhat sullen, defiant air, and put
down his hands to assist. At that instant there was a sharp click, the
jangling of metal, and Sherlock Holmes sprang to his feet again.

"Gentlemen," he cried, with flashing eyes, "let me introduce you to Mr.
Jefferson Hope, the murderer of Enoch Drebber and of Joseph Stangerson."

The whole thing occurred in a moment--so quickly that I had no time
to realize it. I have a vivid recollection of that instant, of Holmes'
triumphant expression and the ring of his voice, of the cabman's
dazed, savage face, as he glared at the glittering handcuffs, which had
appeared as if by magic upon his wrists. For a second or two we might
have been a group of statues. Then, with an inarticulate roar of fury,
the prisoner wrenched himself free from Holmes's grasp, and hurled
himself through the window. Woodwork and glass gave way before him; but
before he got quite through, Gregson, Lestrade, and Holmes sprang upon
him like so many staghounds. He was dragged back into the room, and then
commenced a terrific conflict. So powerful and so fierce was he, that
the four of us were shaken off again and again. He appeared to have the
convulsive strength of a man in an epileptic fit. His face and hands
were terribly mangled by his passage through the glass, but loss of
blood had no effect in diminishing his resistance. It was not until
Lestrade succeeded in getting his hand inside his neckcloth and
half-strangling him that we made him realize that his struggles were of
no avail; and even then we felt no security until we had pinioned his
feet as well as his hands. That done, we rose to our feet breathless and
panting.

"We have his cab," said Sherlock Holmes. "It will serve to take him to
Scotland Yard. And now, gentlemen," he continued, with a pleasant smile,
"we have reached the end of our little mystery. You are very welcome to
put any questions that you like to me now, and there is no danger that I
will refuse to answer them."





PART II. _The Country of the Saints._




CHAPTER I. ON THE GREAT ALKALI PLAIN.


IN the central portion of the great North American Continent there lies
an arid and repulsive desert, which for many a long year served as a
barrier against the advance of civilisation. From the Sierra Nevada to
Nebraska, and from the Yellowstone River in the north to the Colorado
upon the south, is a region of desolation and silence. Nor is Nature
always in one mood throughout this grim district. It comprises
snow-capped and lofty mountains, and dark and gloomy valleys. There are
swift-flowing rivers which dash through jagged cañons; and there are
enormous plains, which in winter are white with snow, and in summer are
grey with the saline alkali dust. They all preserve, however, the common
characteristics of barrenness, inhospitality, and misery.

There are no inhabitants of this land of despair. A band of Pawnees
or of Blackfeet may occasionally traverse it in order to reach other
hunting-grounds, but the hardiest of the braves are glad to lose sight
of those awesome plains, and to find themselves once more upon their
prairies. The coyote skulks among the scrub, the buzzard flaps heavily
through the air, and the clumsy grizzly bear lumbers through the dark
ravines, and picks up such sustenance as it can amongst the rocks. These
are the sole dwellers in the wilderness.

In the whole world there can be no more dreary view than that from
the northern slope of the Sierra Blanco. As far as the eye can reach
stretches the great flat plain-land, all dusted over with patches of
alkali, and intersected by clumps of the dwarfish chaparral bushes. On
the extreme verge of the horizon lie a long chain of mountain peaks,
with their rugged summits flecked with snow. In this great stretch of
country there is no sign of life, nor of anything appertaining to life.
There is no bird in the steel-blue heaven, no movement upon the dull,
grey earth--above all, there is absolute silence. Listen as one may,
there is no shadow of a sound in all that mighty wilderness; nothing but
silence--complete and heart-subduing silence.

It has been said there is nothing appertaining to life upon the broad
plain. That is hardly true. Looking down from the Sierra Blanco, one
sees a pathway traced out across the desert, which winds away and is
lost in the extreme distance. It is rutted with wheels and trodden down
by the feet of many adventurers. Here and there there are scattered
white objects which glisten in the sun, and stand out against the dull
deposit of alkali. Approach, and examine them! They are bones: some
large and coarse, others smaller and more delicate. The former have
belonged to oxen, and the latter to men. For fifteen hundred miles one
may trace this ghastly caravan route by these scattered remains of those
who had fallen by the wayside.

Looking down on this very scene, there stood upon the fourth of May,
eighteen hundred and forty-seven, a solitary traveller. His appearance
was such that he might have been the very genius or demon of the region.
An observer would have found it difficult to say whether he was nearer
to forty or to sixty. His face was lean and haggard, and the brown
parchment-like skin was drawn tightly over the projecting bones; his
long, brown hair and beard were all flecked and dashed with white; his
eyes were sunken in his head, and burned with an unnatural lustre; while
the hand which grasped his rifle was hardly more fleshy than that of a
skeleton. As he stood, he leaned upon his weapon for support, and yet
his tall figure and the massive framework of his bones suggested a wiry
and vigorous constitution. His gaunt face, however, and his clothes,
which hung so baggily over his shrivelled limbs, proclaimed what it
was that gave him that senile and decrepit appearance. The man was
dying--dying from hunger and from thirst.

He had toiled painfully down the ravine, and on to this little
elevation, in the vain hope of seeing some signs of water. Now the great
salt plain stretched before his eyes, and the distant belt of savage
mountains, without a sign anywhere of plant or tree, which might
indicate the presence of moisture. In all that broad landscape there
was no gleam of hope. North, and east, and west he looked with wild
questioning eyes, and then he realised that his wanderings had come to
an end, and that there, on that barren crag, he was about to die. "Why
not here, as well as in a feather bed, twenty years hence," he muttered,
as he seated himself in the shelter of a boulder.

Before sitting down, he had deposited upon the ground his useless rifle,
and also a large bundle tied up in a grey shawl, which he had carried
slung over his right shoulder. It appeared to be somewhat too heavy for
his strength, for in lowering it, it came down on the ground with some
little violence. Instantly there broke from the grey parcel a little
moaning cry, and from it there protruded a small, scared face, with very
bright brown eyes, and two little speckled, dimpled fists.

"You've hurt me!" said a childish voice reproachfully.

"Have I though," the man answered penitently, "I didn't go for to do
it." As he spoke he unwrapped the grey shawl and extricated a pretty
little girl of about five years of age, whose dainty shoes and smart
pink frock with its little linen apron all bespoke a mother's care. The
child was pale and wan, but her healthy arms and legs showed that she
had suffered less than her companion.

"How is it now?" he answered anxiously, for she was still rubbing the
towsy golden curls which covered the back of her head.

"Kiss it and make it well," she said, with perfect gravity, shoving
[19] the injured part up to him. "That's what mother used to do. Where's
mother?"

"Mother's gone. I guess you'll see her before long."

"Gone, eh!" said the little girl. "Funny, she didn't say good-bye; she
'most always did if she was just goin' over to Auntie's for tea, and now
she's been away three days. Say, it's awful dry, ain't it? Ain't there
no water, nor nothing to eat?"

"No, there ain't nothing, dearie. You'll just need to be patient awhile,
and then you'll be all right. Put your head up agin me like that, and
then you'll feel bullier. It ain't easy to talk when your lips is like
leather, but I guess I'd best let you know how the cards lie. What's
that you've got?"

"Pretty things! fine things!" cried the little girl enthusiastically,
holding up two glittering fragments of mica. "When we goes back to home
I'll give them to brother Bob."

"You'll see prettier things than them soon," said the man confidently.
"You just wait a bit. I was going to tell you though--you remember when
we left the river?"

"Oh, yes."

"Well, we reckoned we'd strike another river soon, d'ye see. But there
was somethin' wrong; compasses, or map, or somethin', and it didn't
turn up. Water ran out. Just except a little drop for the likes of you
and--and----"

"And you couldn't wash yourself," interrupted his companion gravely,
staring up at his grimy visage.

"No, nor drink. And Mr. Bender, he was the fust to go, and then Indian
Pete, and then Mrs. McGregor, and then Johnny Hones, and then, dearie,
your mother."

"Then mother's a deader too," cried the little girl dropping her face in
her pinafore and sobbing bitterly.

"Yes, they all went except you and me. Then I thought there was some
chance of water in this direction, so I heaved you over my shoulder and
we tramped it together. It don't seem as though we've improved matters.
There's an almighty small chance for us now!"

"Do you mean that we are going to die too?" asked the child, checking
her sobs, and raising her tear-stained face.

"I guess that's about the size of it."

"Why didn't you say so before?" she said, laughing gleefully. "You gave
me such a fright. Why, of course, now as long as we die we'll be with
mother again."

"Yes, you will, dearie."

"And you too. I'll tell her how awful good you've been. I'll bet she
meets us at the door of Heaven with a big pitcher of water, and a lot
of buckwheat cakes, hot, and toasted on both sides, like Bob and me was
fond of. How long will it be first?"

"I don't know--not very long." The man's eyes were fixed upon the
northern horizon. In the blue vault of the heaven there had appeared
three little specks which increased in size every moment, so rapidly did
they approach. They speedily resolved themselves into three large brown
birds, which circled over the heads of the two wanderers, and then
settled upon some rocks which overlooked them. They were buzzards, the
vultures of the west, whose coming is the forerunner of death.

"Cocks and hens," cried the little girl gleefully, pointing at their
ill-omened forms, and clapping her hands to make them rise. "Say, did
God make this country?"

"In course He did," said her companion, rather startled by this
unexpected question.

"He made the country down in Illinois, and He made the Missouri," the
little girl continued. "I guess somebody else made the country in these
parts. It's not nearly so well done. They forgot the water and the
trees."

"What would ye think of offering up prayer?" the man asked diffidently.

"It ain't night yet," she answered.

"It don't matter. It ain't quite regular, but He won't mind that, you
bet. You say over them ones that you used to say every night in the
waggon when we was on the Plains."

"Why don't you say some yourself?" the child asked, with wondering eyes.

"I disremember them," he answered. "I hain't said none since I was half
the height o' that gun. I guess it's never too late. You say them out,
and I'll stand by and come in on the choruses."

"Then you'll need to kneel down, and me too," she said, laying the shawl
out for that purpose. "You've got to put your hands up like this. It
makes you feel kind o' good."

It was a strange sight had there been anything but the buzzards to see
it. Side by side on the narrow shawl knelt the two wanderers, the little
prattling child and the reckless, hardened adventurer. Her chubby face,
and his haggard, angular visage were both turned up to the cloudless
heaven in heartfelt entreaty to that dread being with whom they were
face to face, while the two voices--the one thin and clear, the other
deep and harsh--united in the entreaty for mercy and forgiveness. The
prayer finished, they resumed their seat in the shadow of the boulder
until the child fell asleep, nestling upon the broad breast of her
protector. He watched over her slumber for some time, but Nature proved
to be too strong for him. For three days and three nights he had allowed
himself neither rest nor repose. Slowly the eyelids drooped over the
tired eyes, and the head sunk lower and lower upon the breast, until the
man's grizzled beard was mixed with the gold tresses of his companion,
and both slept the same deep and dreamless slumber.

Had the wanderer remained awake for another half hour a strange sight
would have met his eyes. Far away on the extreme verge of the alkali
plain there rose up a little spray of dust, very slight at first, and
hardly to be distinguished from the mists of the distance, but gradually
growing higher and broader until it formed a solid, well-defined cloud.
This cloud continued to increase in size until it became evident that it
could only be raised by a great multitude of moving creatures. In more
fertile spots the observer would have come to the conclusion that one
of those great herds of bisons which graze upon the prairie land was
approaching him. This was obviously impossible in these arid wilds. As
the whirl of dust drew nearer to the solitary bluff upon which the two
castaways were reposing, the canvas-covered tilts of waggons and the
figures of armed horsemen began to show up through the haze, and the
apparition revealed itself as being a great caravan upon its journey for
the West. But what a caravan! When the head of it had reached the base
of the mountains, the rear was not yet visible on the horizon. Right
across the enormous plain stretched the straggling array, waggons
and carts, men on horseback, and men on foot. Innumerable women who
staggered along under burdens, and children who toddled beside the
waggons or peeped out from under the white coverings. This was evidently
no ordinary party of immigrants, but rather some nomad people who had
been compelled from stress of circumstances to seek themselves a new
country. There rose through the clear air a confused clattering and
rumbling from this great mass of humanity, with the creaking of wheels
and the neighing of horses. Loud as it was, it was not sufficient to
rouse the two tired wayfarers above them.

At the head of the column there rode a score or more of grave ironfaced
men, clad in sombre homespun garments and armed with rifles. On reaching
the base of the bluff they halted, and held a short council among
themselves.

"The wells are to the right, my brothers," said one, a hard-lipped,
clean-shaven man with grizzly hair.

"To the right of the Sierra Blanco--so we shall reach the Rio Grande,"
said another.

"Fear not for water," cried a third. "He who could draw it from the
rocks will not now abandon His own chosen people."

"Amen! Amen!" responded the whole party.

They were about to resume their journey when one of the youngest and
keenest-eyed uttered an exclamation and pointed up at the rugged crag
above them. From its summit there fluttered a little wisp of pink,
showing up hard and bright against the grey rocks behind. At the sight
there was a general reining up of horses and unslinging of guns, while
fresh horsemen came galloping up to reinforce the vanguard. The word
'Redskins' was on every lip.

"There can't be any number of Injuns here," said the elderly man who
appeared to be in command. "We have passed the Pawnees, and there are no
other tribes until we cross the great mountains."

"Shall I go forward and see, Brother Stangerson," asked one of the band.

"And I," "and I," cried a dozen voices.

"Leave your horses below and we will await you here," the Elder
answered. In a moment the young fellows had dismounted, fastened their
horses, and were ascending the precipitous slope which led up to the
object which had excited their curiosity. They advanced rapidly and
noiselessly, with the confidence and dexterity of practised scouts.
The watchers from the plain below could see them flit from rock to rock
until their figures stood out against the skyline. The young man who had
first given the alarm was leading them. Suddenly his followers saw him
throw up his hands, as though overcome with astonishment, and on joining
him they were affected in the same way by the sight which met their
eyes.

On the little plateau which crowned the barren hill there stood a
single giant boulder, and against this boulder there lay a tall man,
long-bearded and hard-featured, but of an excessive thinness. His placid
face and regular breathing showed that he was fast asleep. Beside him
lay a little child, with her round white arms encircling his brown
sinewy neck, and her golden haired head resting upon the breast of his
velveteen tunic. Her rosy lips were parted, showing the regular line of
snow-white teeth within, and a playful smile played over her infantile
features. Her plump little white legs terminating in white socks and
neat shoes with shining buckles, offered a strange contrast to the long
shrivelled members of her companion. On the ledge of rock above this
strange couple there stood three solemn buzzards, who, at the sight of
the new comers uttered raucous screams of disappointment and flapped
sullenly away.

The cries of the foul birds awoke the two sleepers who stared about [20]
them in bewilderment. The man staggered to his feet and looked down upon
the plain which had been so desolate when sleep had overtaken him, and
which was now traversed by this enormous body of men and of beasts. His
face assumed an expression of incredulity as he gazed, and he passed his
boney hand over his eyes. "This is what they call delirium, I guess,"
he muttered. The child stood beside him, holding on to the skirt of
his coat, and said nothing but looked all round her with the wondering
questioning gaze of childhood.

The rescuing party were speedily able to convince the two castaways that
their appearance was no delusion. One of them seized the little girl,
and hoisted her upon his shoulder, while two others supported her gaunt
companion, and assisted him towards the waggons.

"My name is John Ferrier," the wanderer explained; "me and that little
un are all that's left o' twenty-one people. The rest is all dead o'
thirst and hunger away down in the south."

"Is she your child?" asked someone.

"I guess she is now," the other cried, defiantly; "she's mine 'cause I
saved her. No man will take her from me. She's Lucy Ferrier from this
day on. Who are you, though?" he continued, glancing with curiosity at
his stalwart, sunburned rescuers; "there seems to be a powerful lot of
ye."

"Nigh upon ten thousand," said one of the young men; "we are the
persecuted children of God--the chosen of the Angel Merona."

"I never heard tell on him," said the wanderer. "He appears to have
chosen a fair crowd of ye."

"Do not jest at that which is sacred," said the other sternly. "We are
of those who believe in those sacred writings, drawn in Egyptian letters
on plates of beaten gold, which were handed unto the holy Joseph Smith
at Palmyra. We have come from Nauvoo, in the State of Illinois, where we
had founded our temple. We have come to seek a refuge from the violent
man and from the godless, even though it be the heart of the desert."

The name of Nauvoo evidently recalled recollections to John Ferrier. "I
see," he said, "you are the Mormons."

"We are the Mormons," answered his companions with one voice.

"And where are you going?"

"We do not know. The hand of God is leading us under the person of our
Prophet. You must come before him. He shall say what is to be done with
you."

They had reached the base of the hill by this time, and were surrounded
by crowds of the pilgrims--pale-faced meek-looking women, strong
laughing children, and anxious earnest-eyed men. Many were the cries
of astonishment and of commiseration which arose from them when they
perceived the youth of one of the strangers and the destitution of the
other. Their escort did not halt, however, but pushed on, followed by
a great crowd of Mormons, until they reached a waggon, which was
conspicuous for its great size and for the gaudiness and smartness of
its appearance. Six horses were yoked to it, whereas the others were
furnished with two, or, at most, four a-piece. Beside the driver there
sat a man who could not have been more than thirty years of age, but
whose massive head and resolute expression marked him as a leader. He
was reading a brown-backed volume, but as the crowd approached he laid
it aside, and listened attentively to an account of the episode. Then he
turned to the two castaways.

"If we take you with us," he said, in solemn words, "it can only be as
believers in our own creed. We shall have no wolves in our fold. Better
far that your bones should bleach in this wilderness than that you
should prove to be that little speck of decay which in time corrupts the
whole fruit. Will you come with us on these terms?"

"Guess I'll come with you on any terms," said Ferrier, with such
emphasis that the grave Elders could not restrain a smile. The leader
alone retained his stern, impressive expression.

"Take him, Brother Stangerson," he said, "give him food and drink,
and the child likewise. Let it be your task also to teach him our holy
creed. We have delayed long enough. Forward! On, on to Zion!"

"On, on to Zion!" cried the crowd of Mormons, and the words rippled down
the long caravan, passing from mouth to mouth until they died away in a
dull murmur in the far distance. With a cracking of whips and a creaking
of wheels the great waggons got into motion, and soon the whole caravan
was winding along once more. The Elder to whose care the two waifs
had been committed, led them to his waggon, where a meal was already
awaiting them.

"You shall remain here," he said. "In a few days you will have recovered
from your fatigues. In the meantime, remember that now and for ever you
are of our religion. Brigham Young has said it, and he has spoken with
the voice of Joseph Smith, which is the voice of God."




CHAPTER II. THE FLOWER OF UTAH.


THIS is not the place to commemorate the trials and privations endured
by the immigrant Mormons before they came to their final haven. From the
shores of the Mississippi to the western slopes of the Rocky Mountains
they had struggled on with a constancy almost unparalleled in history.
The savage man, and the savage beast, hunger, thirst, fatigue, and
disease--every impediment which Nature could place in the way, had all
been overcome with Anglo-Saxon tenacity. Yet the long journey and the
accumulated terrors had shaken the hearts of the stoutest among them.
There was not one who did not sink upon his knees in heartfelt prayer
when they saw the broad valley of Utah bathed in the sunlight beneath
them, and learned from the lips of their leader that this was the
promised land, and that these virgin acres were to be theirs for
evermore.

Young speedily proved himself to be a skilful administrator as well as a
resolute chief. Maps were drawn and charts prepared, in which the future
city was sketched out. All around farms were apportioned and allotted in
proportion to the standing of each individual. The tradesman was put
to his trade and the artisan to his calling. In the town streets and
squares sprang up, as if by magic. In the country there was draining
and hedging, planting and clearing, until the next summer saw the whole
country golden with the wheat crop. Everything prospered in the strange
settlement. Above all, the great temple which they had erected in the
centre of the city grew ever taller and larger. From the first blush of
dawn until the closing of the twilight, the clatter of the hammer
and the rasp of the saw was never absent from the monument which the
immigrants erected to Him who had led them safe through many dangers.

The two castaways, John Ferrier and the little girl who had shared his
fortunes and had been adopted as his daughter, accompanied the Mormons
to the end of their great pilgrimage. Little Lucy Ferrier was borne
along pleasantly enough in Elder Stangerson's waggon, a retreat which
she shared with the Mormon's three wives and with his son, a headstrong
forward boy of twelve. Having rallied, with the elasticity of childhood,
from the shock caused by her mother's death, she soon became a pet
with the women, and reconciled herself to this new life in her moving
canvas-covered home. In the meantime Ferrier having recovered from his
privations, distinguished himself as a useful guide and an indefatigable
hunter. So rapidly did he gain the esteem of his new companions, that
when they reached the end of their wanderings, it was unanimously agreed
that he should be provided with as large and as fertile a tract of land
as any of the settlers, with the exception of Young himself, and of
Stangerson, Kemball, Johnston, and Drebber, who were the four principal
Elders.

On the farm thus acquired John Ferrier built himself a substantial
log-house, which received so many additions in succeeding years that it
grew into a roomy villa. He was a man of a practical turn of mind,
keen in his dealings and skilful with his hands. His iron constitution
enabled him to work morning and evening at improving and tilling his
lands. Hence it came about that his farm and all that belonged to
him prospered exceedingly. In three years he was better off than his
neighbours, in six he was well-to-do, in nine he was rich, and in twelve
there were not half a dozen men in the whole of Salt Lake City who could
compare with him. From the great inland sea to the distant Wahsatch
Mountains there was no name better known than that of John Ferrier.

There was one way and only one in which he offended the susceptibilities
of his co-religionists. No argument or persuasion could ever induce him
to set up a female establishment after the manner of his companions. He
never gave reasons for this persistent refusal, but contented himself by
resolutely and inflexibly adhering to his determination. There were some
who accused him of lukewarmness in his adopted religion, and others who
put it down to greed of wealth and reluctance to incur expense. Others,
again, spoke of some early love affair, and of a fair-haired girl who
had pined away on the shores of the Atlantic. Whatever the reason,
Ferrier remained strictly celibate. In every other respect he conformed
to the religion of the young settlement, and gained the name of being an
orthodox and straight-walking man.

Lucy Ferrier grew up within the log-house, and assisted her adopted
father in all his undertakings. The keen air of the mountains and the
balsamic odour of the pine trees took the place of nurse and mother to
the young girl. As year succeeded to year she grew taller and stronger,
her cheek more rudy, and her step more elastic. Many a wayfarer upon
the high road which ran by Ferrier's farm felt long-forgotten thoughts
revive in their mind as they watched her lithe girlish figure tripping
through the wheatfields, or met her mounted upon her father's mustang,
and managing it with all the ease and grace of a true child of the West.
So the bud blossomed into a flower, and the year which saw her father
the richest of the farmers left her as fair a specimen of American
girlhood as could be found in the whole Pacific slope.

It was not the father, however, who first discovered that the child had
developed into the woman. It seldom is in such cases. That mysterious
change is too subtle and too gradual to be measured by dates. Least of
all does the maiden herself know it until the tone of a voice or the
touch of a hand sets her heart thrilling within her, and she learns,
with a mixture of pride and of fear, that a new and a larger nature has
awoken within her. There are few who cannot recall that day and remember
the one little incident which heralded the dawn of a new life. In the
case of Lucy Ferrier the occasion was serious enough in itself, apart
from its future influence on her destiny and that of many besides.

It was a warm June morning, and the Latter Day Saints were as busy as
the bees whose hive they have chosen for their emblem. In the fields and
in the streets rose the same hum of human industry. Down the dusty high
roads defiled long streams of heavily-laden mules, all heading to the
west, for the gold fever had broken out in California, and the Overland
Route lay through the City of the Elect. There, too, were droves of
sheep and bullocks coming in from the outlying pasture lands, and trains
of tired immigrants, men and horses equally weary of their interminable
journey. Through all this motley assemblage, threading her way with the
skill of an accomplished rider, there galloped Lucy Ferrier, her fair
face flushed with the exercise and her long chestnut hair floating out
behind her. She had a commission from her father in the City, and was
dashing in as she had done many a time before, with all the fearlessness
of youth, thinking only of her task and how it was to be performed. The
travel-stained adventurers gazed after her in astonishment, and even
the unemotional Indians, journeying in with their pelties, relaxed their
accustomed stoicism as they marvelled at the beauty of the pale-faced
maiden.

She had reached the outskirts of the city when she found the road
blocked by a great drove of cattle, driven by a half-dozen wild-looking
herdsmen from the plains. In her impatience she endeavoured to pass this
obstacle by pushing her horse into what appeared to be a gap. Scarcely
had she got fairly into it, however, before the beasts closed in behind
her, and she found herself completely imbedded in the moving stream of
fierce-eyed, long-horned bullocks. Accustomed as she was to deal with
cattle, she was not alarmed at her situation, but took advantage of
every opportunity to urge her horse on in the hopes of pushing her way
through the cavalcade. Unfortunately the horns of one of the creatures,
either by accident or design, came in violent contact with the flank of
the mustang, and excited it to madness. In an instant it reared up upon
its hind legs with a snort of rage, and pranced and tossed in a way that
would have unseated any but a most skilful rider. The situation was full
of peril. Every plunge of the excited horse brought it against the horns
again, and goaded it to fresh madness. It was all that the girl could
do to keep herself in the saddle, yet a slip would mean a terrible death
under the hoofs of the unwieldy and terrified animals. Unaccustomed to
sudden emergencies, her head began to swim, and her grip upon the bridle
to relax. Choked by the rising cloud of dust and by the steam from the
struggling creatures, she might have abandoned her efforts in despair,
but for a kindly voice at her elbow which assured her of assistance. At
the same moment a sinewy brown hand caught the frightened horse by
the curb, and forcing a way through the drove, soon brought her to the
outskirts.

"You're not hurt, I hope, miss," said her preserver, respectfully.

She looked up at his dark, fierce face, and laughed saucily. "I'm awful
frightened," she said, naively; "whoever would have thought that Poncho
would have been so scared by a lot of cows?"

"Thank God you kept your seat," the other said earnestly. He was a tall,
savage-looking young fellow, mounted on a powerful roan horse, and
clad in the rough dress of a hunter, with a long rifle slung over his
shoulders. "I guess you are the daughter of John Ferrier," he remarked,
"I saw you ride down from his house. When you see him, ask him if he
remembers the Jefferson Hopes of St. Louis. If he's the same Ferrier, my
father and he were pretty thick."

"Hadn't you better come and ask yourself?" she asked, demurely.

The young fellow seemed pleased at the suggestion, and his dark eyes
sparkled with pleasure. "I'll do so," he said, "we've been in the
mountains for two months, and are not over and above in visiting
condition. He must take us as he finds us."

"He has a good deal to thank you for, and so have I," she answered,
"he's awful fond of me. If those cows had jumped on me he'd have never
got over it."

"Neither would I," said her companion.

"You! Well, I don't see that it would make much matter to you, anyhow.
You ain't even a friend of ours."

The young hunter's dark face grew so gloomy over this remark that Lucy
Ferrier laughed aloud.

"There, I didn't mean that," she said; "of course, you are a friend now.
You must come and see us. Now I must push along, or father won't trust
me with his business any more. Good-bye!"

"Good-bye," he answered, raising his broad sombrero, and bending over
her little hand. She wheeled her mustang round, gave it a cut with her
riding-whip, and darted away down the broad road in a rolling cloud of
dust.

Young Jefferson Hope rode on with his companions, gloomy and taciturn.
He and they had been among the Nevada Mountains prospecting for silver,
and were returning to Salt Lake City in the hope of raising capital
enough to work some lodes which they had discovered. He had been as keen
as any of them upon the business until this sudden incident had drawn
his thoughts into another channel. The sight of the fair young girl,
as frank and wholesome as the Sierra breezes, had stirred his volcanic,
untamed heart to its very depths. When she had vanished from his sight,
he realized that a crisis had come in his life, and that neither silver
speculations nor any other questions could ever be of such importance to
him as this new and all-absorbing one. The love which had sprung up in
his heart was not the sudden, changeable fancy of a boy, but rather the
wild, fierce passion of a man of strong will and imperious temper. He
had been accustomed to succeed in all that he undertook. He swore in
his heart that he would not fail in this if human effort and human
perseverance could render him successful.

He called on John Ferrier that night, and many times again, until
his face was a familiar one at the farm-house. John, cooped up in the
valley, and absorbed in his work, had had little chance of learning
the news of the outside world during the last twelve years. All this
Jefferson Hope was able to tell him, and in a style which interested
Lucy as well as her father. He had been a pioneer in California, and
could narrate many a strange tale of fortunes made and fortunes lost
in those wild, halcyon days. He had been a scout too, and a trapper, a
silver explorer, and a ranchman. Wherever stirring adventures were to be
had, Jefferson Hope had been there in search of them. He soon became a
favourite with the old farmer, who spoke eloquently of his virtues. On
such occasions, Lucy was silent, but her blushing cheek and her bright,
happy eyes, showed only too clearly that her young heart was no longer
her own. Her honest father may not have observed these symptoms,
but they were assuredly not thrown away upon the man who had won her
affections.

It was a summer evening when he came galloping down the road and pulled
up at the gate. She was at the doorway, and came down to meet him. He
threw the bridle over the fence and strode up the pathway.

"I am off, Lucy," he said, taking her two hands in his, and gazing
tenderly down into her face; "I won't ask you to come with me now, but
will you be ready to come when I am here again?"

"And when will that be?" she asked, blushing and laughing.

"A couple of months at the outside. I will come and claim you then, my
darling. There's no one who can stand between us."

"And how about father?" she asked.

"He has given his consent, provided we get these mines working all
right. I have no fear on that head."

"Oh, well; of course, if you and father have arranged it all, there's
no more to be said," she whispered, with her cheek against his broad
breast.

"Thank God!" he said, hoarsely, stooping and kissing her. "It is
settled, then. The longer I stay, the harder it will be to go. They are
waiting for me at the cañon. Good-bye, my own darling--good-bye. In two
months you shall see me."

He tore himself from her as he spoke, and, flinging himself upon his
horse, galloped furiously away, never even looking round, as though
afraid that his resolution might fail him if he took one glance at
what he was leaving. She stood at the gate, gazing after him until
he vanished from her sight. Then she walked back into the house, the
happiest girl in all Utah.




CHAPTER III. JOHN FERRIER TALKS WITH THE PROPHET.


THREE weeks had passed since Jefferson Hope and his comrades had
departed from Salt Lake City. John Ferrier's heart was sore within him
when he thought of the young man's return, and of the impending loss of
his adopted child. Yet her bright and happy face reconciled him to
the arrangement more than any argument could have done. He had always
determined, deep down in his resolute heart, that nothing would ever
induce him to allow his daughter to wed a Mormon. Such a marriage he
regarded as no marriage at all, but as a shame and a disgrace. Whatever
he might think of the Mormon doctrines, upon that one point he was
inflexible. He had to seal his mouth on the subject, however, for to
express an unorthodox opinion was a dangerous matter in those days in
the Land of the Saints.

Yes, a dangerous matter--so dangerous that even the most saintly dared
only whisper their religious opinions with bated breath, lest something
which fell from their lips might be misconstrued, and bring down a
swift retribution upon them. The victims of persecution had now turned
persecutors on their own account, and persecutors of the most
terrible description. Not the Inquisition of Seville, nor the German
Vehm-gericht, nor the Secret Societies of Italy, were ever able to put
a more formidable machinery in motion than that which cast a cloud over
the State of Utah.

Its invisibility, and the mystery which was attached to it, made
this organization doubly terrible. It appeared to be omniscient and
omnipotent, and yet was neither seen nor heard. The man who held out
against the Church vanished away, and none knew whither he had gone or
what had befallen him. His wife and his children awaited him at home,
but no father ever returned to tell them how he had fared at the
hands of his secret judges. A rash word or a hasty act was followed
by annihilation, and yet none knew what the nature might be of this
terrible power which was suspended over them. No wonder that men
went about in fear and trembling, and that even in the heart of the
wilderness they dared not whisper the doubts which oppressed them.

At first this vague and terrible power was exercised only upon the
recalcitrants who, having embraced the Mormon faith, wished afterwards
to pervert or to abandon it. Soon, however, it took a wider range. The
supply of adult women was running short, and polygamy without a female
population on which to draw was a barren doctrine indeed. Strange
rumours began to be bandied about--rumours of murdered immigrants and
rifled camps in regions where Indians had never been seen. Fresh women
appeared in the harems of the Elders--women who pined and wept, and
bore upon their faces the traces of an unextinguishable horror. Belated
wanderers upon the mountains spoke of gangs of armed men, masked,
stealthy, and noiseless, who flitted by them in the darkness. These
tales and rumours took substance and shape, and were corroborated and
re-corroborated, until they resolved themselves into a definite name.
To this day, in the lonely ranches of the West, the name of the Danite
Band, or the Avenging Angels, is a sinister and an ill-omened one.

Fuller knowledge of the organization which produced such terrible
results served to increase rather than to lessen the horror which it
inspired in the minds of men. None knew who belonged to this ruthless
society. The names of the participators in the deeds of blood and
violence done under the name of religion were kept profoundly secret.
The very friend to whom you communicated your misgivings as to the
Prophet and his mission, might be one of those who would come forth at
night with fire and sword to exact a terrible reparation. Hence every
man feared his neighbour, and none spoke of the things which were
nearest his heart.

One fine morning, John Ferrier was about to set out to his wheatfields,
when he heard the click of the latch, and, looking through the window,
saw a stout, sandy-haired, middle-aged man coming up the pathway. His
heart leapt to his mouth, for this was none other than the great Brigham
Young himself. Full of trepidation--for he knew that such a visit boded
him little good--Ferrier ran to the door to greet the Mormon chief. The
latter, however, received his salutations coldly, and followed him with
a stern face into the sitting-room.

"Brother Ferrier," he said, taking a seat, and eyeing the farmer keenly
from under his light-coloured eyelashes, "the true believers have been
good friends to you. We picked you up when you were starving in the
desert, we shared our food with you, led you safe to the Chosen Valley,
gave you a goodly share of land, and allowed you to wax rich under our
protection. Is not this so?"

"It is so," answered John Ferrier.

"In return for all this we asked but one condition: that was, that you
should embrace the true faith, and conform in every way to its usages.
This you promised to do, and this, if common report says truly, you have
neglected."

"And how have I neglected it?" asked Ferrier, throwing out his hands in
expostulation. "Have I not given to the common fund? Have I not attended
at the Temple? Have I not----?"

"Where are your wives?" asked Young, looking round him. "Call them in,
that I may greet them."

"It is true that I have not married," Ferrier answered. "But women
were few, and there were many who had better claims than I. I was not a
lonely man: I had my daughter to attend to my wants."

"It is of that daughter that I would speak to you," said the leader
of the Mormons. "She has grown to be the flower of Utah, and has found
favour in the eyes of many who are high in the land."

John Ferrier groaned internally.

"There are stories of her which I would fain disbelieve--stories that
she is sealed to some Gentile. This must be the gossip of idle tongues.
What is the thirteenth rule in the code of the sainted Joseph Smith?
'Let every maiden of the true faith marry one of the elect; for if
she wed a Gentile, she commits a grievous sin.' This being so, it is
impossible that you, who profess the holy creed, should suffer your
daughter to violate it."

John Ferrier made no answer, but he played nervously with his
riding-whip.

"Upon this one point your whole faith shall be tested--so it has been
decided in the Sacred Council of Four. The girl is young, and we would
not have her wed grey hairs, neither would we deprive her of all
choice. We Elders have many heifers, [29] but our children must also
be provided. Stangerson has a son, and Drebber has a son, and either of
them would gladly welcome your daughter to their house. Let her choose
between them. They are young and rich, and of the true faith. What say
you to that?"

Ferrier remained silent for some little time with his brows knitted.

"You will give us time," he said at last. "My daughter is very
young--she is scarce of an age to marry."

"She shall have a month to choose," said Young, rising from his seat.
"At the end of that time she shall give her answer."

He was passing through the door, when he turned, with flushed face and
flashing eyes. "It were better for you, John Ferrier," he thundered,
"that you and she were now lying blanched skeletons upon the Sierra
Blanco, than that you should put your weak wills against the orders of
the Holy Four!"

With a threatening gesture of his hand, he turned from the door, and
Ferrier heard his heavy step scrunching along the shingly path.

He was still sitting with his elbows upon his knees, considering how he
should broach the matter to his daughter when a soft hand was laid upon
his, and looking up, he saw her standing beside him. One glance at her
pale, frightened face showed him that she had heard what had passed.

"I could not help it," she said, in answer to his look. "His voice rang
through the house. Oh, father, father, what shall we do?"

"Don't you scare yourself," he answered, drawing her to him, and passing
his broad, rough hand caressingly over her chestnut hair. "We'll fix it
up somehow or another. You don't find your fancy kind o' lessening for
this chap, do you?"

A sob and a squeeze of his hand was her only answer.

"No; of course not. I shouldn't care to hear you say you did. He's a
likely lad, and he's a Christian, which is more than these folk here, in
spite o' all their praying and preaching. There's a party starting for
Nevada to-morrow, and I'll manage to send him a message letting him know
the hole we are in. If I know anything o' that young man, he'll be back
here with a speed that would whip electro-telegraphs."

Lucy laughed through her tears at her father's description.

"When he comes, he will advise us for the best. But it is for you that
I am frightened, dear. One hears--one hears such dreadful stories about
those who oppose the Prophet: something terrible always happens to
them."

"But we haven't opposed him yet," her father answered. "It will be time
to look out for squalls when we do. We have a clear month before us; at
the end of that, I guess we had best shin out of Utah."

"Leave Utah!"

"That's about the size of it."

"But the farm?"

"We will raise as much as we can in money, and let the rest go. To tell
the truth, Lucy, it isn't the first time I have thought of doing it. I
don't care about knuckling under to any man, as these folk do to their
darned prophet. I'm a free-born American, and it's all new to me. Guess
I'm too old to learn. If he comes browsing about this farm, he might
chance to run up against a charge of buckshot travelling in the opposite
direction."

"But they won't let us leave," his daughter objected.

"Wait till Jefferson comes, and we'll soon manage that. In the meantime,
don't you fret yourself, my dearie, and don't get your eyes swelled up,
else he'll be walking into me when he sees you. There's nothing to be
afeared about, and there's no danger at all."

John Ferrier uttered these consoling remarks in a very confident tone,
but she could not help observing that he paid unusual care to the
fastening of the doors that night, and that he carefully cleaned and
loaded the rusty old shotgun which hung upon the wall of his bedroom.




CHAPTER IV. A FLIGHT FOR LIFE.


ON the morning which followed his interview with the Mormon Prophet,
John Ferrier went in to Salt Lake City, and having found his
acquaintance, who was bound for the Nevada Mountains, he entrusted him
with his message to Jefferson Hope. In it he told the young man of the
imminent danger which threatened them, and how necessary it was that he
should return. Having done thus he felt easier in his mind, and returned
home with a lighter heart.

As he approached his farm, he was surprised to see a horse hitched to
each of the posts of the gate. Still more surprised was he on entering
to find two young men in possession of his sitting-room. One, with a
long pale face, was leaning back in the rocking-chair, with his feet
cocked up upon the stove. The other, a bull-necked youth with coarse
bloated features, was standing in front of the window with his hands in
his pocket, whistling a popular hymn. Both of them nodded to Ferrier as
he entered, and the one in the rocking-chair commenced the conversation.

"Maybe you don't know us," he said. "This here is the son of Elder
Drebber, and I'm Joseph Stangerson, who travelled with you in the desert
when the Lord stretched out His hand and gathered you into the true
fold."

"As He will all the nations in His own good time," said the other in a
nasal voice; "He grindeth slowly but exceeding small."

John Ferrier bowed coldly. He had guessed who his visitors were.

"We have come," continued Stangerson, "at the advice of our fathers to
solicit the hand of your daughter for whichever of us may seem good to
you and to her. As I have but four wives and Brother Drebber here has
seven, it appears to me that my claim is the stronger one."

"Nay, nay, Brother Stangerson," cried the other; "the question is not
how many wives we have, but how many we can keep. My father has now
given over his mills to me, and I am the richer man."

"But my prospects are better," said the other, warmly. "When the
Lord removes my father, I shall have his tanning yard and his leather
factory. Then I am your elder, and am higher in the Church."

"It will be for the maiden to decide," rejoined young Drebber, smirking
at his own reflection in the glass. "We will leave it all to her
decision."

During this dialogue, John Ferrier had stood fuming in the doorway,
hardly able to keep his riding-whip from the backs of his two visitors.

"Look here," he said at last, striding up to them, "when my daughter
summons you, you can come, but until then I don't want to see your faces
again."

The two young Mormons stared at him in amazement. In their eyes this
competition between them for the maiden's hand was the highest of
honours both to her and her father.

"There are two ways out of the room," cried Ferrier; "there is the door,
and there is the window. Which do you care to use?"

His brown face looked so savage, and his gaunt hands so threatening,
that his visitors sprang to their feet and beat a hurried retreat. The
old farmer followed them to the door.

"Let me know when you have settled which it is to be," he said,
sardonically.

"You shall smart for this!" Stangerson cried, white with rage. "You have
defied the Prophet and the Council of Four. You shall rue it to the end
of your days."

"The hand of the Lord shall be heavy upon you," cried young Drebber; "He
will arise and smite you!"

"Then I'll start the smiting," exclaimed Ferrier furiously, and would
have rushed upstairs for his gun had not Lucy seized him by the arm and
restrained him. Before he could escape from her, the clatter of horses'
hoofs told him that they were beyond his reach.

"The young canting rascals!" he exclaimed, wiping the perspiration from
his forehead; "I would sooner see you in your grave, my girl, than the
wife of either of them."

"And so should I, father," she answered, with spirit; "but Jefferson
will soon be here."

"Yes. It will not be long before he comes. The sooner the better, for we
do not know what their next move may be."

It was, indeed, high time that someone capable of giving advice and
help should come to the aid of the sturdy old farmer and his adopted
daughter. In the whole history of the settlement there had never been
such a case of rank disobedience to the authority of the Elders. If
minor errors were punished so sternly, what would be the fate of this
arch rebel. Ferrier knew that his wealth and position would be of no
avail to him. Others as well known and as rich as himself had been
spirited away before now, and their goods given over to the Church. He
was a brave man, but he trembled at the vague, shadowy terrors which
hung over him. Any known danger he could face with a firm lip, but
this suspense was unnerving. He concealed his fears from his daughter,
however, and affected to make light of the whole matter, though she,
with the keen eye of love, saw plainly that he was ill at ease.

He expected that he would receive some message or remonstrance from
Young as to his conduct, and he was not mistaken, though it came in an
unlooked-for manner. Upon rising next morning he found, to his surprise,
a small square of paper pinned on to the coverlet of his bed just over
his chest. On it was printed, in bold straggling letters:--

"Twenty-nine days are given you for amendment, and then----"

The dash was more fear-inspiring than any threat could have been. How
this warning came into his room puzzled John Ferrier sorely, for his
servants slept in an outhouse, and the doors and windows had all been
secured. He crumpled the paper up and said nothing to his daughter, but
the incident struck a chill into his heart. The twenty-nine days were
evidently the balance of the month which Young had promised. What
strength or courage could avail against an enemy armed with such
mysterious powers? The hand which fastened that pin might have struck
him to the heart, and he could never have known who had slain him.

Still more shaken was he next morning. They had sat down to their
breakfast when Lucy with a cry of surprise pointed upwards. In the
centre of the ceiling was scrawled, with a burned stick apparently,
the number 28. To his daughter it was unintelligible, and he did not
enlighten her. That night he sat up with his gun and kept watch and
ward. He saw and he heard nothing, and yet in the morning a great 27 had
been painted upon the outside of his door.

Thus day followed day; and as sure as morning came he found that his
unseen enemies had kept their register, and had marked up in some
conspicuous position how many days were still left to him out of the
month of grace. Sometimes the fatal numbers appeared upon the walls,
sometimes upon the floors, occasionally they were on small placards
stuck upon the garden gate or the railings. With all his vigilance John
Ferrier could not discover whence these daily warnings proceeded. A
horror which was almost superstitious came upon him at the sight of
them. He became haggard and restless, and his eyes had the troubled look
of some hunted creature. He had but one hope in life now, and that was
for the arrival of the young hunter from Nevada.

Twenty had changed to fifteen and fifteen to ten, but there was no news
of the absentee. One by one the numbers dwindled down, and still there
came no sign of him. Whenever a horseman clattered down the road, or a
driver shouted at his team, the old farmer hurried to the gate thinking
that help had arrived at last. At last, when he saw five give way to
four and that again to three, he lost heart, and abandoned all hope of
escape. Single-handed, and with his limited knowledge of the mountains
which surrounded the settlement, he knew that he was powerless. The
more-frequented roads were strictly watched and guarded, and none could
pass along them without an order from the Council. Turn which way he
would, there appeared to be no avoiding the blow which hung over him.
Yet the old man never wavered in his resolution to part with life itself
before he consented to what he regarded as his daughter's dishonour.

He was sitting alone one evening pondering deeply over his troubles, and
searching vainly for some way out of them. That morning had shown the
figure 2 upon the wall of his house, and the next day would be the last
of the allotted time. What was to happen then? All manner of vague and
terrible fancies filled his imagination. And his daughter--what was to
become of her after he was gone? Was there no escape from the invisible
network which was drawn all round them. He sank his head upon the table
and sobbed at the thought of his own impotence.

What was that? In the silence he heard a gentle scratching sound--low,
but very distinct in the quiet of the night. It came from the door of
the house. Ferrier crept into the hall and listened intently. There
was a pause for a few moments, and then the low insidious sound was
repeated. Someone was evidently tapping very gently upon one of the
panels of the door. Was it some midnight assassin who had come to carry
out the murderous orders of the secret tribunal? Or was it some agent
who was marking up that the last day of grace had arrived. John Ferrier
felt that instant death would be better than the suspense which shook
his nerves and chilled his heart. Springing forward he drew the bolt and
threw the door open.

Outside all was calm and quiet. The night was fine, and the stars were
twinkling brightly overhead. The little front garden lay before the
farmer's eyes bounded by the fence and gate, but neither there nor on
the road was any human being to be seen. With a sigh of relief, Ferrier
looked to right and to left, until happening to glance straight down at
his own feet he saw to his astonishment a man lying flat upon his face
upon the ground, with arms and legs all asprawl.

So unnerved was he at the sight that he leaned up against the wall with
his hand to his throat to stifle his inclination to call out. His first
thought was that the prostrate figure was that of some wounded or dying
man, but as he watched it he saw it writhe along the ground and into the
hall with the rapidity and noiselessness of a serpent. Once within the
house the man sprang to his feet, closed the door, and revealed to the
astonished farmer the fierce face and resolute expression of Jefferson
Hope.

"Good God!" gasped John Ferrier. "How you scared me! Whatever made you
come in like that."

"Give me food," the other said, hoarsely. "I have had no time for bite
or sup for eight-and-forty hours." He flung himself upon the [21] cold
meat and bread which were still lying upon the table from his host's
supper, and devoured it voraciously. "Does Lucy bear up well?" he asked,
when he had satisfied his hunger.

"Yes. She does not know the danger," her father answered.

"That is well. The house is watched on every side. That is why I crawled
my way up to it. They may be darned sharp, but they're not quite sharp
enough to catch a Washoe hunter."

John Ferrier felt a different man now that he realized that he had
a devoted ally. He seized the young man's leathery hand and wrung it
cordially. "You're a man to be proud of," he said. "There are not many
who would come to share our danger and our troubles."

"You've hit it there, pard," the young hunter answered. "I have a
respect for you, but if you were alone in this business I'd think twice
before I put my head into such a hornet's nest. It's Lucy that brings me
here, and before harm comes on her I guess there will be one less o' the
Hope family in Utah."

"What are we to do?"

"To-morrow is your last day, and unless you act to-night you are lost.
I have a mule and two horses waiting in the Eagle Ravine. How much money
have you?"

"Two thousand dollars in gold, and five in notes."

"That will do. I have as much more to add to it. We must push for Carson
City through the mountains. You had best wake Lucy. It is as well that
the servants do not sleep in the house."

While Ferrier was absent, preparing his daughter for the approaching
journey, Jefferson Hope packed all the eatables that he could find into
a small parcel, and filled a stoneware jar with water, for he knew by
experience that the mountain wells were few and far between. He had
hardly completed his arrangements before the farmer returned with his
daughter all dressed and ready for a start. The greeting between the
lovers was warm, but brief, for minutes were precious, and there was
much to be done.

"We must make our start at once," said Jefferson Hope, speaking in a low
but resolute voice, like one who realizes the greatness of the peril,
but has steeled his heart to meet it. "The front and back entrances are
watched, but with caution we may get away through the side window and
across the fields. Once on the road we are only two miles from the
Ravine where the horses are waiting. By daybreak we should be half-way
through the mountains."

"What if we are stopped," asked Ferrier.

Hope slapped the revolver butt which protruded from the front of his
tunic. "If they are too many for us we shall take two or three of them
with us," he said with a sinister smile.

The lights inside the house had all been extinguished, and from the
darkened window Ferrier peered over the fields which had been his own,
and which he was now about to abandon for ever. He had long nerved
himself to the sacrifice, however, and the thought of the honour and
happiness of his daughter outweighed any regret at his ruined fortunes.
All looked so peaceful and happy, the rustling trees and the broad
silent stretch of grain-land, that it was difficult to realize that
the spirit of murder lurked through it all. Yet the white face and set
expression of the young hunter showed that in his approach to the house
he had seen enough to satisfy him upon that head.

Ferrier carried the bag of gold and notes, Jefferson Hope had the scanty
provisions and water, while Lucy had a small bundle containing a few
of her more valued possessions. Opening the window very slowly and
carefully, they waited until a dark cloud had somewhat obscured the
night, and then one by one passed through into the little garden. With
bated breath and crouching figures they stumbled across it, and gained
the shelter of the hedge, which they skirted until they came to the gap
which opened into the cornfields. They had just reached this point when
the young man seized his two companions and dragged them down into the
shadow, where they lay silent and trembling.

It was as well that his prairie training had given Jefferson Hope the
ears of a lynx. He and his friends had hardly crouched down before the
melancholy hooting of a mountain owl was heard within a few yards
of them, which was immediately answered by another hoot at a small
distance. At the same moment a vague shadowy figure emerged from the
gap for which they had been making, and uttered the plaintive signal cry
again, on which a second man appeared out of the obscurity.

"To-morrow at midnight," said the first who appeared to be in authority.
"When the Whip-poor-Will calls three times."

"It is well," returned the other. "Shall I tell Brother Drebber?"

"Pass it on to him, and from him to the others. Nine to seven!"

"Seven to five!" repeated the other, and the two figures flitted away
in different directions. Their concluding words had evidently been some
form of sign and countersign. The instant that their footsteps had died
away in the distance, Jefferson Hope sprang to his feet, and helping his
companions through the gap, led the way across the fields at the top
of his speed, supporting and half-carrying the girl when her strength
appeared to fail her.

"Hurry on! hurry on!" he gasped from time to time. "We are through the
line of sentinels. Everything depends on speed. Hurry on!"

Once on the high road they made rapid progress. Only once did they
meet anyone, and then they managed to slip into a field, and so avoid
recognition. Before reaching the town the hunter branched away into a
rugged and narrow footpath which led to the mountains. Two dark jagged
peaks loomed above them through the darkness, and the defile which led
between them was the Eagle Cañon in which the horses were awaiting them.
With unerring instinct Jefferson Hope picked his way among the great
boulders and along the bed of a dried-up watercourse, until he came to
the retired corner, screened with rocks, where the faithful animals had
been picketed. The girl was placed upon the mule, and old Ferrier upon
one of the horses, with his money-bag, while Jefferson Hope led the
other along the precipitous and dangerous path.

It was a bewildering route for anyone who was not accustomed to face
Nature in her wildest moods. On the one side a great crag towered up a
thousand feet or more, black, stern, and menacing, with long basaltic
columns upon its rugged surface like the ribs of some petrified monster.
On the other hand a wild chaos of boulders and debris made all advance
impossible. Between the two ran the irregular track, so narrow in places
that they had to travel in Indian file, and so rough that only practised
riders could have traversed it at all. Yet in spite of all dangers and
difficulties, the hearts of the fugitives were light within them,
for every step increased the distance between them and the terrible
despotism from which they were flying.

They soon had a proof, however, that they were still within the
jurisdiction of the Saints. They had reached the very wildest and most
desolate portion of the pass when the girl gave a startled cry, and
pointed upwards. On a rock which overlooked the track, showing out dark
and plain against the sky, there stood a solitary sentinel. He saw them
as soon as they perceived him, and his military challenge of "Who goes
there?" rang through the silent ravine.

"Travellers for Nevada," said Jefferson Hope, with his hand upon the
rifle which hung by his saddle.

They could see the lonely watcher fingering his gun, and peering down at
them as if dissatisfied at their reply.

"By whose permission?" he asked.

"The Holy Four," answered Ferrier. His Mormon experiences had taught him
that that was the highest authority to which he could refer.

"Nine from seven," cried the sentinel.

"Seven from five," returned Jefferson Hope promptly, remembering the
countersign which he had heard in the garden.

"Pass, and the Lord go with you," said the voice from above. Beyond his
post the path broadened out, and the horses were able to break into a
trot. Looking back, they could see the solitary watcher leaning upon
his gun, and knew that they had passed the outlying post of the chosen
people, and that freedom lay before them.




CHAPTER V. THE AVENGING ANGELS.


ALL night their course lay through intricate defiles and over irregular
and rock-strewn paths. More than once they lost their way, but Hope's
intimate knowledge of the mountains enabled them to regain the track
once more. When morning broke, a scene of marvellous though savage
beauty lay before them. In every direction the great snow-capped peaks
hemmed them in, peeping over each other's shoulders to the far horizon.
So steep were the rocky banks on either side of them, that the larch
and the pine seemed to be suspended over their heads, and to need only a
gust of wind to come hurtling down upon them. Nor was the fear entirely
an illusion, for the barren valley was thickly strewn with trees and
boulders which had fallen in a similar manner. Even as they passed,
a great rock came thundering down with a hoarse rattle which woke
the echoes in the silent gorges, and startled the weary horses into a
gallop.

As the sun rose slowly above the eastern horizon, the caps of the great
mountains lit up one after the other, like lamps at a festival, until
they were all ruddy and glowing. The magnificent spectacle cheered the
hearts of the three fugitives and gave them fresh energy. At a wild
torrent which swept out of a ravine they called a halt and watered their
horses, while they partook of a hasty breakfast. Lucy and her father
would fain have rested longer, but Jefferson Hope was inexorable. "They
will be upon our track by this time," he said. "Everything depends upon
our speed. Once safe in Carson we may rest for the remainder of our
lives."

During the whole of that day they struggled on through the defiles, and
by evening they calculated that they were more than thirty miles from
their enemies. At night-time they chose the base of a beetling crag,
where the rocks offered some protection from the chill wind, and there
huddled together for warmth, they enjoyed a few hours' sleep. Before
daybreak, however, they were up and on their way once more. They had
seen no signs of any pursuers, and Jefferson Hope began to think that
they were fairly out of the reach of the terrible organization whose
enmity they had incurred. He little knew how far that iron grasp could
reach, or how soon it was to close upon them and crush them.

About the middle of the second day of their flight their scanty store
of provisions began to run out. This gave the hunter little uneasiness,
however, for there was game to be had among the mountains, and he had
frequently before had to depend upon his rifle for the needs of life.
Choosing a sheltered nook, he piled together a few dried branches and
made a blazing fire, at which his companions might warm themselves, for
they were now nearly five thousand feet above the sea level, and the air
was bitter and keen. Having tethered the horses, and bade Lucy adieu,
he threw his gun over his shoulder, and set out in search of whatever
chance might throw in his way. Looking back he saw the old man and the
young girl crouching over the blazing fire, while the three animals
stood motionless in the back-ground. Then the intervening rocks hid them
from his view.

He walked for a couple of miles through one ravine after another without
success, though from the marks upon the bark of the trees, and other
indications, he judged that there were numerous bears in the vicinity.
At last, after two or three hours' fruitless search, he was thinking of
turning back in despair, when casting his eyes upwards he saw a sight
which sent a thrill of pleasure through his heart. On the edge of a
jutting pinnacle, three or four hundred feet above him, there stood a
creature somewhat resembling a sheep in appearance, but armed with a
pair of gigantic horns. The big-horn--for so it is called--was acting,
probably, as a guardian over a flock which were invisible to the hunter;
but fortunately it was heading in the opposite direction, and had not
perceived him. Lying on his face, he rested his rifle upon a rock, and
took a long and steady aim before drawing the trigger. The animal sprang
into the air, tottered for a moment upon the edge of the precipice, and
then came crashing down into the valley beneath.

The creature was too unwieldy to lift, so the hunter contented himself
with cutting away one haunch and part of the flank. With this trophy
over his shoulder, he hastened to retrace his steps, for the evening was
already drawing in. He had hardly started, however, before he realized
the difficulty which faced him. In his eagerness he had wandered far
past the ravines which were known to him, and it was no easy matter
to pick out the path which he had taken. The valley in which he found
himself divided and sub-divided into many gorges, which were so like
each other that it was impossible to distinguish one from the other.
He followed one for a mile or more until he came to a mountain torrent
which he was sure that he had never seen before. Convinced that he had
taken the wrong turn, he tried another, but with the same result. Night
was coming on rapidly, and it was almost dark before he at last found
himself in a defile which was familiar to him. Even then it was no easy
matter to keep to the right track, for the moon had not yet risen, and
the high cliffs on either side made the obscurity more profound. Weighed
down with his burden, and weary from his exertions, he stumbled along,
keeping up his heart by the reflection that every step brought him
nearer to Lucy, and that he carried with him enough to ensure them food
for the remainder of their journey.

He had now come to the mouth of the very defile in which he had left
them. Even in the darkness he could recognize the outline of the cliffs
which bounded it. They must, he reflected, be awaiting him anxiously,
for he had been absent nearly five hours. In the gladness of his heart
he put his hands to his mouth and made the glen re-echo to a loud halloo
as a signal that he was coming. He paused and listened for an answer.
None came save his own cry, which clattered up the dreary silent
ravines, and was borne back to his ears in countless repetitions. Again
he shouted, even louder than before, and again no whisper came back from
the friends whom he had left such a short time ago. A vague, nameless
dread came over him, and he hurried onwards frantically, dropping the
precious food in his agitation.

When he turned the corner, he came full in sight of the spot where the
fire had been lit. There was still a glowing pile of wood ashes there,
but it had evidently not been tended since his departure. The same
dead silence still reigned all round. With his fears all changed to
convictions, he hurried on. There was no living creature near the
remains of the fire: animals, man, maiden, all were gone. It was only
too clear that some sudden and terrible disaster had occurred during
his absence--a disaster which had embraced them all, and yet had left no
traces behind it.

Bewildered and stunned by this blow, Jefferson Hope felt his head spin
round, and had to lean upon his rifle to save himself from falling. He
was essentially a man of action, however, and speedily recovered from
his temporary impotence. Seizing a half-consumed piece of wood from the
smouldering fire, he blew it into a flame, and proceeded with its help
to examine the little camp. The ground was all stamped down by the feet
of horses, showing that a large party of mounted men had overtaken
the fugitives, and the direction of their tracks proved that they had
afterwards turned back to Salt Lake City. Had they carried back both of
his companions with them? Jefferson Hope had almost persuaded himself
that they must have done so, when his eye fell upon an object which made
every nerve of his body tingle within him. A little way on one side of
the camp was a low-lying heap of reddish soil, which had assuredly
not been there before. There was no mistaking it for anything but a
newly-dug grave. As the young hunter approached it, he perceived that a
stick had been planted on it, with a sheet of paper stuck in the cleft
fork of it. The inscription upon the paper was brief, but to the point:

                        JOHN FERRIER,
                 FORMERLY OF SALT LAKE CITY, [22]
                    Died August 4th, 1860.

The sturdy old man, whom he had left so short a time before, was gone,
then, and this was all his epitaph. Jefferson Hope looked wildly round
to see if there was a second grave, but there was no sign of one. Lucy
had been carried back by their terrible pursuers to fulfil her original
destiny, by becoming one of the harem of the Elder's son. As the young
fellow realized the certainty of her fate, and his own powerlessness to
prevent it, he wished that he, too, was lying with the old farmer in his
last silent resting-place.

Again, however, his active spirit shook off the lethargy which springs
from despair. If there was nothing else left to him, he could at least
devote his life to revenge. With indomitable patience and perseverance,
Jefferson Hope possessed also a power of sustained vindictiveness, which
he may have learned from the Indians amongst whom he had lived. As he
stood by the desolate fire, he felt that the only one thing which could
assuage his grief would be thorough and complete retribution, brought
by his own hand upon his enemies. His strong will and untiring energy
should, he determined, be devoted to that one end. With a grim, white
face, he retraced his steps to where he had dropped the food, and having
stirred up the smouldering fire, he cooked enough to last him for a
few days. This he made up into a bundle, and, tired as he was, he
set himself to walk back through the mountains upon the track of the
avenging angels.

For five days he toiled footsore and weary through the defiles which he
had already traversed on horseback. At night he flung himself down among
the rocks, and snatched a few hours of sleep; but before daybreak he was
always well on his way. On the sixth day, he reached the Eagle Cañon,
from which they had commenced their ill-fated flight. Thence he could
look down upon the home of the saints. Worn and exhausted, he leaned
upon his rifle and shook his gaunt hand fiercely at the silent
widespread city beneath him. As he looked at it, he observed that
there were flags in some of the principal streets, and other signs of
festivity. He was still speculating as to what this might mean when he
heard the clatter of horse's hoofs, and saw a mounted man riding towards
him. As he approached, he recognized him as a Mormon named Cowper, to
whom he had rendered services at different times. He therefore accosted
him when he got up to him, with the object of finding out what Lucy
Ferrier's fate had been.

"I am Jefferson Hope," he said. "You remember me."

The Mormon looked at him with undisguised astonishment--indeed, it was
difficult to recognize in this tattered, unkempt wanderer, with ghastly
white face and fierce, wild eyes, the spruce young hunter of former
days. Having, however, at last, satisfied himself as to his identity,
the man's surprise changed to consternation.

"You are mad to come here," he cried. "It is as much as my own life is
worth to be seen talking with you. There is a warrant against you from
the Holy Four for assisting the Ferriers away."

"I don't fear them, or their warrant," Hope said, earnestly. "You must
know something of this matter, Cowper. I conjure you by everything you
hold dear to answer a few questions. We have always been friends. For
God's sake, don't refuse to answer me."

"What is it?" the Mormon asked uneasily. "Be quick. The very rocks have
ears and the trees eyes."

"What has become of Lucy Ferrier?"

"She was married yesterday to young Drebber. Hold up, man, hold up, you
have no life left in you."

"Don't mind me," said Hope faintly. He was white to the very lips, and
had sunk down on the stone against which he had been leaning. "Married,
you say?"

"Married yesterday--that's what those flags are for on the Endowment
House. There was some words between young Drebber and young Stangerson
as to which was to have her. They'd both been in the party that followed
them, and Stangerson had shot her father, which seemed to give him the
best claim; but when they argued it out in council, Drebber's party was
the stronger, so the Prophet gave her over to him. No one won't have
her very long though, for I saw death in her face yesterday. She is more
like a ghost than a woman. Are you off, then?"

"Yes, I am off," said Jefferson Hope, who had risen from his seat. His
face might have been chiselled out of marble, so hard and set was its
expression, while its eyes glowed with a baleful light.

"Where are you going?"

"Never mind," he answered; and, slinging his weapon over his shoulder,
strode off down the gorge and so away into the heart of the mountains to
the haunts of the wild beasts. Amongst them all there was none so fierce
and so dangerous as himself.

The prediction of the Mormon was only too well fulfilled. Whether it was
the terrible death of her father or the effects of the hateful marriage
into which she had been forced, poor Lucy never held up her head again,
but pined away and died within a month. Her sottish husband, who had
married her principally for the sake of John Ferrier's property, did not
affect any great grief at his bereavement; but his other wives mourned
over her, and sat up with her the night before the burial, as is the
Mormon custom. They were grouped round the bier in the early hours of
the morning, when, to their inexpressible fear and astonishment,
the door was flung open, and a savage-looking, weather-beaten man in
tattered garments strode into the room. Without a glance or a word to
the cowering women, he walked up to the white silent figure which had
once contained the pure soul of Lucy Ferrier. Stooping over her, he
pressed his lips reverently to her cold forehead, and then, snatching
up her hand, he took the wedding-ring from her finger. "She shall not be
buried in that," he cried with a fierce snarl, and before an alarm could
be raised sprang down the stairs and was gone. So strange and so brief
was the episode, that the watchers might have found it hard to believe
it themselves or persuade other people of it, had it not been for the
undeniable fact that the circlet of gold which marked her as having been
a bride had disappeared.

For some months Jefferson Hope lingered among the mountains, leading
a strange wild life, and nursing in his heart the fierce desire for
vengeance which possessed him. Tales were told in the City of the weird
figure which was seen prowling about the suburbs, and which haunted
the lonely mountain gorges. Once a bullet whistled through Stangerson's
window and flattened itself upon the wall within a foot of him. On
another occasion, as Drebber passed under a cliff a great boulder
crashed down on him, and he only escaped a terrible death by throwing
himself upon his face. The two young Mormons were not long in
discovering the reason of these attempts upon their lives, and led
repeated expeditions into the mountains in the hope of capturing or
killing their enemy, but always without success. Then they adopted the
precaution of never going out alone or after nightfall, and of having
their houses guarded. After a time they were able to relax these
measures, for nothing was either heard or seen of their opponent, and
they hoped that time had cooled his vindictiveness.

Far from doing so, it had, if anything, augmented it. The hunter's mind
was of a hard, unyielding nature, and the predominant idea of revenge
had taken such complete possession of it that there was no room for
any other emotion. He was, however, above all things practical. He soon
realized that even his iron constitution could not stand the incessant
strain which he was putting upon it. Exposure and want of wholesome food
were wearing him out. If he died like a dog among the mountains, what
was to become of his revenge then? And yet such a death was sure to
overtake him if he persisted. He felt that that was to play his enemy's
game, so he reluctantly returned to the old Nevada mines, there to
recruit his health and to amass money enough to allow him to pursue his
object without privation.

His intention had been to be absent a year at the most, but a
combination of unforeseen circumstances prevented his leaving the mines
for nearly five. At the end of that time, however, his memory of
his wrongs and his craving for revenge were quite as keen as on that
memorable night when he had stood by John Ferrier's grave. Disguised,
and under an assumed name, he returned to Salt Lake City, careless
what became of his own life, as long as he obtained what he knew to
be justice. There he found evil tidings awaiting him. There had been a
schism among the Chosen People a few months before, some of the younger
members of the Church having rebelled against the authority of the
Elders, and the result had been the secession of a certain number of the
malcontents, who had left Utah and become Gentiles. Among these had been
Drebber and Stangerson; and no one knew whither they had gone. Rumour
reported that Drebber had managed to convert a large part of his
property into money, and that he had departed a wealthy man, while his
companion, Stangerson, was comparatively poor. There was no clue at all,
however, as to their whereabouts.

Many a man, however vindictive, would have abandoned all thought of
revenge in the face of such a difficulty, but Jefferson Hope never
faltered for a moment. With the small competence he possessed, eked out
by such employment as he could pick up, he travelled from town to town
through the United States in quest of his enemies. Year passed into
year, his black hair turned grizzled, but still he wandered on, a human
bloodhound, with his mind wholly set upon the one object upon which he
had devoted his life. At last his perseverance was rewarded. It was
but a glance of a face in a window, but that one glance told him that
Cleveland in Ohio possessed the men whom he was in pursuit of. He
returned to his miserable lodgings with his plan of vengeance all
arranged. It chanced, however, that Drebber, looking from his window,
had recognized the vagrant in the street, and had read murder in
his eyes. He hurried before a justice of the peace, accompanied by
Stangerson, who had become his private secretary, and represented to him
that they were in danger of their lives from the jealousy and hatred of
an old rival. That evening Jefferson Hope was taken into custody, and
not being able to find sureties, was detained for some weeks. When at
last he was liberated, it was only to find that Drebber's house was
deserted, and that he and his secretary had departed for Europe.

Again the avenger had been foiled, and again his concentrated hatred
urged him to continue the pursuit. Funds were wanting, however, and
for some time he had to return to work, saving every dollar for his
approaching journey. At last, having collected enough to keep life in
him, he departed for Europe, and tracked his enemies from city to
city, working his way in any menial capacity, but never overtaking the
fugitives. When he reached St. Petersburg they had departed for Paris;
and when he followed them there he learned that they had just set off
for Copenhagen. At the Danish capital he was again a few days late, for
they had journeyed on to London, where he at last succeeded in running
them to earth. As to what occurred there, we cannot do better than quote
the old hunter's own account, as duly recorded in Dr. Watson's Journal,
to which we are already under such obligations.




CHAPTER VI. A CONTINUATION OF THE REMINISCENCES OF JOHN WATSON, M.D.


OUR prisoner's furious resistance did not apparently indicate any
ferocity in his disposition towards ourselves, for on finding himself
powerless, he smiled in an affable manner, and expressed his hopes that
he had not hurt any of us in the scuffle. "I guess you're going to take
me to the police-station," he remarked to Sherlock Holmes. "My cab's at
the door. If you'll loose my legs I'll walk down to it. I'm not so light
to lift as I used to be."

Gregson and Lestrade exchanged glances as if they thought this
proposition rather a bold one; but Holmes at once took the prisoner at
his word, and loosened the towel which we had bound round his ancles.
[23] He rose and stretched his legs, as though to assure himself that
they were free once more. I remember that I thought to myself, as I eyed
him, that I had seldom seen a more powerfully built man; and his dark
sunburned face bore an expression of determination and energy which was
as formidable as his personal strength.

"If there's a vacant place for a chief of the police, I reckon you
are the man for it," he said, gazing with undisguised admiration at my
fellow-lodger. "The way you kept on my trail was a caution."

"You had better come with me," said Holmes to the two detectives.

"I can drive you," said Lestrade.

"Good! and Gregson can come inside with me. You too, Doctor, you have
taken an interest in the case and may as well stick to us."

I assented gladly, and we all descended together. Our prisoner made no
attempt at escape, but stepped calmly into the cab which had been his,
and we followed him. Lestrade mounted the box, whipped up the horse, and
brought us in a very short time to our destination. We were ushered into
a small chamber where a police Inspector noted down our prisoner's name
and the names of the men with whose murder he had been charged. The
official was a white-faced unemotional man, who went through his
duties in a dull mechanical way. "The prisoner will be put before the
magistrates in the course of the week," he said; "in the mean time, Mr.
Jefferson Hope, have you anything that you wish to say? I must warn you
that your words will be taken down, and may be used against you."

"I've got a good deal to say," our prisoner said slowly. "I want to tell
you gentlemen all about it."

"Hadn't you better reserve that for your trial?" asked the Inspector.

"I may never be tried," he answered. "You needn't look startled. It
isn't suicide I am thinking of. Are you a Doctor?" He turned his fierce
dark eyes upon me as he asked this last question.

"Yes; I am," I answered.

"Then put your hand here," he said, with a smile, motioning with his
manacled wrists towards his chest.

I did so; and became at once conscious of an extraordinary throbbing and
commotion which was going on inside. The walls of his chest seemed to
thrill and quiver as a frail building would do inside when some powerful
engine was at work. In the silence of the room I could hear a dull
humming and buzzing noise which proceeded from the same source.

"Why," I cried, "you have an aortic aneurism!"

"That's what they call it," he said, placidly. "I went to a Doctor last
week about it, and he told me that it is bound to burst before many days
passed. It has been getting worse for years. I got it from over-exposure
and under-feeding among the Salt Lake Mountains. I've done my work now,
and I don't care how soon I go, but I should like to leave some account
of the business behind me. I don't want to be remembered as a common
cut-throat."

The Inspector and the two detectives had a hurried discussion as to the
advisability of allowing him to tell his story.

"Do you consider, Doctor, that there is immediate danger?" the former
asked, [24]

"Most certainly there is," I answered.

"In that case it is clearly our duty, in the interests of justice, to
take his statement," said the Inspector. "You are at liberty, sir, to
give your account, which I again warn you will be taken down."

"I'll sit down, with your leave," the prisoner said, suiting the action
to the word. "This aneurism of mine makes me easily tired, and the
tussle we had half an hour ago has not mended matters. I'm on the brink
of the grave, and I am not likely to lie to you. Every word I say is the
absolute truth, and how you use it is a matter of no consequence to me."

With these words, Jefferson Hope leaned back in his chair and began
the following remarkable statement. He spoke in a calm and methodical
manner, as though the events which he narrated were commonplace enough.
I can vouch for the accuracy of the subjoined account, for I have had
access to Lestrade's note-book, in which the prisoner's words were taken
down exactly as they were uttered.

"It don't much matter to you why I hated these men," he said; "it's
enough that they were guilty of the death of two human beings--a father
and a daughter--and that they had, therefore, forfeited their own
lives. After the lapse of time that has passed since their crime, it was
impossible for me to secure a conviction against them in any court. I
knew of their guilt though, and I determined that I should be judge,
jury, and executioner all rolled into one. You'd have done the same, if
you have any manhood in you, if you had been in my place.

"That girl that I spoke of was to have married me twenty years ago. She
was forced into marrying that same Drebber, and broke her heart over
it. I took the marriage ring from her dead finger, and I vowed that his
dying eyes should rest upon that very ring, and that his last thoughts
should be of the crime for which he was punished. I have carried
it about with me, and have followed him and his accomplice over two
continents until I caught them. They thought to tire me out, but they
could not do it. If I die to-morrow, as is likely enough, I die knowing
that my work in this world is done, and well done. They have perished,
and by my hand. There is nothing left for me to hope for, or to desire.

"They were rich and I was poor, so that it was no easy matter for me to
follow them. When I got to London my pocket was about empty, and I found
that I must turn my hand to something for my living. Driving and riding
are as natural to me as walking, so I applied at a cabowner's office,
and soon got employment. I was to bring a certain sum a week to the
owner, and whatever was over that I might keep for myself. There was
seldom much over, but I managed to scrape along somehow. The hardest job
was to learn my way about, for I reckon that of all the mazes that ever
were contrived, this city is the most confusing. I had a map beside me
though, and when once I had spotted the principal hotels and stations, I
got on pretty well.

"It was some time before I found out where my two gentlemen were living;
but I inquired and inquired until at last I dropped across them. They
were at a boarding-house at Camberwell, over on the other side of the
river. When once I found them out I knew that I had them at my mercy. I
had grown my beard, and there was no chance of their recognizing me.
I would dog them and follow them until I saw my opportunity. I was
determined that they should not escape me again.

"They were very near doing it for all that. Go where they would about
London, I was always at their heels. Sometimes I followed them on my
cab, and sometimes on foot, but the former was the best, for then they
could not get away from me. It was only early in the morning or late
at night that I could earn anything, so that I began to get behind hand
with my employer. I did not mind that, however, as long as I could lay
my hand upon the men I wanted.

"They were very cunning, though. They must have thought that there was
some chance of their being followed, for they would never go out alone,
and never after nightfall. During two weeks I drove behind them every
day, and never once saw them separate. Drebber himself was drunk half
the time, but Stangerson was not to be caught napping. I watched them
late and early, but never saw the ghost of a chance; but I was not
discouraged, for something told me that the hour had almost come. My
only fear was that this thing in my chest might burst a little too soon
and leave my work undone.

"At last, one evening I was driving up and down Torquay Terrace, as the
street was called in which they boarded, when I saw a cab drive up to
their door. Presently some luggage was brought out, and after a time
Drebber and Stangerson followed it, and drove off. I whipped up my horse
and kept within sight of them, feeling very ill at ease, for I feared
that they were going to shift their quarters. At Euston Station they
got out, and I left a boy to hold my horse, and followed them on to the
platform. I heard them ask for the Liverpool train, and the guard answer
that one had just gone and there would not be another for some hours.
Stangerson seemed to be put out at that, but Drebber was rather pleased
than otherwise. I got so close to them in the bustle that I could hear
every word that passed between them. Drebber said that he had a little
business of his own to do, and that if the other would wait for him he
would soon rejoin him. His companion remonstrated with him, and reminded
him that they had resolved to stick together. Drebber answered that the
matter was a delicate one, and that he must go alone. I could not catch
what Stangerson said to that, but the other burst out swearing, and
reminded him that he was nothing more than his paid servant, and that he
must not presume to dictate to him. On that the Secretary gave it up
as a bad job, and simply bargained with him that if he missed the last
train he should rejoin him at Halliday's Private Hotel; to which Drebber
answered that he would be back on the platform before eleven, and made
his way out of the station.

"The moment for which I had waited so long had at last come. I had my
enemies within my power. Together they could protect each other,
but singly they were at my mercy. I did not act, however, with undue
precipitation. My plans were already formed. There is no satisfaction in
vengeance unless the offender has time to realize who it is that strikes
him, and why retribution has come upon him. I had my plans arranged by
which I should have the opportunity of making the man who had wronged me
understand that his old sin had found him out. It chanced that some days
before a gentleman who had been engaged in looking over some houses in
the Brixton Road had dropped the key of one of them in my carriage. It
was claimed that same evening, and returned; but in the interval I had
taken a moulding of it, and had a duplicate constructed. By means of
this I had access to at least one spot in this great city where I could
rely upon being free from interruption. How to get Drebber to that house
was the difficult problem which I had now to solve.

"He walked down the road and went into one or two liquor shops, staying
for nearly half-an-hour in the last of them. When he came out he
staggered in his walk, and was evidently pretty well on. There was a
hansom just in front of me, and he hailed it. I followed it so close
that the nose of my horse was within a yard of his driver the whole way.
We rattled across Waterloo Bridge and through miles of streets, until,
to my astonishment, we found ourselves back in the Terrace in which he
had boarded. I could not imagine what his intention was in returning
there; but I went on and pulled up my cab a hundred yards or so from
the house. He entered it, and his hansom drove away. Give me a glass of
water, if you please. My mouth gets dry with the talking."

I handed him the glass, and he drank it down.

"That's better," he said. "Well, I waited for a quarter of an hour, or
more, when suddenly there came a noise like people struggling inside the
house. Next moment the door was flung open and two men appeared, one of
whom was Drebber, and the other was a young chap whom I had never seen
before. This fellow had Drebber by the collar, and when they came to
the head of the steps he gave him a shove and a kick which sent him half
across the road. 'You hound,' he cried, shaking his stick at him; 'I'll
teach you to insult an honest girl!' He was so hot that I think he would
have thrashed Drebber with his cudgel, only that the cur staggered away
down the road as fast as his legs would carry him. He ran as far as the
corner, and then, seeing my cab, he hailed me and jumped in. 'Drive me
to Halliday's Private Hotel,' said he.

"When I had him fairly inside my cab, my heart jumped so with joy that
I feared lest at this last moment my aneurism might go wrong. I drove
along slowly, weighing in my own mind what it was best to do. I might
take him right out into the country, and there in some deserted lane
have my last interview with him. I had almost decided upon this, when he
solved the problem for me. The craze for drink had seized him again, and
he ordered me to pull up outside a gin palace. He went in, leaving word
that I should wait for him. There he remained until closing time, and
when he came out he was so far gone that I knew the game was in my own
hands.

"Don't imagine that I intended to kill him in cold blood. It would only
have been rigid justice if I had done so, but I could not bring myself
to do it. I had long determined that he should have a show for his life
if he chose to take advantage of it. Among the many billets which I
have filled in America during my wandering life, I was once janitor and
sweeper out of the laboratory at York College. One day the professor was
lecturing on poisions, [25] and he showed his students some alkaloid,
as he called it, which he had extracted from some South American arrow
poison, and which was so powerful that the least grain meant instant
death. I spotted the bottle in which this preparation was kept, and when
they were all gone, I helped myself to a little of it. I was a fairly
good dispenser, so I worked this alkaloid into small, soluble pills, and
each pill I put in a box with a similar pill made without the poison.
I determined at the time that when I had my chance, my gentlemen should
each have a draw out of one of these boxes, while I ate the pill that
remained. It would be quite as deadly, and a good deal less noisy than
firing across a handkerchief. From that day I had always my pill boxes
about with me, and the time had now come when I was to use them.

"It was nearer one than twelve, and a wild, bleak night, blowing hard
and raining in torrents. Dismal as it was outside, I was glad within--so
glad that I could have shouted out from pure exultation. If any of you
gentlemen have ever pined for a thing, and longed for it during twenty
long years, and then suddenly found it within your reach, you would
understand my feelings. I lit a cigar, and puffed at it to steady my
nerves, but my hands were trembling, and my temples throbbing with
excitement. As I drove, I could see old John Ferrier and sweet Lucy
looking at me out of the darkness and smiling at me, just as plain as I
see you all in this room. All the way they were ahead of me, one on each
side of the horse until I pulled up at the house in the Brixton Road.

"There was not a soul to be seen, nor a sound to be heard, except the
dripping of the rain. When I looked in at the window, I found Drebber
all huddled together in a drunken sleep. I shook him by the arm, 'It's
time to get out,' I said.

"'All right, cabby,' said he.

"I suppose he thought we had come to the hotel that he had mentioned,
for he got out without another word, and followed me down the garden.
I had to walk beside him to keep him steady, for he was still a little
top-heavy. When we came to the door, I opened it, and led him into the
front room. I give you my word that all the way, the father and the
daughter were walking in front of us.

"'It's infernally dark,' said he, stamping about.

"'We'll soon have a light,' I said, striking a match and putting it to
a wax candle which I had brought with me. 'Now, Enoch Drebber,' I
continued, turning to him, and holding the light to my own face, 'who am
I?'

"He gazed at me with bleared, drunken eyes for a moment, and then I
saw a horror spring up in them, and convulse his whole features, which
showed me that he knew me. He staggered back with a livid face, and I
saw the perspiration break out upon his brow, while his teeth chattered
in his head. At the sight, I leaned my back against the door and laughed
loud and long. I had always known that vengeance would be sweet, but I
had never hoped for the contentment of soul which now possessed me.

"'You dog!' I said; 'I have hunted you from Salt Lake City to St.
Petersburg, and you have always escaped me. Now, at last your wanderings
have come to an end, for either you or I shall never see to-morrow's sun
rise.' He shrunk still further away as I spoke, and I could see on his
face that he thought I was mad. So I was for the time. The pulses in my
temples beat like sledge-hammers, and I believe I would have had a fit
of some sort if the blood had not gushed from my nose and relieved me.

"'What do you think of Lucy Ferrier now?' I cried, locking the door, and
shaking the key in his face. 'Punishment has been slow in coming, but it
has overtaken you at last.' I saw his coward lips tremble as I spoke. He
would have begged for his life, but he knew well that it was useless.

"'Would you murder me?' he stammered.

"'There is no murder,' I answered. 'Who talks of murdering a mad dog?
What mercy had you upon my poor darling, when you dragged her from her
slaughtered father, and bore her away to your accursed and shameless
harem.'

"'It was not I who killed her father,' he cried.

"'But it was you who broke her innocent heart,' I shrieked, thrusting
the box before him. 'Let the high God judge between us. Choose and
eat. There is death in one and life in the other. I shall take what you
leave. Let us see if there is justice upon the earth, or if we are ruled
by chance.'

"He cowered away with wild cries and prayers for mercy, but I drew my
knife and held it to his throat until he had obeyed me. Then I swallowed
the other, and we stood facing one another in silence for a minute or
more, waiting to see which was to live and which was to die. Shall I
ever forget the look which came over his face when the first warning
pangs told him that the poison was in his system? I laughed as I saw
it, and held Lucy's marriage ring in front of his eyes. It was but for
a moment, for the action of the alkaloid is rapid. A spasm of pain
contorted his features; he threw his hands out in front of him,
staggered, and then, with a hoarse cry, fell heavily upon the floor. I
turned him over with my foot, and placed my hand upon his heart. There
was no movement. He was dead!

"The blood had been streaming from my nose, but I had taken no notice of
it. I don't know what it was that put it into my head to write upon the
wall with it. Perhaps it was some mischievous idea of setting the police
upon a wrong track, for I felt light-hearted and cheerful. I remembered
a German being found in New York with RACHE written up above him, and it
was argued at the time in the newspapers that the secret societies must
have done it. I guessed that what puzzled the New Yorkers would puzzle
the Londoners, so I dipped my finger in my own blood and printed it on
a convenient place on the wall. Then I walked down to my cab and found
that there was nobody about, and that the night was still very wild. I
had driven some distance when I put my hand into the pocket in which
I usually kept Lucy's ring, and found that it was not there. I was
thunderstruck at this, for it was the only memento that I had of her.
Thinking that I might have dropped it when I stooped over Drebber's
body, I drove back, and leaving my cab in a side street, I went boldly
up to the house--for I was ready to dare anything rather than lose
the ring. When I arrived there, I walked right into the arms of a
police-officer who was coming out, and only managed to disarm his
suspicions by pretending to be hopelessly drunk.

"That was how Enoch Drebber came to his end. All I had to do then was
to do as much for Stangerson, and so pay off John Ferrier's debt. I knew
that he was staying at Halliday's Private Hotel, and I hung about all
day, but he never came out. [26] fancy that he suspected something when
Drebber failed to put in an appearance. He was cunning, was Stangerson,
and always on his guard. If he thought he could keep me off by staying
indoors he was very much mistaken. I soon found out which was the window
of his bedroom, and early next morning I took advantage of some ladders
which were lying in the lane behind the hotel, and so made my way into
his room in the grey of the dawn. I woke him up and told him that the
hour had come when he was to answer for the life he had taken so long
before. I described Drebber's death to him, and I gave him the same
choice of the poisoned pills. Instead of grasping at the chance of
safety which that offered him, he sprang from his bed and flew at my
throat. In self-defence I stabbed him to the heart. It would have been
the same in any case, for Providence would never have allowed his guilty
hand to pick out anything but the poison.

"I have little more to say, and it's as well, for I am about done up.
I went on cabbing it for a day or so, intending to keep at it until I
could save enough to take me back to America. I was standing in the
yard when a ragged youngster asked if there was a cabby there called
Jefferson Hope, and said that his cab was wanted by a gentleman at 221B,
Baker Street. I went round, suspecting no harm, and the next thing I
knew, this young man here had the bracelets on my wrists, and as neatly
snackled [27] as ever I saw in my life. That's the whole of my story,
gentlemen. You may consider me to be a murderer; but I hold that I am
just as much an officer of justice as you are."

So thrilling had the man's narrative been, and his manner was so
impressive that we had sat silent and absorbed. Even the professional
detectives, _blasé_ as they were in every detail of crime, appeared to
be keenly interested in the man's story. When he finished we sat for
some minutes in a stillness which was only broken by the scratching
of Lestrade's pencil as he gave the finishing touches to his shorthand
account.

"There is only one point on which I should like a little more
information," Sherlock Holmes said at last. "Who was your accomplice who
came for the ring which I advertised?"

The prisoner winked at my friend jocosely. "I can tell my own secrets,"
he said, "but I don't get other people into trouble. I saw your
advertisement, and I thought it might be a plant, or it might be the
ring which I wanted. My friend volunteered to go and see. I think you'll
own he did it smartly."

"Not a doubt of that," said Holmes heartily.

"Now, gentlemen," the Inspector remarked gravely, "the forms of the law
must be complied with. On Thursday the prisoner will be brought before
the magistrates, and your attendance will be required. Until then I will
be responsible for him." He rang the bell as he spoke, and Jefferson
Hope was led off by a couple of warders, while my friend and I made our
way out of the Station and took a cab back to Baker Street.




CHAPTER VII. THE CONCLUSION.


WE had all been warned to appear before the magistrates upon the
Thursday; but when the Thursday came there was no occasion for our
testimony. A higher Judge had taken the matter in hand, and Jefferson
Hope had been summoned before a tribunal where strict justice would
be meted out to him. On the very night after his capture the aneurism
burst, and he was found in the morning stretched upon the floor of the
cell, with a placid smile upon his face, as though he had been able
in his dying moments to look back upon a useful life, and on work well
done.

"Gregson and Lestrade will be wild about his death," Holmes remarked, as
we chatted it over next evening. "Where will their grand advertisement
be now?"

"I don't see that they had very much to do with his capture," I
answered.

"What you do in this world is a matter of no consequence," returned my
companion, bitterly. "The question is, what can you make people believe
that you have done. Never mind," he continued, more brightly, after a
pause. "I would not have missed the investigation for anything. There
has been no better case within my recollection. Simple as it was, there
were several most instructive points about it."

"Simple!" I ejaculated.

"Well, really, it can hardly be described as otherwise," said Sherlock
Holmes, smiling at my surprise. "The proof of its intrinsic simplicity
is, that without any help save a few very ordinary deductions I was able
to lay my hand upon the criminal within three days."

"That is true," said I.

"I have already explained to you that what is out of the common is
usually a guide rather than a hindrance. In solving a problem of this
sort, the grand thing is to be able to reason backwards. That is a very
useful accomplishment, and a very easy one, but people do not practise
it much. In the every-day affairs of life it is more useful to reason
forwards, and so the other comes to be neglected. There are fifty who
can reason synthetically for one who can reason analytically."

"I confess," said I, "that I do not quite follow you."

"I hardly expected that you would. Let me see if I can make it clearer.
Most people, if you describe a train of events to them, will tell you
what the result would be. They can put those events together in their
minds, and argue from them that something will come to pass. There are
few people, however, who, if you told them a result, would be able to
evolve from their own inner consciousness what the steps were which led
up to that result. This power is what I mean when I talk of reasoning
backwards, or analytically."

"I understand," said I.

"Now this was a case in which you were given the result and had to
find everything else for yourself. Now let me endeavour to show you the
different steps in my reasoning. To begin at the beginning. I approached
the house, as you know, on foot, and with my mind entirely free from all
impressions. I naturally began by examining the roadway, and there, as I
have already explained to you, I saw clearly the marks of a cab, which,
I ascertained by inquiry, must have been there during the night. I
satisfied myself that it was a cab and not a private carriage by the
narrow gauge of the wheels. The ordinary London growler is considerably
less wide than a gentleman's brougham.

"This was the first point gained. I then walked slowly down the garden
path, which happened to be composed of a clay soil, peculiarly suitable
for taking impressions. No doubt it appeared to you to be a mere
trampled line of slush, but to my trained eyes every mark upon its
surface had a meaning. There is no branch of detective science which
is so important and so much neglected as the art of tracing footsteps.
Happily, I have always laid great stress upon it, and much practice
has made it second nature to me. I saw the heavy footmarks of the
constables, but I saw also the track of the two men who had first passed
through the garden. It was easy to tell that they had been before the
others, because in places their marks had been entirely obliterated by
the others coming upon the top of them. In this way my second link was
formed, which told me that the nocturnal visitors were two in number,
one remarkable for his height (as I calculated from the length of his
stride), and the other fashionably dressed, to judge from the small and
elegant impression left by his boots.

"On entering the house this last inference was confirmed. My well-booted
man lay before me. The tall one, then, had done the murder, if murder
there was. There was no wound upon the dead man's person, but the
agitated expression upon his face assured me that he had foreseen his
fate before it came upon him. Men who die from heart disease, or any
sudden natural cause, never by any chance exhibit agitation upon their
features. Having sniffed the dead man's lips I detected a slightly sour
smell, and I came to the conclusion that he had had poison forced upon
him. Again, I argued that it had been forced upon him from the hatred
and fear expressed upon his face. By the method of exclusion, I had
arrived at this result, for no other hypothesis would meet the facts.
Do not imagine that it was a very unheard of idea. The forcible
administration of poison is by no means a new thing in criminal annals.
The cases of Dolsky in Odessa, and of Leturier in Montpellier, will
occur at once to any toxicologist.

"And now came the great question as to the reason why. Robbery had not
been the object of the murder, for nothing was taken. Was it politics,
then, or was it a woman? That was the question which confronted me.
I was inclined from the first to the latter supposition. Political
assassins are only too glad to do their work and to fly. This murder
had, on the contrary, been done most deliberately, and the perpetrator
had left his tracks all over the room, showing that he had been there
all the time. It must have been a private wrong, and not a political
one, which called for such a methodical revenge. When the inscription
was discovered upon the wall I was more inclined than ever to my
opinion. The thing was too evidently a blind. When the ring was found,
however, it settled the question. Clearly the murderer had used it to
remind his victim of some dead or absent woman. It was at this point
that I asked Gregson whether he had enquired in his telegram to
Cleveland as to any particular point in Mr. Drebber's former career. He
answered, you remember, in the negative.

"I then proceeded to make a careful examination of the room, which
confirmed me in my opinion as to the murderer's height, and furnished me
with the additional details as to the Trichinopoly cigar and the length
of his nails. I had already come to the conclusion, since there were no
signs of a struggle, that the blood which covered the floor had burst
from the murderer's nose in his excitement. I could perceive that the
track of blood coincided with the track of his feet. It is seldom that
any man, unless he is very full-blooded, breaks out in this way through
emotion, so I hazarded the opinion that the criminal was probably a
robust and ruddy-faced man. Events proved that I had judged correctly.

"Having left the house, I proceeded to do what Gregson had neglected. I
telegraphed to the head of the police at Cleveland, limiting my enquiry
to the circumstances connected with the marriage of Enoch Drebber. The
answer was conclusive. It told me that Drebber had already applied for
the protection of the law against an old rival in love, named Jefferson
Hope, and that this same Hope was at present in Europe. I knew now that
I held the clue to the mystery in my hand, and all that remained was to
secure the murderer.

"I had already determined in my own mind that the man who had walked
into the house with Drebber, was none other than the man who had driven
the cab. The marks in the road showed me that the horse had wandered
on in a way which would have been impossible had there been anyone in
charge of it. Where, then, could the driver be, unless he were inside
the house? Again, it is absurd to suppose that any sane man would carry
out a deliberate crime under the very eyes, as it were, of a third
person, who was sure to betray him. Lastly, supposing one man wished
to dog another through London, what better means could he adopt than
to turn cabdriver. All these considerations led me to the irresistible
conclusion that Jefferson Hope was to be found among the jarveys of the
Metropolis.

"If he had been one there was no reason to believe that he had ceased to
be. On the contrary, from his point of view, any sudden change would be
likely to draw attention to himself. He would, probably, for a time at
least, continue to perform his duties. There was no reason to suppose
that he was going under an assumed name. Why should he change his name
in a country where no one knew his original one? I therefore organized
my Street Arab detective corps, and sent them systematically to every
cab proprietor in London until they ferreted out the man that I wanted.
How well they succeeded, and how quickly I took advantage of it, are
still fresh in your recollection. The murder of Stangerson was an
incident which was entirely unexpected, but which could hardly in
any case have been prevented. Through it, as you know, I came into
possession of the pills, the existence of which I had already surmised.
You see the whole thing is a chain of logical sequences without a break
or flaw."

"It is wonderful!" I cried. "Your merits should be publicly recognized.
You should publish an account of the case. If you won't, I will for
you."

"You may do what you like, Doctor," he answered. "See here!" he
continued, handing a paper over to me, "look at this!"

It was the _Echo_ for the day, and the paragraph to which he pointed was
devoted to the case in question.

"The public," it said, "have lost a sensational treat through the sudden
death of the man Hope, who was suspected of the murder of Mr. Enoch
Drebber and of Mr. Joseph Stangerson. The details of the case will
probably be never known now, though we are informed upon good authority
that the crime was the result of an old standing and romantic feud, in
which love and Mormonism bore a part. It seems that both the victims
belonged, in their younger days, to the Latter Day Saints, and Hope, the
deceased prisoner, hails also from Salt Lake City. If the case has had
no other effect, it, at least, brings out in the most striking manner
the efficiency of our detective police force, and will serve as a lesson
to all foreigners that they will do wisely to settle their feuds at
home, and not to carry them on to British soil. It is an open secret
that the credit of this smart capture belongs entirely to the well-known
Scotland Yard officials, Messrs. Lestrade and Gregson. The man was
apprehended, it appears, in the rooms of a certain Mr. Sherlock Holmes,
who has himself, as an amateur, shown some talent in the detective
line, and who, with such instructors, may hope in time to attain to some
degree of their skill. It is expected that a testimonial of some sort
will be presented to the two officers as a fitting recognition of their
services."

"Didn't I tell you so when we started?" cried Sherlock Holmes with a
laugh. "That's the result of all our Study in Scarlet: to get them a
testimonial!"

"Never mind," I answered, "I have all the facts in my journal, and the
public shall know them. In the meantime you must make yourself contented
by the consciousness of success, like the Roman miser--

            "'Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo
       Ipse domi simul ac nummos contemplor in arca.'"








I

It is not an easy matter to write from the front. You know that there
are several courteous but inexorable gentlemen who may have a word in
the matter, and their presence 'imparts but small ease to the style.'
But above all you have the twin censors of your own conscience and
common sense, which assure you that, if all other readers fail you, you
will certainly find a most attentive one in the neighbourhood of the
Haupt-Quartier. An instructive story is still told of how a certain
well-meaning traveller recorded his satisfaction with the appearance of
the big guns at the retiring and peaceful village of Jamais, and how
three days later, by an interesting coincidence, the village of Jamais
passed suddenly off the map and dematerialised into brickdust and
splinters.

I have been with soldiers on the warpath before, but never have I had a
day so crammed with experiences and impressions as yesterday. Some of
them at least I can faintly convey to the reader, and if they ever
reach the eye of that gentleman at the Haupt-Quartier they will give
him little joy. For the crowning impression of all is the enormous
imperturbable confidence of the Army and its extraordinary efficiency
in organisation, administration, material, and personnel. I met in one
day a sample of many types, an Army commander, a corps commander, two
divisional commanders, staff officers of many grades, and, above all, I
met repeatedly the two very great men whom Britain has produced, the
private soldier and the regimental officer. Everywhere and on every
face one read the same spirit of cheerful bravery. Even the half-mad
cranks whose absurd consciences prevent them from barring the way to
the devil seemed to me to be turning into men under the prevailing
influence. I saw a batch of them, neurotic and largely be-spectacled,
but working with a will by the roadside. They will volunteer for the
trenches yet.

       *        *        *        *        *

If there are pessimists among us they are not to be found among the men
who are doing the work. There is no foolish bravado, no under-rating of
a dour opponent, but there is a quick, alert, confident attention to
the job in hand which is an inspiration to the observer. These brave
lads are guarding Britain in the present. See to it that Britain guards
them in the future! We have a bad record in this matter. It must be
changed. They are the wards of the nation, both officers and men.
Socialism has never had an attraction for me, but I should be a
Socialist to-morrow if I thought that to ease a tax on wealth these men
should ever suffer for the time or health that they gave to the public
cause.

'Get out of the car. Don't let it stay here. It may be hit.' These
words from a staff officer give you the first idea that things are
going to happen. Up to then you might have been driving through the
black country in the Walsall district with the population of Aldershot
let loose upon its dingy roads. 'Put on this shrapnel helmet. That hat
of yours would infuriate the Boche'--this was an unkind allusion to the
only uniform which I have a right to wear. 'Take this gas helmet. You
won't need it, but it is a standing order. Now come on!'

We cross a meadow and enter a trench. Here and there it comes to the
surface again where there is dead ground. At one such point an old
church stands, with an unexploded shell sticking out of the wall. A
century hence folk will journey to see that shell. Then on again
through an endless cutting. It is slippery clay below. I have no nails
in my boots, an iron pot on my head, and the sun above me. I will
remember that walk. Ten telephone wires run down the side. Here and
there large thistles and other plants grow from the clay walls, so
immobile have been our lines. Occasionally there are patches of
untidiness. 'Shells,' says the officer laconically. There is a racket
of guns before us and behind, especially behind, but danger seems
remote with all these Bairnfather groups of cheerful Tommies at work
around us. I pass one group of grimy, tattered boys. A glance at their
shoulders shows me that they are of a public school battalion. 'I
thought you fellows were all officers now,' I remarked. 'No, sir, we
like it better so.' 'Well, it will be a great memory for you. We are
all in your debt.'

They salute, and we squeeze past them. They had the fresh, brown faces
of boy cricketers. But their comrades were men of a different type,
with hard, strong, rugged features, and the eyes of men who have seen
strange sights. These are veterans, men of Mons, and their young pals
of the public schools have something to live up to.

       *        *        *        *        *

Up to this we have only had two clay walls to look at. But now our
interminable and tropical walk is lightened by the sight of a British
aeroplane sailing overhead. Numerous shrapnel bursts are all round it,
but she floats on serenely, a thing of delicate beauty against the blue
background. Now another passes--and yet another. All morning we saw
them circling and swooping, and never a sign of a Boche. They tell me
it is nearly always so--that we hold the air, and that the Boche
intruder, save at early morning, is a rare bird. A visit to the line
would reassure Mr. Pemberton-Billing. 'We have never met a British
aeroplane which was not ready to fight,' said a captured German aviator
the other day. There is a fine stern courtesy between the airmen on
either side, each dropping notes into the other's aerodromes to tell
the fate of missing officers. Had the whole war been fought by the
Germans as their airmen have conducted it (I do not speak of course of
the Zeppelin murderers), a peace would eventually have been more easily
arranged. As it is, if every frontier could be settled, it would be a
hard thing to stop until all that is associated with the words Cavell,
Zeppelin, Wittenberg, Lusitania, and Louvain has been brought to the
bar of the world's Justice.

And now we are there--in what is surely the most wonderful spot in the
world, the front firing trench, the outer breakwater which holds back
the German tide. How strange that this monstrous oscillation of giant
forces, setting in from east to west, should find their equilibrium
here across this particular meadow of Flanders. 'How far?' I ask. '180
yards,' says my guide. 'Pop!' remarks a third person just in front. 'A
sniper,' says my guide; 'take a look through the periscope.' I do so.
There is some rusty wire before me, then a field sloping slightly
upwards with knee-deep grass, then rusty wire again, and a red line of
broken earth. There is not a sign of movement, but sharp eyes are
always watching us, even as these crouching soldiers around me are
watching them. There are dead Germans in the grass before us. You need
not see them to know that they are there. A wounded soldier sits in a
corner nursing his leg. Here and there men pop out like rabbits from
dug-outs and mine-shafts. Others sit on the fire-step or lean smoking
against the clay wall. Who would dream to look at their bold, careless
faces that this is a front line, and that at any moment it is possible
that a grey wave may submerge them? With all their careless bearing I
notice that every man has his gas helmet and his rifle within easy
reach.

A mile of front trenches and then we are on our way back down that
weary walk. Then I am whisked off upon a ten mile drive. There is a
pause for lunch at Corps Headquarters, and after it we are taken to a
medal presentation in a market square. Generals Munro, Haking and
Landon, famous fighting soldiers all three, are the British
representatives. Munro with a ruddy face, and brain above all bulldog
below; Haking, pale, distinguished, intellectual; Landon a pleasant,
genial country squire. An elderly French General stands beside them.

British infantry keep the ground. In front are about fifty Frenchmen in
civil dress of every grade of life, workmen and gentlemen, in a double
rank. They are all so wounded that they are back in civil life, but
to-day they are to have some solace for their wounds. They lean heavily
on sticks, their bodies are twisted and maimed, but their faces are
shining with pride and joy. The French General draws his sword and
addresses them. One catches words like 'honneur' and 'patrie.' They
lean forward on their crutches, hanging on every syllable which comes
hissing and rasping from under that heavy white moustache. Then the
medals are pinned on. One poor lad is terribly wounded and needs two
sticks. A little girl runs out with some flowers. He leans forward and
tries to kiss her, but the crutches slip and he nearly falls upon her.
It was a pitiful but beautiful little scene.

Now the British candidates march up one by one for their medals, hale,
hearty men, brown and fit. There is a smart young officer of Scottish
Rifles; and then a selection of Worcesters, Welsh Fusiliers and Scots
Fusiliers, with one funny little Highlander, a tiny figure with a
soup-bowl helmet, a grinning boy's face beneath it, and a bedraggled
uniform. 'Many acts of great bravery'--such was the record for which he
was decorated. Even the French wounded smiled at his quaint appearance,
as they did at another Briton who had acquired the chewing-gum habit,
and came up for his medal as if he had been called suddenly in the
middle of his dinner, which he was still endeavouring to bolt. Then
came the end, with the National Anthem. The British regiment formed
fours and went past. To me that was the most impressive sight of any.
They were the Queen's West Surreys, a veteran regiment of the great
Ypres battle. What grand fellows! As the order came 'Eyes right,' and
all those fierce, dark faces flashed round about us, I felt the might
of the British infantry, the intense individuality which is not
incompatible with the highest discipline. Much they had endured, but a
great spirit shone from their faces. I confess that as I looked at
those brave English lads, and thought of what we owe to them and to
their like who have passed on, I felt more emotional than befits a
Briton in foreign parts.

       *        *        *        *        *

Now the ceremony was ended, and once again we set out for the front. It
was to an artillery observation post that we were bound, and once again
my description must be bounded by discretion. Suffice it, that in an
hour I found myself, together with a razor-keen young artillery
observer and an excellent old sportsman of a Russian prince, jammed
into a very small space, and staring through a slit at the German
lines. In front of us lay a vast plain, scarred and slashed, with bare
places at intervals, such as you see where gravel pits break a green
common. Not a sign of life or movement, save some wheeling crows. And
yet down there, within a mile or so, is the population of a city. Far
away a single train is puffing at the back of the German lines. We are
here on a definite errand. Away to the right, nearly three miles off,
is a small red house, dim to the eye but clear in the glasses, which is
suspected as a German post. It is to go up this afternoon. The gun is
some distance away, but I hear the telephone directions. '"Mother" will
soon do her in,' remarks the gunner boy cheerfully. 'Mother' is the
name of the gun. 'Give her five six three four,' he cries through the
'phone. 'Mother' utters a horrible bellow from somewhere on our right.
An enormous spout of smoke rises ten seconds later from near the house.
'A little short,' says our gunner. 'Two and a half minutes left,' adds
a little small voice, which represents another observer at a different
angle. 'Raise her seven five,' says our boy encouragingly. 'Mother'
roars more angrily than ever. 'How will that do?' she seems to say.
'One and a half right,' says our invisible gossip. I wonder how the
folk in the house are feeling as the shells creep ever nearer. 'Gun
laid, sir,' says the telephone. 'Fire!' I am looking through my glass.
A flash of fire on the house, a huge pillar of dust and smoke--then it
settles, and an unbroken field is there. The German post has gone up.
'It's a dear little gun,' says the officer boy. 'And her shells are
reliable,' remarked a senior behind us. 'They vary with different
calibres, but "Mother" never goes wrong.' The German line was very
quiet. 'Pourquoi ils ne répondent pas?' asked the Russian prince. 'Yes,
they are quiet to-day,' answered the senior. 'But we get it in the neck
sometimes.' We are all led off to be introduced to 'Mother,' who sits,
squat and black, amid twenty of her grimy children who wait upon and
feed her. She is an important person is 'Mother,' and her importance
grows. It gets clearer with every month that it is she, and only she,
who can lead us to the Rhine. She can and she will if the factories of
Britain can beat those of the Hun. See to it, you working men and women
of Britain. Work now if you rest for ever after, for the fate of Europe
and of all that is dear to us is in your hands. For 'Mother' is a
dainty eater, and needs good food and plenty. She is fond of strange
lodgings, too, in which she prefers safety to dignity. But that is a
dangerous subject.

       *        *        *        *        *

One more experience of this wonderful day--the most crowded with
impressions of my whole life. At night we take a car and drive north,
and ever north, until at a late hour we halt and climb a hill in the
darkness. Below is a wonderful sight. Down on the flats, in a huge
semi-circle, lights are rising and falling. They are very brilliant,
going up for a few seconds and then dying down. Sometimes a dozen are
in the air at one time. There are the dull thuds of explosions and an
occasional rat-tat-tat. I have seen nothing like it, but the nearest
comparison would be an enormous ten-mile railway station in full swing
at night, with signals winking, lamps waving, engines hissing and
carriages bumping. It is a terrible place down yonder, a place which
will live as long as military history is written, for it is the Ypres
Salient. What a salient it is, too! A huge curve, as outlined by the
lights, needing only a little more to be an encirclement. Something
caught the rope as it closed, and that something was the British
soldier. But it is a perilous place still by day and by night. Never
shall I forget the impression of ceaseless, malignant activity which
was borne in upon me by the white, winking lights, the red sudden
glares, and the horrible thudding noises in that place of death beneath
me.


II

In old days we had a great name as organisers. Then came a long period
when we deliberately adopted a policy of individuality and 'go as you
please.' Now once again in our sore need we have called on all our
power of administration and direction. But it has not deserted us. We
still have it in a supreme degree. Even in peace time we have shown it
in that vast, well-oiled, swift-running, noiseless machine called the
British Navy. But now our powers have risen with the need of them. The
expansion of the Navy has been a miracle, the management of the
transport a greater one, the formation of the new Army the greatest of
all time. To get the men was the least of the difficulties. To put them
here, with everything down to the lid of the last field saucepan in its
place, that is the marvel. The tools of the gunners, and of the
sappers, to say nothing of the knowledge of how to use them, are in
themselves a huge problem. But it has all been met and mastered, and
will be to the end. But don't let us talk any more about the muddling
of the War Office. It has become just a little ridiculous.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have told of my first day, when I visited the front trenches, saw the
work of 'Mother,' and finally that marvellous spectacle, the Ypres
Salient at night. I have passed the night at the headquarters of a
divisional-general, Capper, who might truly be called one of the two
fathers of the British flying force, for it was he, with Templer, who
laid the first foundations from which so great an organisation has
arisen. My morning was spent in visiting two fighting brigadiers,
cheery weather-beaten soldiers, respectful, as all our soldiers are, of
the prowess of the Hun, but serenely confident that we can beat him. In
company with one of them I ascended a hill, the reverse slope of which
was swarming with cheerful infantry in every stage of dishabille, for
they were cleaning up after the trenches. Once over the slope we
advanced with some care, and finally reached a certain spot from which
we looked down upon the German line. It was the advanced observation
post, about a thousand yards from the German trenches, with our own
trenches between us. We could see the two lines, sometimes only a few
yards, as it seemed, apart, extending for miles on either side. The
sinister silence and solitude were strangely dramatic. Such vast crowds
of men, such intensity of feeling, and yet only that open rolling
countryside, with never a movement in its whole expanse.

The afternoon saw us in the Square at Ypres. It is the city of a dream,
this modern Pompeii, destroyed, deserted and desecrated, but with a
sad, proud dignity which made you involuntarily lower your voice as you
passed through the ruined streets. It is a more considerable place than
I had imagined, with many traces of ancient grandeur. No words can
describe the absolute splintered wreck that the Huns have made of it.
The effect of some of the shells has been grotesque. One boiler-plated
water-tower, a thing forty or fifty feet high, was actually standing on
its head like a great metal top. There is not a living soul in the
place save a few pickets of soldiers, and a number of cats which become
fierce and dangerous. Now and then a shell still falls, but the Huns
probably know that the devastation is already complete.

We stood in the lonely grass-grown Square, once the busy centre of the
town, and we marvelled at the beauty of the smashed cathedral and the
tottering Cloth Hall beside it. Surely at their best they could not
have looked more wonderful than now. If they were preserved even so,
and if a heaven-inspired artist were to model a statue of Belgium in
front, Belgium with one hand pointing to the treaty by which Prussia
guaranteed her safety and the other to the sacrilege behind her, it
would make the most impressive group in the world. It was an evil day
for Belgium when her frontier was violated, but it was a worse one for
Germany. I venture to prophesy that it will be regarded by history as
the greatest military as well as political error that has ever been
made. Had the great guns that destroyed Liége made their first breach
at Verdun, what chance was there for Paris? Those few weeks of warning
and preparation saved France, and left Germany as she now is, like a
weary and furious bull, tethered fast in the place of trespass and
waiting for the inevitable pole-axe.

We were glad to get out of the place, for the gloom of it lay as heavy
upon our hearts as the shrapnel helmets did upon our heads. Both were
lightened as we sped back past empty and shattered villas to where,
just behind the danger line, the normal life of rural Flanders was
carrying on as usual. A merry sight helped to cheer us, for scudding
down wind above our heads came a Boche aeroplane, with two British at
her tail barking away with their machine guns, like two swift terriers
after a cat. They shot rat-tat-tatting across the sky until we lost
sight of them in the heat haze over the German line.

       *       *       *       *       *

The afternoon saw us on the Sharpenburg, from which many a million will
gaze in days to come, for from no other point can so much be seen. It
is a spot forbid, but a special permit took us up, and the sentry on
duty, having satisfied himself of our bona fides, proceeded to tell us
tales of the war in a pure Hull dialect which might have been Chinese
for all that I could understand. That he was a 'terrier' and had nine
children were the only facts I could lay hold of. But I wished to be
silent and to think--even, perhaps, to pray. Here, just below my feet,
were the spots which our dear lads, three of them my own kith, have
sanctified with their blood. Here, fighting for the freedom of the
world, they cheerily gave their all. On that sloping meadow to the left
of the row of houses on the opposite ridge the London Scottish fought
to the death on that grim November morning when the Bavarians reeled
back from their shot-torn line. That plain away on the other side of
Ypres was the place where the three grand Canadian brigades, first of
all men, stood up to the damnable cowardly gases of the Hun. Down
yonder is Hill 60, that blood-soaked kopje. The ridge over the fields
was held by the cavalry against two army corps, and there where the sun
strikes the red roof among the trees I can just see Gheluveld, a name
for ever to be associated with Haig and the most vital battle of the
war. As I turn away I am faced by my Hull Territorial, who still says
incomprehensible things. I look at him with other eyes. He has fought
on yonder plain. He has slain Huns, and he has nine children. Could any
one better epitomise the duties of a good citizen? I could have found
it in my heart to salute him had I not known that it would have shocked
him and made him unhappy.

It has been a full day, and the next is even fuller, for it is my
privilege to lunch at Headquarters, and to make the acquaintance of the
Commander-in-chief and of his staff. It would be an invasion of private
hospitality if I were to give the public the impressions which I
carried from that charming château. I am the more sorry, since they
were very vivid and strong. This much I will say--and any man who is a
face reader will not need to have it said--that if the Army stands
still it is not by the will of its commander. There will, I swear, be
no happier man in Europe when the day has come and the hour. It is
human to err, but never possibly can some types err by being backward.
We have a superb army in France. It needs the right leader to handle
it. I came away happier and more confident than ever as to the future.

Extraordinary are the contrasts of war. Within three hours of leaving
the quiet atmosphere of the Headquarters Château I was present at what
in any other war would have been looked upon as a brisk engagement. As
it was it would certainly figure in one of our desiccated reports as an
activity of the artillery. The noise as we struck the line at this new
point showed that the matter was serious, and, indeed, we had chosen
the spot because it had been the storm centre of the last week. The
method of approach chosen by our experienced guide was in itself a
tribute to the gravity of the affair. As one comes from the settled
order of Flanders into the actual scene of war, the first sign of it is
one of the stationary, sausage-shaped balloons, a chain of which marks
the ring in which the great wrestlers are locked. We pass under this,
ascend a hill, and find ourselves in a garden where for a year no feet
save those of wanderers like ourselves have stood. There is a wild,
confused luxuriance of growth more beautiful to my eye than anything
which the care of man can produce. One old shell-hole of vast diameter
has filled itself with forget-me-nots, and appears as a graceful basin
of light blue flowers, held up as an atonement to heaven for the
brutalities of man. Through the tangled bushes we creep, then across a
yard--'Please stoop and run as you pass this point'--and finally to a
small opening in a wall, whence the battle lies not so much before as
beside us. For a moment we have a front seat at the great world-drama,
God's own problem play, working surely to its magnificent end. One
feels a sort of shame to crouch here in comfort, a useless spectator,
while brave men down yonder are facing that pelting shower of iron.

      *       *       *       *       *

There is a large field on our left rear, and the German gunners have
the idea that there is a concealed battery therein. They are
systematically searching for it. A great shell explodes in the top
corner, but gets nothing more solid than a few tons of clay. You can
read the mind of Gunner Fritz. 'Try the lower corner!' says he, and up
goes the earth-cloud once again. 'Perhaps it's hid about the middle.
I'll try.' Earth again, and nothing more. 'I believe I was right the
first time after all,' says hopeful Fritz. So another shell comes into
the top corner. The field is as full of pits as a Gruyère cheese, but
Fritz gets nothing by his perseverance. Perhaps there never was a
battery there at all. One effect he obviously did attain. He made
several other British batteries exceedingly angry. 'Stop that tickling,
Fritz!' was the burden of their cry. Where they were we could no more
see than Fritz could, but their constant work was very clear along the
German line. We appeared to be using more shrapnel and the Germans more
high explosives, but that may have been just the chance of the day. The
Vimy Ridge was on our right, and before us was the old French position,
with the labyrinth of terrible memories and the long hill of Lorette.
When, last year, the French, in a three weeks' battle, fought their way
up that hill, it was an exhibition of sustained courage which even
their military annals can seldom have beaten.

And so I turn from the British line. Another and more distant task lies
before me. I come away with the deep sense of the difficult task which
lies before the Army, but with a deeper one of the ability of these men
to do all that soldiers can ever be asked to perform. Let the guns
clear the way for the infantry, and the rest will follow. It all lies
with the guns. But the guns, in turn, depend upon our splendid workers
at home, who, men and women, are doing so grandly. Let them not be
judged by a tiny minority, who are given, perhaps, too much attention
in our journals. We have all made sacrifices in the war, but when the
full story comes to be told, perhaps the greatest sacrifice of all is
that which Labour made when, with a sigh, she laid aside that which it
had taken so many weary years to build.




A GLIMPSE OF THE ITALIAN ARMY


One meets with such extreme kindness and consideration among the
Italians that there is a real danger lest one's personal feeling of
obligation should warp one's judgment or hamper one's expression.
Making every possible allowance for this, I come away from them, after
a very wide if superficial view of all that they are doing, with a deep
feeling of admiration and a conviction that no army in the world could
have made a braver attempt to advance under conditions of extraordinary
difficulty.

First a word as to the Italian soldier. He is a type by himself which
differs from the earnest solidarity of the new French army, and from
the businesslike alertness of the Briton, and yet has a very special
dash and fire of its own, covered over by a very pleasing and
unassuming manner. London has not yet forgotten Durando of Marathon
fame. He was just such another easy smiling youth as I now see
everywhere around me. Yet there came a day when a hundred thousand
Londoners hung upon his every movement--when strong men gasped and
women wept at his invincible but unavailing spirit. When he had fallen
senseless in that historic race on the very threshold of his goal, so
high was the determination within him, that while he floundered on the
track like a broken-backed horse, with the senses gone out of him, his
legs still continued to drum upon the cinder path. Then when by pure
will power he staggered to his feet and drove his dazed body across the
line, it was an exhibition of pluck which put the little sunburned
baker straightway among London's heroes. Durando's spirit is alive
to-day, I see thousands of him all around me. A thousand such, led by a
few young gentlemen of the type who occasionally give us object lessons
in how to ride at Olympia, make no mean battalion. It has been a war
of most desperate ventures, but never once has there been a lack of
volunteers. The Tyrolese are good men--too good to be fighting in so
rotten a cause. But from first to last the Alpini have had the
ascendency in the hill fighting, as the line regiments have against the
Kaiserlics upon the plain. Caesar told how the big Germans used to
laugh at his little men until they had been at handgrips with them. The
Austrians could tell the same tale. The spirit in the ranks is
something marvellous. There have been occasions when every officer has
fallen and yet the men have pushed on, have taken a position and then
waited for official directions.

But if that is so, you will ask, why is it that they have not made more
impression upon the enemy's position? The answer lies in the
strategical position of Italy, and it can be discussed without any
technicalities. A child could understand it. The Alps form such a bar
across the north that there are only two points where serious
operations are possible. One is the Trentino Salient where Austria can
always threaten and invade Italy. She lies in the mountains with the
plains beneath her. She can always invade the plain, but the Italians
cannot seriously invade the mountains, since the passes would only lead
to other mountains beyond. Therefore their only possible policy is to
hold the Austrians back. This they have most successfully done, and
though the Austrians with the aid of a shattering heavy artillery have
recently made some advance, it is perfectly certain that they can never
really carry out any serious invasion. The Italians then have done all
that could be done in this quarter. There remains the other front, the
opening by the sea. Here the Italians had a chance to advance over a
front of plain bounded by a river with hills beyond. They cleared the
plain, they crossed the river, they fought a battle very like our own
battle of the Aisne upon the slopes of the hills, taking 20,000
Austrian prisoners, and now they are faced by barbed wire, machine
guns, cemented trenches, and every other device which has held them as
it has held every one else. But remember what they have done for the
common cause and be grateful for it. They have in a year occupied some
forty Austrian divisions, and relieved our Russian allies to that very
appreciable extent. They have killed or wounded a quarter of a million,
taken 40,000, and drawn to themselves a large portion of the artillery.
That is their record up to date. As to the future it is very easy to
prophesy. They will continue to absorb large enemy armies. Neither side
can advance far as matters stand. But if the Russians advance and
Austria has to draw her men to the East, there will be a tiger spring
for Trieste. If manhood can break the line, then I believe the Durandos
will do it.

'Trieste o morte!' I saw chalked upon the walls all over North Italy.
That is the Italian objective.

And they are excellently led. Cadorna is an old Roman, a man cast in
the big simple mould of antiquity, frugal in his tastes, clear in his
aims, with no thought outside his duty. Every one loves and trusts him.
Porro, the Chief of the Staff, who was good enough to explain the
strategical position to me, struck me as a man of great clearness of
vision, middle-sized, straight as a dart, with an eagle face grained
and coloured like an old walnut. The whole of the staff work is, as
experts assure me, moot excellently done.

So much for the general situation. Let me descend for a moment to my
own trivial adventures since leaving the British front. Of France I
hope to say more in the future, and so I will pass at a bound to Padua,
where it appeared that the Austrian front had politely advanced to meet
me, for I was wakened betimes in the morning by the dropping of bombs,
the rattle of anti-aircraft guns, and the distant rat-tat-tat of a
maxim high up in the air. I heard when I came down later that the
intruder had been driven away and that little damage had been done. The
work of the Austrian aeroplanes is, however, very aggressive behind the
Italian lines, for they have the great advantage that a row of fine
cities lies at their mercy, while the Italians can do nothing without
injuring their own kith and kin across the border. This dropping of
explosives on the chance of hitting one soldier among fifty victims
seems to me the most monstrous development of the whole war, and the
one which should be most sternly repressed in future international
legislation--if such a thing as international law still exists. The
Italian headquarter town, which I will call Nemini, was a particular
victim of these murderous attacks. I speak with some feeling, as not
only was the ceiling of my bedroom shattered some days before my
arrival, but a greasy patch with some black shreds upon it was still
visible above my window which represented part of the remains of an
unfortunate workman, who had been blown to pieces immediately in front
of the house. The air defence is very skilfully managed however, and
the Italians have the matter well in hand.

My first experience of the Italian line was at the portion which I have
called the gap by the sea, otherwise the Isonzo front. From a mound
behind the trenches an extraordinary fine view can be got of the
Austrian position, the general curve of both lines being marked, as in
Flanders, by the sausage balloons which float behind them. The Isonzo,
which has been so bravely carried by the Italians, lay in front of me,
a clear blue river, as broad as the Thames at Hampton Court. In a
hollow to my left were the roofs of Gorizia, the town which the
Italians are endeavouring to take. A long desolate ridge, the Carso,
extends to the south of the town, and stretches down nearly to the sea.
The crest is held by the Austrians and the Italian trenches have been
pushed within fifty yards of them. A lively bombardment was going on
from either side, but so far as the infantry goes there is none of that
constant malignant petty warfare with which we are familiar in
Flanders. I was anxious to see the Italian trenches, in order to
compare them with our British methods, but save for the support and
communication trenches I was courteously but firmly warned off.

The story of trench attack and defence is no doubt very similar in all
quarters, but I am convinced that close touch should be kept between
the Allies on the matter of new inventions. The quick Latin brain may
conceive and test an idea long before we do. At present there seems to
be very imperfect sympathy. As an example, when I was on the British
lines they were dealing with a method of clearing barbed wire. The
experiments were new and were causing great interest. But on the
Italian front I found that the same system had been tested for many
months. In the use of bullet proof jackets for engineers and other men
who have to do exposed work the Italians are also ahead of us. One of
their engineers at our headquarters might give some valuable advice. At
present the Italians have, as I understand, no military representative
with our armies, while they receive a British General with a small
staff. This seems very wrong not only from the point of view of
courtesy and justice, but also because Italy has no direct means of
knowing the truth about our great development. When Germans state that
our new armies are made of paper, our Allies should have some official
assurance of their own that this is false. I can understand our keeping
neutrals from our headquarters, but surely our Allies should be on
another footing.

Having got this general view of the position I was anxious in the
afternoon to visit Monfalcone, which is the small dockyard captured
from the Austrians on the Adriatic. My kind Italian officer guides did
not recommend the trip, as it was part of their great hospitality to
shield their guest from any part of that danger which they were always
ready to incur themselves. The only road to Monfalcone ran close to the
Austrian position at the village of Ronchi, and afterwards kept
parallel to it for some miles. I was told that it was only on odd days
that the Austrian guns were active in this particular section, so
determined to trust to luck that this might not be one of them. It
proved, however, to be one of the worst on record, and we were not
destined to see the dockyard to which we started.

The civilian cuts a ridiculous figure when he enlarges upon small
adventures which may come his way--adventures which the soldier endures
in silence as part of his everyday life. On this occasion, however, the
episode was all our own, and had a sporting flavour in it which made it
dramatic. I know now the feeling of tense expectation with which the
driven grouse whirrs onwards towards the butt. I have been behind the
butt before now, and it is only poetic justice that I should see the
matter from the other point of view. As we approached Ronchi we could
see shrapnel breaking over the road in front of us, but we had not yet
realised that it was precisely for vehicles that the Austrians were
waiting, and that they had the range marked out to a yard. We went down
the road all out at a steady fifty miles an hour. The village was near,
and it seemed that we had got past the place of danger. We had in fact
just reached it. At this moment there was a noise as if the whole four
tyres had gone simultaneously, a most terrific bang in our very ears,
merging into a second sound like a reverberating blow upon an enormous
gong. As I glanced up I saw three clouds immediately above my head, two
of them white and the other of a rusty red. The air was full of flying
metal, and the road, as we were told afterwards by an observer, was all
churned up by it. The metal base of one of the shells was found plumb
in the middle of the road just where our motor had been. There is no
use telling me Austrian gunners can't shoot. I know better.

It was our pace that saved us. The motor was an open one, and the three
shells burst, according to one of my Italian companions who was himself
an artillery officer, about ten metres above our heads. They threw
forward, however, and we travelling at so great a pace shot from under.
Before they could get in another we had swung round the curve and under
the lee of a house. The good Colonel B. wrung my hand in silence. They
were both distressed, these good soldiers, under the impression that
they had led me into danger. As a matter of fact it was I who owed them
an apology, since they had enough risks in the way of business without
taking others in order to gratify the whim of a joy-rider. Barbariche
and Clericetti, this record will convey to you my remorse.

Our difficulties were by no means over. We found an ambulance lorry and
a little group of infantry huddled under the same shelter with the
expression of people who had been caught in the rain. The road beyond
was under heavy fire as well as that by which we had come. Had the
Ostro-Boches dropped a high-explosive upon us they would have had a
good mixed bag. But apparently they were only out for fancy shooting
and disdained a sitter. Presently there came a lull and the lorry moved
on, but we soon heard a burst of firing which showed that they were
after it. My companions had decided that it was out of the question for
us to finish our excursion. We waited for some time therefore and were
able finally to make our retreat on foot, being joined later by the
car. So ended my visit to Monfalcone, the place I did not reach. I hear
that two 10,000-ton steamers were left on the stocks there by the
Austrians, but were disabled before they retired. Their cabin basins
and other fittings are now adorning the Italian dug-outs.

My second day was devoted to a view of the Italian mountain warfare in
the Carnic Alps. Besides the two great fronts, one of defence
(Trentino) and one of offence (Isonzo), there are very many smaller
valleys which have to be guarded. The total frontier line is over four
hundred miles, and it has all to be held against raids if not
invasions. It is a most picturesque business. Far up in the Roccolana
Valley I found the Alpini outposts, backed by artillery which had been
brought into the most wonderful positions. They have taken 8-inch guns
where a tourist could hardly take his knapsack. Neither side can ever
make serious progress, but there are continual duels, gun against gun,
or Alpini against Jaeger. In a little wayside house was the brigade
headquarters, and here I was entertained to lunch. It was a scene that
I shall remember. They drank to England. I raised my glass to Italia
irredenta--might it soon be redenta. They all sprang to their feet and
the circle of dark faces flashed into flame. They keep their souls and
emotions, these people. I trust that ours may not become atrophied by
self-suppression.

The Italians are a quick high-spirited race, and it is very necessary
that we should consider their feelings, and that we should show our
sympathy with what they have done, instead of making querulous and
unreasonable demands of them. In some ways they are in a difficult
position. The war is made by their splendid king--a man of whom every
one speaks with extraordinary reverence and love--and by the people.
The people, with the deep instinct of a very old civilisation,
understand that the liberty of the world and their own national
existence are really at stake. But there are several forces which
divide the strength of the nation. There is the clerical, which
represents the old Guelph or German spirit, looking upon Austria as the
eldest daughter of the Church--a daughter who is little credit to her
mother. Then there is the old nobility. Finally, there are the
commercial people who through the great banks or other similar agencies
have got into the influence and employ of the Germans. When you
consider all this you will appreciate how necessary it is that Britain
should in every possible way, moral and material, sustain the national
party. Should by any evil chance the others gain the upper hand there
might be a very sudden and sinister change in the international
situation. Every man who does, says, or writes a thing which may in any
way alienate the Italians is really, whether he knows it or not,
working for the King of Prussia. They are a grand people, striving most
efficiently for the common cause, with all the dreadful disabilities
which an absence of coal and iron entails. It is for us to show that we
appreciate it. Justice as well as policy demands it.

The last day spent upon the Italian front was in the Trentino. From
Verona a motor drive of about twenty-five miles takes one up the valley
of the Adige, and past a place of evil augury for the Austrians, the
field of Rivoli. As one passes up the valley one appreciates that on
their left wing the Italians have position after position in the spurs
of the mountains before they could be driven into the plain. If the
Austrians could reach the plain it would be to their own ruin, for the
Italians have large reserves. There is no need for any anxiety about
the Trentino.

The attitude of the people behind the firing line should give one
confidence. I had heard that the Italians were a nervous people. It
does not apply to this part of Italy. As I approached the danger spot I
saw rows of large, fat gentlemen with long thin black cigars leaning
against walls in the sunshine. The general atmosphere would have
steadied an epileptic. Italy is perfectly sure of herself in this
quarter. Finally, after a long drive of winding gradients, always
beside the Adige, we reached Ala, where we interviewed the Commander of
the Sector, a man who has done splendid work during the recent
fighting. 'By all means you can see my front. But no motorcar, please.
It draws fire and others may be hit beside you.' We proceeded on foot
therefore along a valley which branched at the end into two passes. In
both very active fighting had been going on, and as we came up the guns
were baying merrily, waking up most extraordinary echoes in the hills.
It was difficult to believe that it was not thunder. There was one
terrible voice that broke out from time to time in the mountains--the
angry voice of the Holy Roman Empire. When it came all other sounds
died down into nothing. It was--so I was told--the master gun, the vast
42 centimetre giant which brought down the pride of Liége and Namur.
The Austrians have brought one or more from Innsbruck. The Italians
assure me, however, as we have ourselves discovered, that in trench
work beyond a certain point the size of the gun makes little matter.

We passed a burst dug-out by the roadside where a tragedy had occurred
recently, for eight medical officers were killed in it by a single
shell. There was no particular danger in the valley however, and the
aimed fire was all going across us to the fighting lines in the two
passes above us. That to the right, the Valley of Buello, has seen some
of the worst of the fighting. These two passes form the Italian left
wing which has held firm all through. So has the right wing. It is only
the centre which has been pushed in by the concentrated fire.

When we arrived at the spot where the two valleys forked we were
halted, and we were not permitted to advance to the advance trenches
which lay upon the crests above us. There was about a thousand yards
between the adversaries. I have seen types of some of the Bosnian and
Croatian prisoners, men of poor physique and intelligence, but the
Italians speak with chivalrous praise of the bravery of the Hungarians
and of the Austrian Jaeger. Some of their proceedings disgust them
however, and especially the fact that they use Russian prisoners to dig
trenches under fire. There is no doubt of this, as some of the men were
recaptured and were sent on to join their comrades in France. On the
whole, however, it may be said that in the Austro-Italian war there is
nothing which corresponds with the extreme bitterness of our western
conflict. The presence or absence of the Hun makes all the difference.

Nothing could be more cool or methodical than the Italian arrangements
on the Trentino front. There are no troops who would not have been
forced back by the Austrian fire. It corresponded with the French
experience at Verdun, or ours at the second battle of Ypres. It may
well occur again if the Austrians get their guns forward. But at such a
rate it would take them a long time to make any real impression. One
cannot look at the officers and men without seeing that their spirit
and confidence are high. In answer to my inquiry they assure me that
there is little difference between the troops of the northern provinces
and those of the south. Even among the snows of the Alps they tell me
that the Sicilians gave an excellent account of themselves.

That night found me back at Verona, and next morning I was on my way to
Paris, where I hope to be privileged to have some experiences at the
front of our splendid Allies. I leave Italy with a deep feeling of
gratitude for the kindness shown to me, and of admiration for the way
in which they are playing their part in the world's fight for freedom.
They have every possible disadvantage, economic and political. But in
spite of it they have done splendidly. Three thousand square kilometres
of the enemy's country are already in their possession. They relieve to
a very great extent the pressure upon the Russians, who, in spite of
all their bravery, might have been overwhelmed last summer during the
'durchbruch' had it not been for the diversion of so many Austrian
troops. The time has come now when Russia by her advance on the Pripet
is repaying her debt. But the debt is common to all the Allies. Let
them bear it in mind. There has been mischief done by slighting
criticism and by inconsiderate words. A warm sympathetic hand-grasp of
congratulation is what Italy has deserved, and it is both justice and
policy to give it.




A GLIMPSE OF THE FRENCH LINE


I

The French soldiers are grand. They are grand. There is no other word
to express it. It is not merely their bravery. All races have shown
bravery in this war. But it is their solidity, their patience, their
nobility. I could not conceive anything finer than the bearing of their
officers. It is proud without being arrogant, stern without being
fierce, serious without being depressed. Such, too, are the men whom
they lead with such skill and devotion. Under the frightful
hammer-blows of circumstance, the national characters seem to have been
reversed. It is our British soldier who has become debonair,
light-hearted and reckless, while the Frenchman has developed a solemn
stolidity and dour patience which was once all our own. During a long
day in the French trenches, I have never once heard the sound of music
or laughter, nor have I once seen a face that was not full of the most
grim determination.

Germany set out to bleed France white. Well, she has done so. France is
full of widows and orphans from end to end. Perhaps in proportion to
her population she has suffered the most of all. But in carrying out
her hellish mission Germany has bled herself white also. Her heavy
sword has done its work, but the keen French rapier has not lost its
skill. France will stand at last, weak and tottering, with her huge
enemy dead at her feet. But it is a fearsome business to see--such a
business as the world never looked upon before. It is fearful for the
French. It is fearful for the Germans. May God's curse rest upon the
arrogant men and the unholy ambitions which let loose this horror upon
humanity! Seeing what they have done, and knowing that they have done
it, one would think that mortal brain would grow crazy under the
weight. Perhaps the central brain of all was crazy from the first. But
what sort of government is it under which one crazy brain can wreck
mankind!

If ever one wanders into the high places of mankind, the places whence
the guidance should come, it seems to me that one has to recall the
dying words of the Swedish Chancellor who declared that the folly of
those who governed was what had amazed him most in his experience of
life. Yesterday I met one of these men of power--M. Clemenceau, once
Prime Minister, now the destroyer of governments. He is by nature a
destroyer, incapable of rebuilding what he has pulled down. With his
personal force, his eloquence, his thundering voice, his bitter pen, he
could wreck any policy, but would not even trouble to suggest an
alternative. As he sat before me with his face of an old prizefighter
(he is remarkably like Jim Mace as I can remember him in his later
days), his angry grey eyes and his truculent, mischievous smile, he
seemed to me a very dangerous man. His conversation, if a squirt on one
side and Niagara on the other can be called conversation, was directed
for the moment upon the iniquity of the English rate of exchange, which
seemed to me very much like railing against the barometer. My
companion, who has forgotten more economics than ever Clemenceau knew,
was about to ask whether France was prepared to take the rouble at face
value, but the roaring voice, like a strong gramophone with a blunt
needle, submerged all argument. We have our dangerous men, but we have
no one in the same class as Clemenceau. Such men enrage the people who
know them, alarm the people who don't, set every one by the ears, act
as a healthy irritant in days of peace, and are a public danger in days
of war.

      *       *       *       *       *

But this is digression. I had set out to say something of a day's
experience of the French front, though I shall write with a fuller pen
when I return from the Argonne. It was for Soissons that we made,
passing on the way a part of the scene of our own early operations,
including the battlefield of Villers Cotteret--just such a wood as I
had imagined. My companion's nephew was one of those Guards' officers
whose bodies rest now in the village cemetery, with a little British
Jack still flying above them. They lie together, and their grave is
tended with pious care. Among the trees beside the road were other
graves of soldiers, buried where they had fallen. 'So look around--and
choose your ground--and take your rest.'

Soissons is a considerable wreck, though it is very far from being an
Ypres. But the cathedral would, and will, make many a patriotic
Frenchman weep. These savages cannot keep their hands off a beautiful
church. Here, absolutely unchanged through the ages, was the spot where
St. Louis had dedicated himself to the Crusade. Every stone of it was
holy. And now the lovely old stained glass strews the floor, and the
roof lies in a huge heap across the central aisle. A dog was climbing
over it as we entered. No wonder the French fight well. Such sights
would drive the mildest man to desperation. The abbé, a good priest,
with a large humorous face, took us over his shattered domain. He was
full of reminiscences of the German occupation of the place. One of his
personal anecdotes was indeed marvellous. It was that a lady in the
local ambulance had vowed to kiss the first French soldier who
re-entered the town. She did so, and it proved to be her husband. The
abbé is a good, kind, truthful man--but he has a humorous face.

A walk down a ruined street brings one to the opening of the trenches.
There are marks upon the walls of the German occupation.
'Berlin--Paris,' with an arrow of direction, adorns one corner. At
another the 76th Regiment have commemorated the fact that they were
there in 1870 and again in 1914. If the Soissons folk are wise they
will keep these inscriptions as a reminder to the rising generation. I
can imagine, however, that their inclination will be to whitewash,
fumigate, and forget.

A sudden turn among some broken walls takes one into the communication
trench. Our guide is a Commandant of the Staff, a tall, thin man with
hard, grey eyes and a severe face. It is the more severe towards us as
I gather that he has been deluded into the belief that about one out of
six of our soldiers goes to the trenches. For the moment he is not
friends with the English. As we go along, however, we gradually get
upon better terms, we discover a twinkle in the hard, grey eyes, and
the day ends with an exchange of walking-sticks and a renewal of the
Entente. May my cane grow into a marshal's baton.

      *        *        *        *        *

A charming young artillery subaltern is our guide in that maze of
trenches, and we walk and walk and walk, with a brisk exchange of
compliments between the '75's' of the French and the '77's' of the
Germans going on high over our heads. The trenches are boarded at the
sides, and have a more permanent look than those of Flanders. Presently
we meet a fine, brown-faced, upstanding boy, as keen as a razor, who
commands this particular section. A little further on a helmeted
captain of infantry, who is an expert sniper, joins our little party.
Now we are at the very front trench. I had expected to see primeval
men, bearded and shaggy. But the 'Poilus' have disappeared. The men
around me were clean and dapper to a remarkable degree. I gathered,
however, that they had their internal difficulties. On one board I read
an old inscription, 'He is a Boche, but he is the inseparable companion
of a French soldier.' Above was a rude drawing of a louse.

I am led to a cunning loop-hole, and have a glimpse through it of a
little framed picture of French countryside. There are fields, a road,
a sloping hill beyond with trees. Quite close, about thirty or forty
yards away, was a low, red-tiled house. 'They are there,' said our
guide. 'That is their outpost. We can hear them cough.' Only the guns
were coughing that morning, so we heard nothing, but it was certainly
wonderful to be so near to the enemy and yet in such peace. I suppose
wondering visitors from Berlin are brought up also to hear the French
cough. Modern warfare has certainly some extraordinary sides.

Now we are shown all the devices which a year of experience has
suggested to the quick brains of our Allies. It is ground upon which
one cannot talk with freedom. Every form of bomb, catapult, and trench
mortar was ready to hand. Every method of cross-fire had been thought
out to an exact degree. There was something, however, about their
disposition of a machine gun which disturbed the Commandant. He called
for the officer of the gun. His thin lips got thinner and his grey eyes
more austere as we waited. Presently there emerged an extraordinarily
handsome youth, dark as a Spaniard, from some rabbit hole. He faced the
Commandant bravely, and answered back with respect but firmness.
'Pourquoi?' asked the Commandant, and yet again 'Pourquoi?' Adonis had
an answer for everything. Both sides appealed to the big Captain of
Snipers, who was clearly embarrassed. He stood on one leg and scratched
his chin. Finally the Commandant turned away angrily in the midst of
one of Adonis' voluble sentences. His face showed that the matter was
not ended. War is taken very seriously in the French army, and any sort
of professional mistake is very quickly punished. I have been told how
many officers of high rank have been broken by the French during the
war. The figure was a very high one. There is no more forgiveness for
the beaten General than there was in the days of the Republic when the
delegate of the National Convention, with a patent portable guillotine,
used to drop in at headquarters to support a more vigorous offensive.

      *       *       *       *       *

As I write these lines there is a burst of bugles in the street, and I
go to my open window to see the 41st of the line march down into what
may develop into a considerable battle. How I wish they could march
down the Strand even as they are. How London would rise to them! Laden
like donkeys, with a pile upon their backs and very often both hands
full as well, they still get a swing into their march which it is good
to see. They march in column of platoons, and the procession is a long
one, for a French regiment is, of course, equal to three battalions.
The men are shortish, very thick, burned brown in the sun, with never a
smile among them--have I not said that they are going down to a grim
sector?--but with faces of granite. There was a time when we talked of
stiffening the French army. I am prepared to believe that our first
expeditionary force was capable of stiffening any conscript army, for I
do not think that a finer force ever went down to battle. But to talk
about stiffening these people now would be ludicrous. You might as well
stiffen the old Guard. There may be weak regiments somewhere, but I
have never seen them.

I think that an injustice has been done to the French army by the
insistence of artists and cinema operators upon the picturesque
Colonial corps. One gets an idea that Arabs and negroes are pulling
France out of the fire. It is absolutely false. Her own brave sons are
doing the work. The Colonial element is really a very small one--so
small that I have not seen a single unit during all my French
wanderings. The Colonials are good men, but like our splendid
Highlanders they catch the eye in a way which is sometimes a little
hard upon their neighbours. When there is hard work to be done it is
the good little French piou-piou who usually has to do it. There is no
better man in Europe. If we are as good--and I believe we are--it is
something to be proud of.

      *        *        *        *        *

But I have wandered far from the trenches of Soissons. It had come on
to rain heavily, and we were forced to take refuge in the dugout of the
sniper. Eight of us sat in the deep gloom huddled closely together. The
Commandant was still harping upon that ill-placed machine gun. He could
not get over it. My imperfect ear for French could not follow all his
complaints, but some defence of the offender brought forth a 'Jamais!
Jamais! Jamais!' which was rapped out as if it came from the gun
itself. There were eight of us in an underground burrow, and some were
smoking. Better a deluge than such an atmosphere as that. But if there
is a thing upon earth which the French officer shies at it is rain and
mud. The reason is that he is extraordinarily natty in his person. His
charming blue uniform, his facings, his brown gaiters, boots and belts
are always just as smart as paint. He is the Dandy of the European war.
I noticed officers in the trenches with their trousers carefully
pressed. It is all to the good, I think. Wellington said that the
dandies made his best officers. It is difficult for the men to get
rattled or despondent when they see the debonair appearance of their
leaders.

Among the many neat little marks upon the French uniforms which
indicate with precision but without obtrusion the rank and arm of the
wearer, there was one which puzzled me. It was to be found on the left
sleeve of men of all ranks, from generals to privates, and it consisted
of small gold chevrons, one, two, or more. No rule seemed to regulate
them, for the general might have none, and I have heard of the private
who wore ten. Then I solved the mystery. They are the record of wounds
received. What an admirable idea! Surely we should hasten to introduce
it among our own soldiers. It costs little and it means much. If you
can allay the smart of a wound by the knowledge that it brings lasting
honour to the man among his fellows, then surely it should be done.
Medals, too, are more freely distributed and with more public parade
than in our service. I am convinced that the effect is good.

      *        *        *        *        *

The rain has now stopped, and we climb from our burrow. Again we are
led down that endless line of communication trench, again we stumble
through the ruins, again we emerge into the street where our cars are
awaiting us. Above our heads the sharp artillery duel is going merrily
forward. The French are firing three or four to one, which has been my
experience at every point I have touched upon the Allied front. Thanks
to the extraordinary zeal of the French workers, especially of the
French women, and to the clever adaptation of machinery by their
engineers, their supplies are abundant. Even now they turn out more
shells a day than we do. That, however, excludes our supply for the
Fleet. But it is one of the miracles of the war that the French, with
their coal and iron in the hands of the enemy, have been able to equal
the production of our great industrial centres. The steel, of course,
is supplied by us. To that extent we can claim credit for the result.

And so, after the ceremony of the walking-sticks, we bid adieu to the
lines of Soissons. To-morrow we start for a longer tour to the more
formidable district of the Argonne, the neighbour of Verdun, and itself
the scene of so much that is glorious and tragic.



II.

There is a couplet of Stevenson's which haunts me, 'There fell a war in
a woody place--in a land beyond the sea.' I have just come back from
spending three wonderful dream days in that woody place. It lies with
the open, bosky country of Verdun on its immediate right, and the chalk
downs of Champagne upon its left. If one could imagine the lines being
taken right through our New Forest or the American Adirondacks it would
give some idea of the terrain, save that it is a very undulating
country of abrupt hills and dales. It is this peculiarity which has
made the war on this front different to any other, more picturesque and
more secret. In front the fighting lines are half in the clay soil,
half behind the shelter of fallen trunks. Between the two the main bulk
of the soldiers live like animals of the woodlands, burrowing on the
hillsides and among the roots of the trees. It is a war by itself, and
a very wonderful one to see. At three different points I have visited
the front in this broad region, wandering from the lines of one army
corps to that of another. In all three I found the same conditions, and
in all three I found also the same pleasing fact which I had discovered
at Soissons, that the fire of the French was at least five, and very
often ten shots to one of the Boche. It used not to be so. The Germans
used to scrupulously return shot for shot. But whether they have moved
their guns to the neighbouring Verdun, or whether, as is more likely,
all the munitions are going there, it is certain that they were very
outclassed upon the three days (June 10, 11, 12) which I allude to.
There were signs that for some reason their spirits were at a low ebb.
On the evening before our arrival the French had massed all their bands
at the front, and, in honour of the Russian victory, had played the
Marseillaise and the Russian National hymn, winding up with general
shoutings and objurgations calculated to annoy. Failing to stir up the
Boche, they had ended by a salute from a hundred shotted guns. After
trailing their coats up and down the line they had finally to give up
the attempt to draw the enemy. Want of food may possibly have caused a
decline in the German spirit. There is some reason to believe that they
feed up their fighting men at the places like Verdun or Hooge, where
they need all their energy, at the expense of the men who are on the
defensive. If so, we may find it out when we attack. The French
officers assured me that the prisoners and deserters made bitter
complaints of their scale of rations. And yet it is hard to believe
that the fine efforts of our enemy at Verdun are the work of
half-starved men.

      *        *        *        *        *

To return to my personal impressions, it was at Chalons that we left
the Paris train--a town which was just touched by the most forward
ripple of the first great German floodtide. A drive of some twenty
miles took us to St. Menehould, and another ten brought us to the front
in the sector of Divisional-General H. A fine soldier this, and heaven
help Germany if he and his division get within its borders, for he is,
as one can see at a glance, a man of iron who has been goaded to
fierceness by all that his beloved country has endured. He is a man of
middle size, swarthy, hawk-like, very abrupt in his movements, with two
steel grey eyes, which are the most searching that mine have ever met.
His hospitality and courtesy to us were beyond all bounds, but there is
another side to him, and it is one which it is wiser not to provoke. In
person he took us to his lines, passing through the usual shot-torn
villages behind them. Where the road dips down into the great forest
there is one particular spot which is visible to the German artillery
observers. The General mentioned it at the time, but his remark seemed
to have no personal interest. We understood it better on our return in
the evening.

Now we found ourselves in the depths of the woods, primeval woods of
oak and beech in the deep clay soil that the great oak loves. There had
been rain and the forest paths were ankle deep in mire. Everywhere, to
right and left, soldiers' faces, hard and rough from a year of open
air, gazed up at us from their burrows in the ground. Presently an
alert, blue-clad figure stood in the path to greet us. It was the
Colonel of the sector. He was ridiculously like Cyrano de Bergerac as
depicted by the late M. Coquelin, save that his nose was of more
moderate proportion. The ruddy colouring, the bristling feline
full-ended moustache, the solidity of pose, the backward tilt of the head,
the general suggestion of the bantam cock, were all there facing us as
he stood amid the leaves in the sunlight. Gauntlets and a long
rapier--nothing else was wanting. Something had amused Cyrano. His
moustache quivered with suppressed mirth, and his blue eyes were
demurely gleaming. Then the joke came out. He had spotted a German
working party, his guns had concentrated on it, and afterwards he had
seen the stretchers go forward. A grim joke, it may seem. But the
French see this war from a different angle to us. If we had the Boche
sitting on our heads for two years, and were not yet quite sure whether
we could ever get him off again, we should get Cyrano's point of view.
Those of us who have had our folk murdered by Zeppelins or tortured in
German prisons have probably got it already.

     *       *       *       *       *

We passed in a little procession among the French soldiers, and viewed
their multifarious arrangements. For them we were a little break in a
monotonous life, and they formed up in lines as we passed. My own
British uniform and the civilian dresses of my two companions
interested them. As the General passed these groups, who formed
themselves up in perhaps a more familiar manner than would have been
usual in the British service, he glanced kindly at them with those
singular eyes of his, and once or twice addressed them as 'Mes
enfants.' One might conceive that all was 'go as you please' among the
French. So it is as long as you go in the right way. When you stray
from it you know it. As we passed a group of men standing on a low
ridge which overlooked us there was a sudden stop. I gazed round. The
General's face was steel and cement. The eyes were cold and yet fiery,
sunlight upon icicles. Something had happened. Cyrano had sprung to his
side. His reddish moustache had shot forward beyond his nose, and it
bristled out like that of an angry cat. Both were looking up at the
group above us. One wretched man detached himself from his comrades and
sidled down the slope. No skipper and mate of a Yankee blood boat could
have looked more ferociously at a mutineer. And yet it was all over
some minor breach of discipline which was summarily disposed of by two
days of confinement. Then in an instant the faces relaxed, there was a
general buzz of relief and we were back at 'Mes enfants' again. But
don't make any mistake as to discipline in the French army.

Trenches are trenches, and the main specialty of these in the Argonne
is that they are nearer to the enemy. In fact there are places where
they interlock, and where the advanced posts lie cheek by jowl with a
good steel plate to cover both cheek and jowl. We were brought to a
sap-head where the Germans were at the other side of a narrow forest
road. Had I leaned forward with extended hand and a Boche done the same
we could have touched. I looked across, but saw only a tangle of wire
and sticks. Even whispering was not permitted in these forward posts.

      *        *        *        *        *

When we emerged from these hushed places of danger Cyrano took us all
to his dug-out, which was a tasty little cottage carved from the side
of a hill and faced with logs. He did the honours of the humble cabin
with the air of a seigneur in his château. There was little furniture,
but from some broken mansion he had extracted an iron fire-back, which
adorned his grate. It was a fine, mediaeval bit of work, with Venus, in
her traditional costume, in the centre of it. It seemed the last touch
in the picture of the gallant, virile Cyrano. I only met him this once,
nor shall I ever see him again, yet he stands a thing complete within
my memory. Even now as I write these lines he walks the leafy paths of
the Argonne, his fierce eyes ever searching for the Boche workers, his
red moustache bristling over their annihilation. He seems a figure out
of the past of France.

That night we dined with yet another type of the French soldier,
General A., who commands the corps of which my friend has one division.
Each of these French generals has a striking individuality of his own
which I wish I could fix upon paper. Their only common point is that
each seems to be a rare good soldier. The corps general is Athos with a
touch of d'Artagnan. He is well over six feet high, bluff, jovial, with
huge, up-curling moustache, and a voice that would rally a regiment. It
is a grand figure which should have been done by Van Dyck with lace
collar, hand on sword, and arm akimbo. Jovial and laughing was he, but
a stern and hard soldier was lurking behind the smiles. His name may
appear in history, and so may Humbert's, who rules all the army of
which the other's corps is a unit. Humbert is a Lord Robert's figure,
small, wiry, quick-stepping, all steel and elastic, with a short,
sharp upturned moustache, which one could imagine as crackling with
electricity in moments of excitement like a cat's fur. What he does or
says is quick, abrupt, and to the point. He fires his remarks like
pistol shots at this man or that. Once to my horror he fixed me with
his hard little eyes and demanded 'Sherlock Holmes, est ce qu'il est un
soldat dans l'armée Anglaise?' The whole table waited in an awful hush.
'Mais, mon general,' I stammered, 'il est trop vieux pour service.'
There was general laughter, and I felt that I had scrambled out of an
awkward place.

And talking of awkward places, I had forgotten about that spot upon the
road whence the Boche observer could see our motor-cars. He had
actually laid a gun upon it, the rascal, and waited all the long day
for our return. No sooner did we appear upon the slope than a shrapnel
shell burst above us, but somewhat behind me, as well as to the left.
Had it been straight the second car would have got it, and there might
have been a vacancy in one of the chief editorial chairs in London. The
General shouted to the driver to speed up, and we were soon safe from
the German gunners. One gets perfectly immune to noises in these
scenes, for the guns which surround you make louder crashes than any
shell which bursts about you. It is only when you actually see the
cloud over you that your thoughts come back to yourself, and that you
realise that in this wonderful drama you may be a useless super, but
none the less you are on the stage and not in the stalls.

      *        *        *        *        *

Next morning we were down in the front trenches again at another
portion of the line. Far away on our right, from a spot named the
Observatory, we could see the extreme left of the Verdun position and
shells bursting on the Fille Morte. To the north of us was a broad
expanse of sunny France, nestling villages, scattered châteaux, rustic
churches, and all as inaccessible as if it were the moon. It is a
terrible thing this German bar--a thing unthinkable to Britons. To
stand on the edge of Yorkshire and look into Lancashire feeling that it
is in other hands, that our fellow-countrymen are suffering there and
waiting, waiting, for help, and that we cannot, after two years, come a
yard nearer to them--would it not break our hearts? Can I wonder that
there is no smile upon the grim faces of these Frenchmen! But when the
bar is broken, when the line sweeps forward, as most surely it will,
when French bayonets gleam on yonder uplands and French flags break
from those village spires--ah, what a day that will be! Men will die
that day from the pure, delirious joy of it. We cannot think what it
means to France, and the less so because she stands so nobly patient
waiting for her hour.

Yet another type of French general takes us round this morning! He,
too, is a man apart, an unforgettable man. Conceive a man with a large
broad good-humoured face, and two placid, dark seal's eyes which gaze
gently into yours. He is young and has pink cheeks and a soft voice.
Such is one of the most redoubtable fighters of France, this General of
Division D. His former staff officers told me something of the man. He
is a philosopher, a fatalist, impervious to fear, a dreamer of distant
dreams amid the most furious bombardment. The weight of the French
assault upon the terrible labyrinth fell at one time upon the brigade
which he then commanded. He led them day after day gathering up Germans
with the detached air of the man of science who is hunting for
specimens. In whatever shell-hole he might chance to lunch he had his
cloth spread and decorated with wild flowers plucked from the edge. If
fate be kind to him he will go far. Apart from his valour he is
admitted to be one of the most scientific soldiers of France.

From the Observatory we saw the destruction of a German trench. There
had been signs of work upon it, so it was decided to close it down. It
was a very visible brown streak a thousand yards away. The word was
passed back to the '75's' in the rear. There was a 'tir rapide' over
our heads. My word, the man who stands fast under a 'tir rapide,' be he
Boche, French or British, is a man of mettle! The mere passage of the
shells was awe-inspiring, at first like the screaming of a wintry wind,
and then thickening into the howling of a pack of wolves. The trench
was a line of terrific explosions. Then the dust settled down and all
was still. Where were the ants who had made the nest? Were they buried
beneath it? Or had they got from under? No one could say.

There was one little gun which fascinated me, and I stood for some time
watching it. Its three gunners, enormous helmeted men, evidently loved
it, and touched it with a swift but tender touch in every movement.
When it was fired it ran up an inclined plane to take off the recoil,
rushing up and then turning and rattling down again upon the gunners
who were used to its ways. The first time it did it, I was standing
behind it, and I don't know which moved quickest--the gun or I.

French officers above a certain rank develop and show their own
individuality. In the lower grades the conditions of service enforce a
certain uniformity. The British officer is a British gentleman first,
and an officer afterwards. The Frenchman is an officer first, though
none the less the gentleman stands behind it. One very strange type we
met, however, in these Argonne Woods. He was a French-Canadian who had
been a French soldier, had founded a homestead in far Alberta, and had
now come back of his own will, though a naturalised Briton, to the old
flag. He spoke English of a kind, the quality and quantity being
equally extraordinary. It poured from him and was, so far as it was
intelligible, of the woolly Western variety. His views on the Germans
were the most emphatic we had met. 'These Godam sons of'--well, let us
say 'Canines!' he would shriek, shaking his fist at the woods to the
north of him. A good man was our compatriot, for he had a very recent
Legion of Honour pinned upon his breast. He had been put with a few men
on Hill 285, a sort of volcano stuffed with mines, and was told to
telephone when he needed relief. He refused to telephone and remained
there for three weeks. 'We sit like a rabbit in his hall,' he
explained. He had only one grievance. There were many wild boars in the
forest, but the infantry were too busy to get them. 'The Godam
Artillaree he get the wild pig!' Out of his pocket he pulled a picture
of a frame-house with snow round it, and a lady with two children on
the stoop. It was his homestead at Trochu, seventy miles north of
Calgary.

       *        *        *        *        *

It was the evening of the third day that we turned our faces to Paris
once more. It was my last view of the French. The roar of their guns
went far with me upon my way. Soldiers of France, farewell! In your own
phrase I salute you! Many have seen you who had more knowledge by which
to judge your manifold virtues, many also who had more skill to draw
you as you are, but never one, I am sure, who admired you more than I.
Great was the French soldier under Louis the Sun-King, great too under
Napoleon, but never was he greater than to-day.

And so it is back to England and to home. I feel sobered and solemn
from all that I have seen. It is a blind vision which does not see more
than the men and the guns, which does not catch something of the
terrific spiritual conflict which is at the heart of it.

  Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord
  --He is trampling out the vineyard where the grapes of wrath are stored.

We have found no inspired singer yet, like Julia Howe, to voice the
divine meaning of it all--that meaning which is more than numbers or
guns upon the day of battle. But who can see the adult manhood of
Europe standing in a double line, waiting for a signal to throw
themselves upon each other, without knowing that he has looked upon the
most terrific of all the dealings between the creature below and that
great force above, which works so strangely towards some distant but
glorious end?

ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE.






It was nine o'clock at night upon the second of August--the most
terrible August in the history of the world.  One might have thought
already that God's curse hung heavy over a degenerate world, for there
was an awesome hush and a feeling of vague expectancy in the sultry and
stagnant air.  The sun had long set, but one blood-red gash like an
open wound lay low in the distant west.  Above, the stars were shining
brightly, and below, the lights of the shipping glimmered in the bay.
The two famous Germans stood beside the stone parapet of the garden
walk, with the long, low, heavily gabled house behind them, and they
looked down upon the broad sweep of the beach at the foot of the great
chalk cliff in which Von Bork, like some wandering eagle, had perched
himself four years before.  They stood with their heads close together,
talking in low, confidential tones.  From below the two glowing ends of
their cigars might have been the smouldering eyes of some malignant
fiend looking down in the darkness.

A remarkable man this Von Bork--a man who could hardly be matched among
all the devoted agents of the Kaiser.  It was his talents which had
first recommended him for the English mission, the most important
mission of all, but since he had taken it over those talents had become
more and more manifest to the half-dozen people in the world who were
really in touch with the truth.  One of these was his present
companion, Baron Von Herling, the chief secretary of the legation,
whose huge 100-horse-power Benz car was blocking the country lane as it
waited to waft its owner back to London.

"So far as I can judge the trend of events, you will probably be back
in Berlin within the week," the secretary was saying.  "When you get
there, my dear Von Bork, I think you will be surprised at the welcome
you will receive.  I happen to know what is thought in the highest
quarters of your work in this country."  He was a huge man, the
secretary, deep, broad, and tall, with a slow, heavy fashion of speech
which had been his main asset in his political career.

Von Bork laughed.

"They are not very hard to deceive," he remarked.  "A more docile,
simple folk could not be imagined."

"I don't know about that," said the other thoughtfully.  "They have
strange limits and one must learn to observe them.  It is that surface
simplicity of theirs which makes a trap for the stranger.  One's first
impression is that they are entirely soft. Then one comes suddenly upon
something very hard, and you know that you have reached the limit and
must adapt yourself to the fact.  They have, for example, their insular
conventions which simply MUST be observed."

"Meaning 'good form' and that sort of thing?" Von Bork sighed as one
who had suffered much.

"Meaning British prejudice in all its queer manifestations.  As an
example I may quote one of my own worst blunders--I can afford to talk
of my blunders, for you know my work well enough to be aware of my
successes.  It was on my first arrival.  I was invited to a week-end
gathering at the country house of a cabinet minister.  The conversation
was amazingly indiscreet."

Von Bork nodded.  "I've been there," said he dryly.

"Exactly.  Well, I naturally sent a resume of the information to
Berlin.  Unfortunately our good chancellor is a little heavy-handed in
these matters, and he transmitted a remark which showed that he was
aware of what had been said.  This, of course, took the trail straight
up to me.  You've no idea the harm that it did me.  There was nothing
soft about our British hosts on that occasion, I can assure you.  I was
two years living it down.  Now you, with this sporting pose of yours--"

"No, no, don't call it a pose.  A pose is an artificial thing. This is
quite natural.  I am a born sportsman.  I enjoy it."

"Well, that makes it the more effective.  You yacht against them, you
hunt with them, you play polo, you match them in every game, your
four-in-hand takes the prize at Olympia.  I have even heard that you go
the length of boxing with the young officers.  What is the result?
Nobody takes you seriously.  You are a 'good old sport' 'quite a decent
fellow for a German,' a hard-drinking, night-club, knock-about-town,
devil-may-care young fellow.  And all the time this quiet country house
of yours is the centre of half the mischief in England, and the
sporting squire the most astute secret-service man in Europe.  Genius,
my dear Von Bork--genius!"

"You flatter me, Baron.  But certainly I may claim my four years in
this country have not been unproductive.  I've never shown you my
little store.  Would you mind stepping in for a moment?"

The door of the study opened straight on to the terrace.  Von Bork
pushed it back, and, leading the way, he clicked the switch of the
electric light.  He then closed the door behind the bulky form which
followed him and carefully adjusted the heavy curtain over the latticed
window.  Only when all these precautions had been taken and tested did
he turn his sunburned aquiline face to his guest.

"Some of my papers have gone," said he.  "When my wife and the
household left yesterday for Flushing they took the less important with
them.  I must, of course, claim the protection of the embassy for the
others."

"Your name has already been filed as one of the personal suite. There
will be no difficulties for you or your baggage.  Of course, it is just
possible that we may not have to go.  England may leave France to her
fate.  We are sure that there is no binding treaty between them."

"And Belgium?"

"Yes, and Belgium, too."

Von Bork shook his head.  "I don't see how that could be.  There is a
definite treaty there.  She could never recover from such a
humiliation."

"She would at least have peace for the moment."

"But her honor?"

"Tut, my dear sir, we live in a utilitarian age.  Honour is a mediaeval
conception.  Besides England is not ready.  It is an inconceivable
thing, but even our special war tax of fifty million, which one would
think made our purpose as clear as if we had advertised it on the front
page of the Times, has not roused these people from their slumbers.
Here and there one hears a question.  It is my business to find an
answer.  Here and there also there is an irritation.  It is my business
to soothe it. But I can assure you that so far as the essentials
go--the storage of munitions, the preparation for submarine attack, the
arrangements for making high explosives--nothing is prepared. How,
then, can England come in, especially when we have stirred her up such a
devil's brew of Irish civil war, window-breaking Furies, and God knows
what to keep her thoughts at home."

"She must think of her future."

"Ah, that is another matter.  I fancy that in the future we have our
own very definite plans about England, and that your information will
be very vital to us.  It is to-day or to-morrow with Mr. John Bull.  If
he prefers to-day we are perfectly ready. If it is to-morrow we shall
be more ready still.  I should think they would be wiser to fight with
allies than without them, but that is their own affair.  This week is
their week of destiny. But you were speaking of your papers."  He sat
in the armchair with the light shining upon his broad bald head, while
he puffed sedately at his cigar.

The large oak-panelled, book-lined room had a curtain hung in the
further corner.  When this was drawn it disclosed a large, brass-bound
safe.  Von Bork detached a small key from his watch chain, and after
some considerable manipulation of the lock he swung open the heavy door.

"Look!" said he, standing clear, with a wave of his hand.

The light shone vividly into the opened safe, and the secretary of the
embassy gazed with an absorbed interest at the rows of stuffed
pigeon-holes with which it was furnished.  Each pigeon-hole had its
label, and his eyes as he glanced along them read a long series of such
titles as "Fords," "Harbour-defences," "Aeroplanes," "Ireland,"
"Egypt," "Portsmouth forts," "The Channel," "Rosythe," and a score of
others.  Each compartment was bristling with papers and plans.

"Colossal!" said the secretary.  Putting down his cigar he softly
clapped his fat hands.

"And all in four years, Baron.  Not such a bad show for the
hard-drinking, hard-riding country squire.  But the gem of my
collection is coming and there is the setting all ready for it." He
pointed to a space over which "Naval Signals" was printed.

"But you have a good dossier there already."

"Out of date and waste paper.  The Admiralty in some way got the alarm
and every code has been changed.  It was a blow, Baron--the worst
setback in my whole campaign.  But thanks to my check-book and the good
Altamont all will be well to-night."

The Baron looked at his watch and gave a guttural exclamation of
disappointment.

"Well, I really can wait no longer.  You can imagine that things are
moving at present in Carlton Terrace and that we have all to be at our
posts.  I had hoped to be able to bring news of your great coup.  Did
Altamont name no hour?"

Von Bork pushed over a telegram.

Will come without fail to-night and bring new sparking plugs.

Altamont.

"Sparking plugs, eh?"

"You see he poses as a motor expert and I keep a full garage.  In our
code everything likely to come up is named after some spare part.  If
he talks of a radiator it is a battleship, of an oil pump a cruiser,
and so on.  Sparking plugs are naval signals."

"From Portsmouth at midday," said the secretary, examining the
superscription.  "By the way, what do you give him?"

"Five hundred pounds for this particular job.  Of course he has a
salary as well."

"The greedy rogue.  They are useful, these traitors, but I grudge them
their blood money."

"I grudge Altamont nothing.  He is a wonderful worker.  If I pay him
well, at least he delivers the goods, to use his own phrase. Besides he
is not a traitor.  I assure you that our most pan-Germanic Junker is a
sucking dove in his feelings towards England as compared with a real
bitter Irish-American."

"Oh, an Irish-American?"

"If you heard him talk you would not doubt it.  Sometimes I assure you
I can hardly understand him.  He seems to have declared war on the
King's English as well as on the English king.  Must you really go?  He
may be here any moment."

"No.  I'm sorry, but I have already overstayed my time.  We shall
expect you early to-morrow, and when you get that signal book through
the little door on the Duke of York's steps you can put a triumphant
finis to your record in England.  What!  Tokay!"  He indicated a
heavily sealed dust-covered bottle which stood with two high glasses
upon a salver.

"May I offer you a glass before your journey?"

"No, thanks.  But it looks like revelry."

"Altamont has a nice taste in wines, and he took a fancy to my Tokay.
He is a touchy fellow and needs humouring in small things.  I have to
study him, I assure you."  They had strolled out on to the terrace
again, and along it to the further end where at a touch from the
Baron's chauffeur the great car shivered and chuckled.  "Those are the
lights of Harwich, I suppose," said the secretary, pulling on his dust
coat.  "How still and peaceful it all seems.  There may be other lights
within the week, and the English coast a less tranquil place! The
heavens, too, may not be quite so peaceful if all that the good Zepplin
promises us comes true.  By the way, who is that?"

Only one window showed a light behind them; in it there stood a lamp,
and beside it, seated at a table, was a dear old ruddy-faced woman in a
country cap.  She was bending over her knitting and stopping
occasionally to stroke a large black cat upon a stool beside her.

"That is Martha, the only servant I have left."

The secretary chuckled.

"She might almost personify Britannia," said he, "with her complete
self-absorption and general air of comfortable somnolence.  Well, au
revoir, Von Bork!"  With a final wave of his hand he sprang into the
car, and a moment later the two golden cones from the headlights shot
through the darkness.  The secretary lay back in the cushions of the
luxurious limousine, with his thoughts so full of the impending
European tragedy that he hardly observed that as his car swung round
the village street it nearly passed over a little Ford coming in the
opposite direction.

Von Bork walked slowly back to the study when the last gleams of the
motor lamps had faded into the distance.  As he passed he observed that
his old housekeeper had put out her lamp and retired.  It was a new
experience to him, the silence and darkness of his widespread house,
for his family and household had been a large one.  It was a relief to
him, however, to think that they were all in safety and that, but for
that one old woman who had lingered in the kitchen, he had the whole
place to himself.  There was a good deal of tidying up to do inside his
study and he set himself to do it until his keen, handsome face was
flushed with the heat of the burning papers.  A leather valise stood
beside his table, and into this he began to pack very neatly and
systematically the precious contents of his safe. He had hardly got
started with the work, however, when his quick ears caught the sounds
of a distant car.  Instantly he gave an exclamation of satisfaction,
strapped up the valise, shut the safe, locked it, and hurried out on to
the terrace.  He was just in time to see the lights of a small car come
to a halt at the gate.  A passenger sprang out of it and advanced
swiftly towards him, while the chauffeur, a heavily built, elderly man
with a gray moustache, settled down like one who resigns himself to a
long vigil.

"Well?" asked Von Bork eagerly, running forward to meet his visitor.

For answer the man waved a small brown-paper parcel triumphantly above
his head.

"You can give me the glad hand to-night, mister," he cried.  "I'm
bringing home the bacon at last."

"The signals?"

"Same as I said in my cable.  Every last one of them, semaphore, lamp
code, Marconi--a copy, mind you, not the original.  That was too
dangerous.  But it's the real goods, and you can lay to that."  He
slapped the German upon the shoulder with a rough familiarity from
which the other winced.

"Come in," he said.  "I'm all alone in the house.  I was only waiting
for this.  Of course a copy is better than the original. If an original
were missing they would change the whole thing. You think it's all safe
about the copy?"

The Irish-American had entered the study and stretched his long limbs
from the armchair.  He was a tall, gaunt man of sixty, with clear-cut
features and a small goatee beard which gave him a general resemblance
to the caricatures of Uncle Sam.  A half-smoked, sodden cigar hung from
the corner of his mouth, and as he sat down he struck a match and relit
it.  "Making ready for a move?" he remarked as he looked round him.
"Say, mister," he added, as his eyes fell upon the safe from which the
curtain was now removed, "you don't tell me you keep your papers in
that?"

"Why not?"

"Gosh, in a wide-open contraption like that!  And they reckon you to be
some spy.  Why, a Yankee crook would be into that with a can-opener.
If I'd known that any letter of mine was goin' to lie loose in a thing
like that I'd have been a mug to write to you at all."

"It would puzzle any crook to force that safe," Von Bork answered.
"You won't cut that metal with any tool."

"But the lock?"

"No, it's a double combination lock.  You know what that is?"

"Search me," said the American.

"Well, you need a word as well as a set of figures before you can get
the lock to work."  He rose and showed a double-radiating disc round
the keyhole.  "This outer one is for the letters, the inner one for the
figures."

"Well, well, that's fine."

"So it's not quite as simple as you thought.  It was four years ago
that I had it made, and what do you think I chose for the word and
figures?"

"It's beyond me."

"Well, I chose August for the word, and 1914 for the figures, and here
we are."

The American's face showed his surprise and admiration.

"My, but that was smart!  You had it down to a fine thing."

"Yes, a few of us even then could have guessed the date.  Here it is,
and I'm shutting down to-morrow morning."

"Well, I guess you'll have to fix me up also.  I'm not staying in this
gol-darned country all on my lonesome.  In a week or less, from what I
see, John Bull will be on his hind legs and fair ramping.  I'd rather
watch him from over the water."

"But you're an American citizen?"

"Well, so was Jack James an American citizen, but he's doing time in
Portland all the same.  It cuts no ice with a British copper to tell
him you're an American citizen.  'It's British law and order over
here,' says he.  By the way, mister, talking of Jack James, it seems to
me you don't do much to cover your men."

"What do you mean?" Von Bork asked sharply.

"Well, you are their employer, ain't you?  It's up to you to see that
they don't fall down.  But they do fall down, and when did you ever
pick them up?  There's James--"

"It was James's own fault.  You know that yourself.  He was too
self-willed for the job."

"James was a bonehead--I give you that.  Then there was Hollis."

"The man was mad."

"Well, he went a bit woozy towards the end.  It's enough to make a man
bug-house when he has to play a part from morning to night with a
hundred guys all ready to set the coppers wise to him. But now there is
Steiner--"

Von Bork started violently, and his ruddy face turned a shade paler.

"What about Steiner?"

"Well, they've got him, that's all.  They raided his store last night,
and he and his papers are all in Portsmouth jail.  You'll go off and
he, poor devil, will have to stand the racket, and lucky if he gets off
with his life.  That's why I want to get over the water as soon as you
do."

Von Bork was a strong, self-contained man, but it was easy to see that
the news had shaken him.

"How could they have got on to Steiner?" he muttered.  "That's the
worst blow yet."

"Well, you nearly had a worse one, for I believe they are not far off
me."

"You don't mean that!"

"Sure thing.  My landlady down Fratton way had some inquiries, and when
I heard of it I guessed it was time for me to hustle. But what I want
to know, mister, is how the coppers know these things?  Steiner is the
fifth man you've lost since I signed on with you, and I know the name
of the sixth if I don't get a move on.  How do you explain it, and
ain't you ashamed to see your men go down like this?"

Von Bork flushed crimson.

"How dare you speak in such a way!"

"If I didn't dare things, mister, I wouldn't be in your service. But
I'll tell you straight what is in my mind.  I've heard that with you
German politicians when an agent has done his work you are not sorry to
see him put away."

Von Bork sprang to his feet.

"Do you dare to suggest that I have given away my own agents!"

"I don't stand for that, mister, but there's a stool pigeon or a cross
somewhere, and it's up to you to find out where it is. Anyhow I am
taking no more chances.  It's me for little Holland, and the sooner the
better."

Von Bork had mastered his anger.

"We have been allies too long to quarrel now at the very hour of
victory," he said.  "You've done splendid work and taken risks, and I
can't forget it.  By all means go to Holland, and you can get a boat
from Rotterdam to New York.  No other line will be safe a week from
now.  I'll take that book and pack it with the rest."

The American held the small parcel in his hand, but made no motion to
give it up.

"What about the dough?" he asked.

"The what?"

"The boodle.  The reward.  The 500 pounds.  The gunner turned damned
nasty at the last, and I had to square him with an extra hundred
dollars or it would have been nitsky for you and me. 'Nothin' doin'!'
says he, and he meant it, too, but the last hundred did it.  It's cost
me two hundred pound from first to last, so it isn't likely I'd give it
up without gettin' my wad."

Von Bork smiled with some bitterness.  "You don't seem to have a very
high opinion of my honour," said he, "you want the money before you
give up the book."

"Well, mister, it is a business proposition."

"All right.  Have your way."  He sat down at the table and scribbled a
check, which he tore from the book, but he refrained from handing it to
his companion.  "After all, since we are to be on such terms, Mr.
Altamont," said he, "I don't see why I should trust you any more than
you trust me.  Do you understand?" he added, looking back over his
shoulder at the American.  "There's the check upon the table.  I claim
the right to examine that parcel before you pick the money up."

The American passed it over without a word.  Von Bork undid a winding
of string and two wrappers of paper.  Then he sat gazing for a moment
in silent amazement at a small blue book which lay before him.  Across
the cover was printed in golden letters Practical Handbook of Bee
Culture.  Only for one instant did the master spy glare at this
strangely irrelevant inscription.  The next he was gripped at the back
of his neck by a grasp of iron, and a chloroformed sponge was held in
front of his writhing face.

"Another glass, Watson!" said Mr. Sherlock Holmes as he extended the
bottle of Imperial Tokay.

The thickset chauffeur, who had seated himself by the table, pushed
forward his glass with some eagerness.

"It is a good wine, Holmes."

"A remarkable wine, Watson.  Our friend upon the sofa has assured me
that it is from Franz Josef's special cellar at the Schoenbrunn Palace.
Might I trouble you to open the window, for chloroform vapour does not
help the palate."

The safe was ajar, and Holmes standing in front of it was removing
dossier after dossier, swiftly examining each, and then packing it
neatly in Von Bork's valise.  The German lay upon the sofa sleeping
stertorously with a strap round his upper arms and another round his
legs.

"We need not hurry ourselves, Watson. We are safe from interruption.
Would you mind touching the bell?  There is no one in the house except
old Martha, who has played her part to admiration.  I got her the
situation here when first I took the matter up. Ah, Martha, you will be
glad to hear that all is well."

The pleasant old lady had appeared in the doorway.  She curtseyed with
a smile to Mr. Holmes, but glanced with some apprehension at the figure
upon the sofa.

"It is all right, Martha.  He has not been hurt at all."

"I am glad of that, Mr. Holmes.  According to his lights he has been a
kind master.  He wanted me to go with his wife to Germany yesterday,
but that would hardly have suited your plans, would it, sir?"

"No, indeed, Martha.  So long as you were here I was easy in my mind.
We waited some time for your signal to-night."

"It was the secretary, sir."

"I know.  His car passed ours."

"I thought he would never go.  I knew that it would not suit your
plans, sir, to find him here."

"No, indeed.  Well, it only meant that we waited half an hour or so
until I saw your lamp go out and knew that the coast was clear.  You
can report to me to-morrow in London, Martha, at Claridge's Hotel."

"Very good, sir."

"I suppose you have everything ready to leave."

"Yes, sir.  He posted seven letters to-day.  I have the addresses as
usual."

"Very good, Martha.  I will look into them to-morrow.  Good-night.
These papers," he continued as the old lady vanished, "are not of very
great importance, for, of course, the information which they represent
has been sent off long ago to the German government.  These are the
originals which could not safely be got out of the country."

"Then they are of no use."

"I should not go so far as to say that, Watson.  They will at least
show our people what is known and what is not.  I may say that a good
many of these papers have come through me, and I need not add are
thoroughly untrustworthy.  It would brighten my declining years to see
a German cruiser navigating the Solent according to the mine-field
plans which I have furnished.  But you, Watson"--he stopped his work
and took his old friend by the shoulders--"I've hardly seen you in the
light yet.  How have the years used you?  You look the same blithe boy
as ever."

"I feel twenty years younger, Holmes.  I have seldom felt so happy as
when I got your wire asking me to meet you at Harwich with the car.
But you, Holmes--you have changed very little--save for that horrible
goatee."

"These are the sacrifices one makes for one's country, Watson," said
Holmes, pulling at his little tuft.  "To-morrow it will be but a
dreadful memory.  With my hair cut and a few other superficial changes
I shall no doubt reappear at Claridge's to-morrow as I was before this
American stunt--I beg your pardon, Watson, my well of English seems to
be permanently defiled--before this American job came my way."

"But you have retired, Holmes.  We heard of you as living the life of a
hermit among your bees and your books in a small farm upon the South
Downs."

"Exactly, Watson.  Here is the fruit of my leisured ease, the magnum
opus of my latter years!"  He picked up the volume from the table and
read out the whole title, Practical Handbook of Bee Culture, with Some
Observations upon the Segregation of the Queen.  "Alone I did it.
Behold the fruit of pensive nights and laborious days when I watched
the little working gangs as once I watched the criminal world of
London."

"But how did you get to work again?"

"Ah, I have often marvelled at it myself.  The Foreign Minister alone I
could have withstood, but when the Premier also deigned to visit my
humble roof--!  The fact is, Watson, that this gentleman upon the sofa
was a bit too good for our people.  He was in a class by himself.
Things were going wrong, and no one could understand why they were
going wrong.  Agents were suspected or even caught, but there was
evidence of some strong and secret central force.  It was absolutely
necessary to expose it.  Strong pressure was brought upon me to look
into the matter. It has cost me two years, Watson, but they have not
been devoid of excitement.  When I say that I started my pilgrimage at
Chicago, graduated in an Irish secret society at Buffalo, gave serious
trouble to the constabulary at Skibbareen, and so eventually caught the
eye of a subordinate agent of Von Bork, who recommended me as a likely
man, you will realize that the matter was complex.  Since then I have
been honoured by his confidence, which has not prevented most of his
plans going subtly wrong and five of his best agents being in prison.
I watched them, Watson, and I picked them as they ripened.  Well, sir,
I hope that you are none the worse!"

The last remark was addressed to Von Bork himself, who after much
gasping and blinking had lain quietly listening to Holmes's statement.
He broke out now into a furious stream of German invective, his face
convulsed with passion.  Holmes continued his swift investigation of
documents while his prisoner cursed and swore.

"Though unmusical, German is the most expressive of all languages," he
observed when Von Bork had stopped from pure exhaustion.  "Hullo!
Hullo!" he added as he looked hard at the corner of a tracing before
putting it in the box.  "This should put another bird in the cage.  I
had no idea that the paymaster was such a rascal, though I have long
had an eye upon him. Mister Von Bork, you have a great deal to answer
for."

The prisoner had raised himself with some difficulty upon the sofa and
was staring with a strange mixture of amazement and hatred at his
captor.

"I shall get level with you, Altamont," he said, speaking with slow
deliberation.  "If it takes me all my life I shall get level with you!"

"The old sweet song," said Holmes.  "How often have I heard it in days
gone by.  It was a favorite ditty of the late lamented Professor
Moriarty.   Colonel Sebastian Moran has also been known to warble it.
And yet I live and keep bees upon the South Downs."

"Curse you, you double traitor!" cried the German, straining against
his bonds and glaring murder from his furious eyes.

"No, no, it is not so bad as that," said Holmes, smiling.  "As my
speech surely shows you, Mr. Altamont of Chicago had no existence in
fact.  I used him and he is gone."

"Then who are you?"

"It is really immaterial who I am, but since the matter seems to
interest you, Mr. Von Bork, I may say that this is not my first
acquaintance with the members of your family.  I have done a good deal
of business in Germany in the past and my name is probably familiar to
you."

"I would wish to know it," said the Prussian grimly.

"It was I who brought about the separation between Irene Adler and the
late King of Bohemia when your cousin Heinrich was the Imperial Envoy.
It was I also who saved from murder, by the Nihilist Klopman, Count Von
und Zu Grafenstein, who was your mother's elder brother.  It was I--"

Von Bork sat up in amazement.

"There is only one man," he cried.

"Exactly," said Holmes.

Von Bork groaned and sank back on the sofa.  "And most of that
information came through you," he cried.  "What is it worth? What have
I done?  It is my ruin forever!"

"It is certainly a little untrustworthy," said Holmes.  "It will
require some checking and you have little time to check it.  Your
admiral may find the new guns rather larger than he expects, and the
cruisers perhaps a trifle faster."

Von Bork clutched at his own throat in despair.

"There are a good many other points of detail which will, no doubt,
come to light in good time.  But you have one quality which is very
rare in a German, Mr. Von Bork:  you are a sportsman and you will bear
me no ill-will when you realize that you, who have outwitted so many
other people, have at last been outwitted yourself.  After all, you
have done your best for your country, and I have done my best for mine,
and what could be more natural?  Besides," he added, not unkindly, as
he laid his hand upon the shoulder of the prostrate man, "it is better
than to fall before some ignoble foe.  These papers are now ready,
Watson.  If you will help me with our prisoner, I think that we may get
started for London at once."

It was no easy task to move Von Bork, for he was a strong and a
desperate man.  Finally, holding either arm, the two friends walked him
very slowly down the garden walk which he had trod with such proud
confidence when he received the congratulations of the famous
diplomatist only a few hours before.  After a short, final struggle he
was hoisted, still bound hand and foot, into the spare seat of the
little car.  His precious valise was wedged in beside him.

"I trust that you are as comfortable as circumstances permit," said
Holmes when the final arrangements were made.  "Should I be guilty of a
liberty if I lit a cigar and placed it between your lips?"

But all amenities were wasted upon the angry German.

"I suppose you realize, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said he, "that if your
government bears you out in this treatment it becomes an act of war."

"What about your government and all this treatment?" said Holmes,
tapping the valise.

"You are a private individual.  You have no warrant for my arrest.  The
whole proceeding is absolutely illegal and outrageous."

"Absolutely," said Holmes.

"Kidnapping a German subject."

"And stealing his private papers."

"Well, you realize your position, you and your accomplice here. If I
were to shout for help as we pass through the village--"

"My dear sir, if you did anything so foolish you would probably enlarge
the two limited titles of our village inns by giving us 'The Dangling
Prussian' as a signpost.  The Englishman is a patient creature, but at
present his temper is a little inflamed, and it would be as well not to
try him too far.  No, Mr. Von Bork, you will go with us in a quiet,
sensible fashion to Scotland Yard, whence you can send for your friend,
Baron Von Herling, and see if even now you may not fill that place
which he has reserved for you in the ambassadorial suite.  As to you,
Watson, you are joining us with your old service, as I understand, so
London won't be out of your way.  Stand with me here upon the terrace,
for it may be the last quiet talk that we shall ever have."

The two friends chatted in intimate converse for a few minutes,
recalling once again the days of the past, while their prisoner vainly
wriggled to undo the bonds that held him.  As they turned to the car
Holmes pointed back to the moonlit sea and shook a thoughtful head.

"There's an east wind coming, Watson."

"I think not, Holmes.  It is very warm."

"Good old Watson!  You are the one fixed point in a changing age.
There's an east wind coming all the same, such a wind as never blew on
England yet.  It will be cold and bitter, Watson, and a good many of us
may wither before its blast.  But it's God's own wind none the less,
and a cleaner, better, stronger land will lie in the sunshine when the
storm has cleared.  Start her up, Watson, for it's time that we were on
our way.  I have a check for five hundred pounds which should be cashed
early, for the drawer is quite capable of stopping it if he can."





Adventure I. Silver Blaze


"I am afraid, Watson, that I shall have to go," said Holmes, as we sat
down together to our breakfast one morning.

"Go! Where to?"

"To Dartmoor; to King's Pyland."

I was not surprised. Indeed, my only wonder was that he had not already
been mixed up in this extraordinary case, which was the one topic of
conversation through the length and breadth of England. For a whole day
my companion had rambled about the room with his chin upon his chest and
his brows knitted, charging and recharging his pipe with the strongest
black tobacco, and absolutely deaf to any of my questions or remarks.
Fresh editions of every paper had been sent up by our news agent, only
to be glanced over and tossed down into a corner. Yet, silent as he was,
I knew perfectly well what it was over which he was brooding. There was
but one problem before the public which could challenge his powers of
analysis, and that was the singular disappearance of the favorite for
the Wessex Cup, and the tragic murder of its trainer. When, therefore,
he suddenly announced his intention of setting out for the scene of the
drama it was only what I had both expected and hoped for.

"I should be most happy to go down with you if I should not be in the
way," said I.

"My dear Watson, you would confer a great favor upon me by coming. And
I think that your time will not be misspent, for there are points about
the case which promise to make it an absolutely unique one. We have, I
think, just time to catch our train at Paddington, and I will go further
into the matter upon our journey. You would oblige me by bringing with
you your very excellent field-glass."

And so it happened that an hour or so later I found myself in the
corner of a first-class carriage flying along en route for Exeter, while
Sherlock Holmes, with his sharp, eager face framed in his ear-flapped
travelling-cap, dipped rapidly into the bundle of fresh papers which he
had procured at Paddington. We had left Reading far behind us before
he thrust the last one of them under the seat, and offered me his
cigar-case.

"We are going well," said he, looking out the window and glancing at his
watch. "Our rate at present is fifty-three and a half miles an hour."

"I have not observed the quarter-mile posts," said I.

"Nor have I. But the telegraph posts upon this line are sixty yards
apart, and the calculation is a simple one. I presume that you
have looked into this matter of the murder of John Straker and the
disappearance of Silver Blaze?"

"I have seen what the Telegraph and the Chronicle have to say."

"It is one of those cases where the art of the reasoner should be
used rather for the sifting of details than for the acquiring of fresh
evidence. The tragedy has been so uncommon, so complete and of such
personal importance to so many people, that we are suffering from a
plethora of surmise, conjecture, and hypothesis. The difficulty is to
detach the framework of fact--of absolute undeniable fact--from the
embellishments of theorists and reporters. Then, having established
ourselves upon this sound basis, it is our duty to see what inferences
may be drawn and what are the special points upon which the whole
mystery turns. On Tuesday evening I received telegrams from both Colonel
Ross, the owner of the horse, and from Inspector Gregory, who is looking
after the case, inviting my cooperation."

"Tuesday evening!" I exclaimed. "And this is Thursday morning. Why
didn't you go down yesterday?"

"Because I made a blunder, my dear Watson--which is, I am afraid, a more
common occurrence than any one would think who only knew me through your
memoirs. The fact is that I could not believe it possible that the most
remarkable horse in England could long remain concealed, especially in
so sparsely inhabited a place as the north of Dartmoor. From hour to
hour yesterday I expected to hear that he had been found, and that
his abductor was the murderer of John Straker. When, however, another
morning had come, and I found that beyond the arrest of young Fitzroy
Simpson nothing had been done, I felt that it was time for me to take
action. Yet in some ways I feel that yesterday has not been wasted."

"You have formed a theory, then?"

"At least I have got a grip of the essential facts of the case. I shall
enumerate them to you, for nothing clears up a case so much as stating
it to another person, and I can hardly expect your co-operation if I do
not show you the position from which we start."

I lay back against the cushions, puffing at my cigar, while Holmes,
leaning forward, with his long, thin forefinger checking off the points
upon the palm of his left hand, gave me a sketch of the events which had
led to our journey.

"Silver Blaze," said he, "is from the Somomy stock, and holds as
brilliant a record as his famous ancestor. He is now in his fifth year,
and has brought in turn each of the prizes of the turf to Colonel Ross,
his fortunate owner. Up to the time of the catastrophe he was the first
favorite for the Wessex Cup, the betting being three to one on him. He
has always, however, been a prime favorite with the racing public, and
has never yet disappointed them, so that even at those odds enormous
sums of money have been laid upon him. It is obvious, therefore, that
there were many people who had the strongest interest in preventing
Silver Blaze from being there at the fall of the flag next Tuesday.

"The fact was, of course, appreciated at King's Pyland, where the
Colonel's training-stable is situated. Every precaution was taken to
guard the favorite. The trainer, John Straker, is a retired jockey
who rode in Colonel Ross's colors before he became too heavy for the
weighing-chair. He has served the Colonel for five years as jockey and
for seven as trainer, and has always shown himself to be a zealous and
honest servant. Under him were three lads; for the establishment was a
small one, containing only four horses in all. One of these lads sat up
each night in the stable, while the others slept in the loft. All three
bore excellent characters. John Straker, who is a married man, lived
in a small villa about two hundred yards from the stables. He has no
children, keeps one maid-servant, and is comfortably off. The country
round is very lonely, but about half a mile to the north there is a
small cluster of villas which have been built by a Tavistock contractor
for the use of invalids and others who may wish to enjoy the pure
Dartmoor air. Tavistock itself lies two miles to the west, while
across the moor, also about two miles distant, is the larger training
establishment of Mapleton, which belongs to Lord Backwater, and is
managed by Silas Brown. In every other direction the moor is a complete
wilderness, inhabited only by a few roaming gypsies. Such was the
general situation last Monday night when the catastrophe occurred.

"On that evening the horses had been exercised and watered as usual, and
the stables were locked up at nine o'clock. Two of the lads walked up
to the trainer's house, where they had supper in the kitchen, while the
third, Ned Hunter, remained on guard. At a few minutes after nine
the maid, Edith Baxter, carried down to the stables his supper, which
consisted of a dish of curried mutton. She took no liquid, as there was
a water-tap in the stables, and it was the rule that the lad on duty
should drink nothing else. The maid carried a lantern with her, as it
was very dark and the path ran across the open moor.

"Edith Baxter was within thirty yards of the stables, when a man
appeared out of the darkness and called to her to stop. As he stepped
into the circle of yellow light thrown by the lantern she saw that he
was a person of gentlemanly bearing, dressed in a gray suit of tweeds,
with a cloth cap. He wore gaiters, and carried a heavy stick with a knob
to it. She was most impressed, however, by the extreme pallor of his
face and by the nervousness of his manner. His age, she thought, would
be rather over thirty than under it.

"'Can you tell me where I am?' he asked. 'I had almost made up my mind
to sleep on the moor, when I saw the light of your lantern.'

"'You are close to the King's Pyland training-stables,' said she.

"'Oh, indeed! What a stroke of luck!' he cried. 'I understand that a
stable-boy sleeps there alone every night. Perhaps that is his supper
which you are carrying to him. Now I am sure that you would not be too
proud to earn the price of a new dress, would you?' He took a piece of
white paper folded up out of his waistcoat pocket. 'See that the boy
has this to-night, and you shall have the prettiest frock that money can
buy.'

"She was frightened by the earnestness of his manner, and ran past him
to the window through which she was accustomed to hand the meals. It was
already opened, and Hunter was seated at the small table inside. She had
begun to tell him of what had happened, when the stranger came up again.

"'Good-evening,' said he, looking through the window. 'I wanted to have
a word with you.' The girl has sworn that as he spoke she noticed the
corner of the little paper packet protruding from his closed hand.

"'What business have you here?' asked the lad.

"'It's business that may put something into your pocket,' said the
other. 'You've two horses in for the Wessex Cup--Silver Blaze and
Bayard. Let me have the straight tip and you won't be a loser. Is it a
fact that at the weights Bayard could give the other a hundred yards in
five furlongs, and that the stable have put their money on him?'

"'So, you're one of those damned touts!' cried the lad. 'I'll show you
how we serve them in King's Pyland.' He sprang up and rushed across the
stable to unloose the dog. The girl fled away to the house, but as she
ran she looked back and saw that the stranger was leaning through the
window. A minute later, however, when Hunter rushed out with the hound
he was gone, and though he ran all round the buildings he failed to find
any trace of him."

"One moment," I asked. "Did the stable-boy, when he ran out with the
dog, leave the door unlocked behind him?"

"Excellent, Watson, excellent!" murmured my companion. "The importance
of the point struck me so forcibly that I sent a special wire to
Dartmoor yesterday to clear the matter up. The boy locked the door
before he left it. The window, I may add, was not large enough for a man
to get through.

"Hunter waited until his fellow-grooms had returned, when he sent a
message to the trainer and told him what had occurred. Straker was
excited at hearing the account, although he does not seem to have quite
realized its true significance. It left him, however, vaguely uneasy,
and Mrs. Straker, waking at one in the morning, found that he was
dressing. In reply to her inquiries, he said that he could not sleep on
account of his anxiety about the horses, and that he intended to walk
down to the stables to see that all was well. She begged him to remain
at home, as she could hear the rain pattering against the window, but in
spite of her entreaties he pulled on his large mackintosh and left the
house.

"Mrs. Straker awoke at seven in the morning, to find that her husband
had not yet returned. She dressed herself hastily, called the maid, and
set off for the stables. The door was open; inside, huddled together
upon a chair, Hunter was sunk in a state of absolute stupor, the
favorite's stall was empty, and there were no signs of his trainer.

"The two lads who slept in the chaff-cutting loft above the harness-room
were quickly aroused. They had heard nothing during the night, for they
are both sound sleepers. Hunter was obviously under the influence of
some powerful drug, and as no sense could be got out of him, he was left
to sleep it off while the two lads and the two women ran out in search
of the absentees. They still had hopes that the trainer had for some
reason taken out the horse for early exercise, but on ascending the
knoll near the house, from which all the neighboring moors were visible,
they not only could see no signs of the missing favorite, but they
perceived something which warned them that they were in the presence of
a tragedy.

"About a quarter of a mile from the stables John Straker's overcoat was
flapping from a furze-bush. Immediately beyond there was a bowl-shaped
depression in the moor, and at the bottom of this was found the dead
body of the unfortunate trainer. His head had been shattered by a savage
blow from some heavy weapon, and he was wounded on the thigh, where
there was a long, clean cut, inflicted evidently by some very sharp
instrument. It was clear, however, that Straker had defended himself
vigorously against his assailants, for in his right hand he held a small
knife, which was clotted with blood up to the handle, while in his left
he clasped a red and black silk cravat, which was recognized by the maid
as having been worn on the preceding evening by the stranger who had
visited the stables. Hunter, on recovering from his stupor, was also
quite positive as to the ownership of the cravat. He was equally certain
that the same stranger had, while standing at the window, drugged his
curried mutton, and so deprived the stables of their watchman. As to the
missing horse, there were abundant proofs in the mud which lay at the
bottom of the fatal hollow that he had been there at the time of the
struggle. But from that morning he has disappeared, and although a large
reward has been offered, and all the gypsies of Dartmoor are on the
alert, no news has come of him. Finally, an analysis has shown that
the remains of his supper left by the stable-lad contain an appreciable
quantity of powdered opium, while the people at the house partook of the
same dish on the same night without any ill effect.

"Those are the main facts of the case, stripped of all surmise, and
stated as baldly as possible. I shall now recapitulate what the police
have done in the matter.

"Inspector Gregory, to whom the case has been committed, is an extremely
competent officer. Were he but gifted with imagination he might rise to
great heights in his profession. On his arrival he promptly found and
arrested the man upon whom suspicion naturally rested. There was little
difficulty in finding him, for he inhabited one of those villas which I
have mentioned. His name, it appears, was Fitzroy Simpson. He was a man
of excellent birth and education, who had squandered a fortune upon the
turf, and who lived now by doing a little quiet and genteel book-making
in the sporting clubs of London. An examination of his betting-book
shows that bets to the amount of five thousand pounds had been
registered by him against the favorite. On being arrested he volunteered
the statement that he had come down to Dartmoor in the hope of
getting some information about the King's Pyland horses, and also about
Desborough, the second favorite, which was in charge of Silas Brown at
the Mapleton stables. He did not attempt to deny that he had acted as
described upon the evening before, but declared that he had no sinister
designs, and had simply wished to obtain first-hand information. When
confronted with his cravat, he turned very pale, and was utterly unable
to account for its presence in the hand of the murdered man. His wet
clothing showed that he had been out in the storm of the night before,
and his stick, which was a Penang-lawyer weighted with lead, was just
such a weapon as might, by repeated blows, have inflicted the terrible
injuries to which the trainer had succumbed. On the other hand, there
was no wound upon his person, while the state of Straker's knife would
show that one at least of his assailants must bear his mark upon him.
There you have it all in a nutshell, Watson, and if you can give me any
light I shall be infinitely obliged to you."

I had listened with the greatest interest to the statement which Holmes,
with characteristic clearness, had laid before me. Though most of the
facts were familiar to me, I had not sufficiently appreciated their
relative importance, nor their connection to each other.

"Is it not possible," I suggested, "that the incised wound upon Straker
may have been caused by his own knife in the convulsive struggles which
follow any brain injury?"

"It is more than possible; it is probable," said Holmes. "In that case
one of the main points in favor of the accused disappears."

"And yet," said I, "even now I fail to understand what the theory of the
police can be."

"I am afraid that whatever theory we state has very grave objections to
it," returned my companion. "The police imagine, I take it, that this
Fitzroy Simpson, having drugged the lad, and having in some way obtained
a duplicate key, opened the stable door and took out the horse, with
the intention, apparently, of kidnapping him altogether. His bridle is
missing, so that Simpson must have put this on. Then, having left the
door open behind him, he was leading the horse away over the moor, when
he was either met or overtaken by the trainer. A row naturally ensued.
Simpson beat out the trainer's brains with his heavy stick without
receiving any injury from the small knife which Straker used in
self-defence, and then the thief either led the horse on to some secret
hiding-place, or else it may have bolted during the struggle, and be
now wandering out on the moors. That is the case as it appears to
the police, and improbable as it is, all other explanations are more
improbable still. However, I shall very quickly test the matter when I
am once upon the spot, and until then I cannot really see how we can get
much further than our present position."

It was evening before we reached the little town of Tavistock, which
lies, like the boss of a shield, in the middle of the huge circle of
Dartmoor. Two gentlemen were awaiting us in the station--the one a tall,
fair man with lion-like hair and beard and curiously penetrating light
blue eyes; the other a small, alert person, very neat and dapper, in a
frock-coat and gaiters, with trim little side-whiskers and an eye-glass.
The latter was Colonel Ross, the well-known sportsman; the other,
Inspector Gregory, a man who was rapidly making his name in the English
detective service.

"I am delighted that you have come down, Mr. Holmes," said the Colonel.
"The Inspector here has done all that could possibly be suggested, but I
wish to leave no stone unturned in trying to avenge poor Straker and in
recovering my horse."

"Have there been any fresh developments?" asked Holmes.

"I am sorry to say that we have made very little progress," said the
Inspector. "We have an open carriage outside, and as you would no doubt
like to see the place before the light fails, we might talk it over as
we drive."

A minute later we were all seated in a comfortable landau, and were
rattling through the quaint old Devonshire city. Inspector Gregory was
full of his case, and poured out a stream of remarks, while Holmes threw
in an occasional question or interjection. Colonel Ross leaned back with
his arms folded and his hat tilted over his eyes, while I listened with
interest to the dialogue of the two detectives. Gregory was formulating
his theory, which was almost exactly what Holmes had foretold in the
train.

"The net is drawn pretty close round Fitzroy Simpson," he remarked, "and
I believe myself that he is our man. At the same time I recognize that
the evidence is purely circumstantial, and that some new development may
upset it."

"How about Straker's knife?"

"We have quite come to the conclusion that he wounded himself in his
fall."

"My friend Dr. Watson made that suggestion to me as we came down. If so,
it would tell against this man Simpson."

"Undoubtedly. He has neither a knife nor any sign of a wound. The
evidence against him is certainly very strong. He had a great interest
in the disappearance of the favorite. He lies under suspicion of having
poisoned the stable-boy, he was undoubtedly out in the storm, he was
armed with a heavy stick, and his cravat was found in the dead man's
hand. I really think we have enough to go before a jury."

Holmes shook his head. "A clever counsel would tear it all to rags,"
said he. "Why should he take the horse out of the stable? If he wished
to injure it why could he not do it there? Has a duplicate key been
found in his possession? What chemist sold him the powdered opium? Above
all, where could he, a stranger to the district, hide a horse, and such
a horse as this? What is his own explanation as to the paper which he
wished the maid to give to the stable-boy?"

"He says that it was a ten-pound note. One was found in his purse. But
your other difficulties are not so formidable as they seem. He is not
a stranger to the district. He has twice lodged at Tavistock in the
summer. The opium was probably brought from London. The key, having
served its purpose, would be hurled away. The horse may be at the bottom
of one of the pits or old mines upon the moor."

"What does he say about the cravat?"

"He acknowledges that it is his, and declares that he had lost it. But a
new element has been introduced into the case which may account for his
leading the horse from the stable."

Holmes pricked up his ears.

"We have found traces which show that a party of gypsies encamped on
Monday night within a mile of the spot where the murder took place. On
Tuesday they were gone. Now, presuming that there was some understanding
between Simpson and these gypsies, might he not have been leading the
horse to them when he was overtaken, and may they not have him now?"

"It is certainly possible."

"The moor is being scoured for these gypsies. I have also examined every
stable and out-house in Tavistock, and for a radius of ten miles."

"There is another training-stable quite close, I understand?"

"Yes, and that is a factor which we must certainly not neglect. As
Desborough, their horse, was second in the betting, they had an interest
in the disappearance of the favorite. Silas Brown, the trainer, is known
to have had large bets upon the event, and he was no friend to poor
Straker. We have, however, examined the stables, and there is nothing to
connect him with the affair."

"And nothing to connect this man Simpson with the interests of the
Mapleton stables?"

"Nothing at all."

Holmes leaned back in the carriage, and the conversation ceased. A few
minutes later our driver pulled up at a neat little red-brick villa with
overhanging eaves which stood by the road. Some distance off, across a
paddock, lay a long gray-tiled out-building. In every other direction
the low curves of the moor, bronze-colored from the fading ferns,
stretched away to the sky-line, broken only by the steeples of
Tavistock, and by a cluster of houses away to the westward which marked
the Mapleton stables. We all sprang out with the exception of Holmes,
who continued to lean back with his eyes fixed upon the sky in front of
him, entirely absorbed in his own thoughts. It was only when I touched
his arm that he roused himself with a violent start and stepped out of
the carriage.

"Excuse me," said he, turning to Colonel Ross, who had looked at him in
some surprise. "I was day-dreaming." There was a gleam in his eyes and a
suppressed excitement in his manner which convinced me, used as I was
to his ways, that his hand was upon a clue, though I could not imagine
where he had found it.

"Perhaps you would prefer at once to go on to the scene of the crime,
Mr. Holmes?" said Gregory.

"I think that I should prefer to stay here a little and go into one or
two questions of detail. Straker was brought back here, I presume?"

"Yes; he lies upstairs. The inquest is to-morrow."

"He has been in your service some years, Colonel Ross?"

"I have always found him an excellent servant."

"I presume that you made an inventory of what he had in his pockets at
the time of his death, Inspector?"

"I have the things themselves in the sitting-room, if you would care to
see them."

"I should be very glad." We all filed into the front room and sat round
the central table while the Inspector unlocked a square tin box and laid
a small heap of things before us. There was a box of vestas, two inches
of tallow candle, an A D P brier-root pipe, a pouch of seal-skin with
half an ounce of long-cut Cavendish, a silver watch with a gold chain,
five sovereigns in gold, an aluminum pencil-case, a few papers, and an
ivory-handled knife with a very delicate, inflexible blade marked Weiss
& Co., London.

"This is a very singular knife," said Holmes, lifting it up and
examining it minutely. "I presume, as I see blood-stains upon it, that
it is the one which was found in the dead man's grasp. Watson, this
knife is surely in your line?"

"It is what we call a cataract knife," said I.

"I thought so. A very delicate blade devised for very delicate work.
A strange thing for a man to carry with him upon a rough expedition,
especially as it would not shut in his pocket."

"The tip was guarded by a disk of cork which we found beside his body,"
said the Inspector. "His wife tells us that the knife had lain upon the
dressing-table, and that he had picked it up as he left the room. It was
a poor weapon, but perhaps the best that he could lay his hands on at
the moment."

"Very possible. How about these papers?"

"Three of them are receipted hay-dealers' accounts. One of them is a
letter of instructions from Colonel Ross. This other is a milliner's
account for thirty-seven pounds fifteen made out by Madame Lesurier,
of Bond Street, to William Derbyshire. Mrs. Straker tells us that
Derbyshire was a friend of her husband's and that occasionally his
letters were addressed here."

"Madam Derbyshire had somewhat expensive tastes," remarked Holmes,
glancing down the account. "Twenty-two guineas is rather heavy for a
single costume. However there appears to be nothing more to learn, and
we may now go down to the scene of the crime."

As we emerged from the sitting-room a woman, who had been waiting in
the passage, took a step forward and laid her hand upon the Inspector's
sleeve. Her face was haggard and thin and eager, stamped with the print
of a recent horror.

"Have you got them? Have you found them?" she panted.

"No, Mrs. Straker. But Mr. Holmes here has come from London to help us,
and we shall do all that is possible."

"Surely I met you in Plymouth at a garden-party some little time ago,
Mrs. Straker?" said Holmes.

"No, sir; you are mistaken."

"Dear me! Why, I could have sworn to it. You wore a costume of
dove-colored silk with ostrich-feather trimming."

"I never had such a dress, sir," answered the lady.

"Ah, that quite settles it," said Holmes. And with an apology he
followed the Inspector outside. A short walk across the moor took us to
the hollow in which the body had been found. At the brink of it was the
furze-bush upon which the coat had been hung.

"There was no wind that night, I understand," said Holmes.

"None; but very heavy rain."

"In that case the overcoat was not blown against the furze-bush, but
placed there."

"Yes, it was laid across the bush."

"You fill me with interest, I perceive that the ground has been trampled
up a good deal. No doubt many feet have been here since Monday night."

"A piece of matting has been laid here at the side, and we have all
stood upon that."

"Excellent."

"In this bag I have one of the boots which Straker wore, one of Fitzroy
Simpson's shoes, and a cast horseshoe of Silver Blaze."

"My dear Inspector, you surpass yourself!" Holmes took the bag, and,
descending into the hollow, he pushed the matting into a more central
position. Then stretching himself upon his face and leaning his chin
upon his hands, he made a careful study of the trampled mud in front of
him. "Hullo!" said he, suddenly. "What's this?" It was a wax vesta half
burned, which was so coated with mud that it looked at first like a
little chip of wood.

"I cannot think how I came to overlook it," said the Inspector, with an
expression of annoyance.

"It was invisible, buried in the mud. I only saw it because I was
looking for it."

"What! You expected to find it?"

"I thought it not unlikely."

He took the boots from the bag, and compared the impressions of each of
them with marks upon the ground. Then he clambered up to the rim of the
hollow, and crawled about among the ferns and bushes.

"I am afraid that there are no more tracks," said the Inspector. "I
have examined the ground very carefully for a hundred yards in each
direction."

"Indeed!" said Holmes, rising. "I should not have the impertinence to
do it again after what you say. But I should like to take a little walk
over the moor before it grows dark, that I may know my ground to-morrow,
and I think that I shall put this horseshoe into my pocket for luck."

Colonel Ross, who had shown some signs of impatience at my companion's
quiet and systematic method of work, glanced at his watch. "I wish you
would come back with me, Inspector," said he. "There are several points
on which I should like your advice, and especially as to whether we do
not owe it to the public to remove our horse's name from the entries for
the Cup."

"Certainly not," cried Holmes, with decision. "I should let the name
stand."

The Colonel bowed. "I am very glad to have had your opinion, sir," said
he. "You will find us at poor Straker's house when you have finished
your walk, and we can drive together into Tavistock."

He turned back with the Inspector, while Holmes and I walked slowly
across the moor. The sun was beginning to sink behind the stables of
Mapleton, and the long, sloping plain in front of us was tinged with
gold, deepening into rich, ruddy browns where the faded ferns and
brambles caught the evening light. But the glories of the landscape were
all wasted upon my companion, who was sunk in the deepest thought.

"It's this way, Watson," said he at last. "We may leave the question
of who killed John Straker for the instant, and confine ourselves to
finding out what has become of the horse. Now, supposing that he broke
away during or after the tragedy, where could he have gone to? The horse
is a very gregarious creature. If left to himself his instincts would
have been either to return to King's Pyland or go over to Mapleton. Why
should he run wild upon the moor? He would surely have been seen by now.
And why should gypsies kidnap him? These people always clear out when
they hear of trouble, for they do not wish to be pestered by the police.
They could not hope to sell such a horse. They would run a great risk
and gain nothing by taking him. Surely that is clear."

"Where is he, then?"

"I have already said that he must have gone to King's Pyland or to
Mapleton. He is not at King's Pyland. Therefore he is at Mapleton. Let
us take that as a working hypothesis and see what it leads us to. This
part of the moor, as the Inspector remarked, is very hard and dry. But
it falls away towards Mapleton, and you can see from here that there
is a long hollow over yonder, which must have been very wet on Monday
night. If our supposition is correct, then the horse must have crossed
that, and there is the point where we should look for his tracks."

We had been walking briskly during this conversation, and a few more
minutes brought us to the hollow in question. At Holmes' request I
walked down the bank to the right, and he to the left, but I had not
taken fifty paces before I heard him give a shout, and saw him waving
his hand to me. The track of a horse was plainly outlined in the soft
earth in front of him, and the shoe which he took from his pocket
exactly fitted the impression.

"See the value of imagination," said Holmes. "It is the one quality
which Gregory lacks. We imagined what might have happened, acted upon
the supposition, and find ourselves justified. Let us proceed."

We crossed the marshy bottom and passed over a quarter of a mile of dry,
hard turf. Again the ground sloped, and again we came on the tracks.
Then we lost them for half a mile, but only to pick them up once more
quite close to Mapleton. It was Holmes who saw them first, and he stood
pointing with a look of triumph upon his face. A man's track was visible
beside the horse's.

"The horse was alone before," I cried.

"Quite so. It was alone before. Hullo, what is this?"

The double track turned sharp off and took the direction of King's
Pyland. Holmes whistled, and we both followed along after it. His eyes
were on the trail, but I happened to look a little to one side, and
saw to my surprise the same tracks coming back again in the opposite
direction.

"One for you, Watson," said Holmes, when I pointed it out. "You have
saved us a long walk, which would have brought us back on our own
traces. Let us follow the return track."

We had not to go far. It ended at the paving of asphalt which led up
to the gates of the Mapleton stables. As we approached, a groom ran out
from them.

"We don't want any loiterers about here," said he.

"I only wished to ask a question," said Holmes, with his finger and
thumb in his waistcoat pocket. "Should I be too early to see your
master, Mr. Silas Brown, if I were to call at five o'clock to-morrow
morning?"

"Bless you, sir, if any one is about he will be, for he is always
the first stirring. But here he is, sir, to answer your questions for
himself. No, sir, no; it is as much as my place is worth to let him see
me touch your money. Afterwards, if you like."

As Sherlock Holmes replaced the half-crown which he had drawn from his
pocket, a fierce-looking elderly man strode out from the gate with a
hunting-crop swinging in his hand.

"What's this, Dawson!" he cried. "No gossiping! Go about your business!
And you, what the devil do you want here?"

"Ten minutes' talk with you, my good sir," said Holmes in the sweetest
of voices.

"I've no time to talk to every gadabout. We want no stranger here. Be
off, or you may find a dog at your heels."

Holmes leaned forward and whispered something in the trainer's ear. He
started violently and flushed to the temples.

"It's a lie!" he shouted, "an infernal lie!"

"Very good. Shall we argue about it here in public or talk it over in
your parlor?"

"Oh, come in if you wish to."

Holmes smiled. "I shall not keep you more than a few minutes, Watson,"
said he. "Now, Mr. Brown, I am quite at your disposal."

It was twenty minutes, and the reds had all faded into grays before
Holmes and the trainer reappeared. Never have I seen such a change as
had been brought about in Silas Brown in that short time. His face was
ashy pale, beads of perspiration shone upon his brow, and his hands
shook until the hunting-crop wagged like a branch in the wind. His
bullying, overbearing manner was all gone too, and he cringed along at
my companion's side like a dog with its master.

"Your instructions will be done. It shall all be done," said he.

"There must be no mistake," said Holmes, looking round at him. The other
winced as he read the menace in his eyes.

"Oh no, there shall be no mistake. It shall be there. Should I change it
first or not?"

Holmes thought a little and then burst out laughing. "No, don't," said
he; "I shall write to you about it. No tricks, now, or--"

"Oh, you can trust me, you can trust me!"

"Yes, I think I can. Well, you shall hear from me to-morrow." He turned
upon his heel, disregarding the trembling hand which the other held out
to him, and we set off for King's Pyland.

"A more perfect compound of the bully, coward, and sneak than Master
Silas Brown I have seldom met with," remarked Holmes as we trudged along
together.

"He has the horse, then?"

"He tried to bluster out of it, but I described to him so exactly what
his actions had been upon that morning that he is convinced that I was
watching him. Of course you observed the peculiarly square toes in the
impressions, and that his own boots exactly corresponded to them.
Again, of course no subordinate would have dared to do such a thing.
I described to him how, when according to his custom he was the first
down, he perceived a strange horse wandering over the moor. How he went
out to it, and his astonishment at recognizing, from the white forehead
which has given the favorite its name, that chance had put in his power
the only horse which could beat the one upon which he had put his money.
Then I described how his first impulse had been to lead him back to
King's Pyland, and how the devil had shown him how he could hide the
horse until the race was over, and how he had led it back and concealed
it at Mapleton. When I told him every detail he gave it up and thought
only of saving his own skin."

"But his stables had been searched?"

"Oh, an old horse-faker like him has many a dodge."

"But are you not afraid to leave the horse in his power now, since he
has every interest in injuring it?"

"My dear fellow, he will guard it as the apple of his eye. He knows that
his only hope of mercy is to produce it safe."

"Colonel Ross did not impress me as a man who would be likely to show
much mercy in any case."

"The matter does not rest with Colonel Ross. I follow my own methods,
and tell as much or as little as I choose. That is the advantage of
being unofficial. I don't know whether you observed it, Watson, but the
Colonel's manner has been just a trifle cavalier to me. I am inclined
now to have a little amusement at his expense. Say nothing to him about
the horse."

"Certainly not without your permission."

"And of course this is all quite a minor point compared to the question
of who killed John Straker."

"And you will devote yourself to that?"

"On the contrary, we both go back to London by the night train."

I was thunderstruck by my friend's words. We had only been a few hours
in Devonshire, and that he should give up an investigation which he had
begun so brilliantly was quite incomprehensible to me. Not a word more
could I draw from him until we were back at the trainer's house. The
Colonel and the Inspector were awaiting us in the parlor.

"My friend and I return to town by the night-express," said Holmes. "We
have had a charming little breath of your beautiful Dartmoor air."

The Inspector opened his eyes, and the Colonel's lip curled in a sneer.

"So you despair of arresting the murderer of poor Straker," said he.

Holmes shrugged his shoulders. "There are certainly grave difficulties
in the way," said he. "I have every hope, however, that your horse
will start upon Tuesday, and I beg that you will have your jockey in
readiness. Might I ask for a photograph of Mr. John Straker?"

The Inspector took one from an envelope and handed it to him.

"My dear Gregory, you anticipate all my wants. If I might ask you to
wait here for an instant, I have a question which I should like to put
to the maid."

"I must say that I am rather disappointed in our London consultant,"
said Colonel Ross, bluntly, as my friend left the room. "I do not see
that we are any further than when he came."

"At least you have his assurance that your horse will run," said I.

"Yes, I have his assurance," said the Colonel, with a shrug of his
shoulders. "I should prefer to have the horse."

I was about to make some reply in defence of my friend when he entered
the room again.

"Now, gentlemen," said he, "I am quite ready for Tavistock."

As we stepped into the carriage one of the stable-lads held the door
open for us. A sudden idea seemed to occur to Holmes, for he leaned
forward and touched the lad upon the sleeve.

"You have a few sheep in the paddock," he said. "Who attends to them?"

"I do, sir."

"Have you noticed anything amiss with them of late?"

"Well, sir, not of much account; but three of them have gone lame, sir."

I could see that Holmes was extremely pleased, for he chuckled and
rubbed his hands together.

"A long shot, Watson; a very long shot," said he, pinching my arm.
"Gregory, let me recommend to your attention this singular epidemic
among the sheep. Drive on, coachman!"

Colonel Ross still wore an expression which showed the poor opinion
which he had formed of my companion's ability, but I saw by the
Inspector's face that his attention had been keenly aroused.

"You consider that to be important?" he asked.

"Exceedingly so."

"Is there any point to which you would wish to draw my attention?"

"To the curious incident of the dog in the night-time."

"The dog did nothing in the night-time."

"That was the curious incident," remarked Sherlock Holmes.


Four days later Holmes and I were again in the train, bound for
Winchester to see the race for the Wessex Cup. Colonel Ross met us by
appointment outside the station, and we drove in his drag to the course
beyond the town. His face was grave, and his manner was cold in the
extreme.

"I have seen nothing of my horse," said he.

"I suppose that you would know him when you saw him?" asked Holmes.

The Colonel was very angry. "I have been on the turf for twenty years,
and never was asked such a question as that before," said he. "A
child would know Silver Blaze, with his white forehead and his mottled
off-foreleg."

"How is the betting?"

"Well, that is the curious part of it. You could have got fifteen to one
yesterday, but the price has become shorter and shorter, until you can
hardly get three to one now."

"Hum!" said Holmes. "Somebody knows something, that is clear."

As the drag drew up in the enclosure near the grand stand I glanced at
the card to see the entries.

Wessex Plate [it ran] 50 sovs each h ft with 1000 sovs added for four
and five year olds. Second, L300. Third, L200. New course (one mile and
five furlongs). Mr. Heath Newton's The Negro. Red cap. Cinnamon jacket.
Colonel Wardlaw's Pugilist. Pink cap. Blue and black jacket. Lord
Backwater's Desborough. Yellow cap and sleeves. Colonel Ross's Silver
Blaze. Black cap. Red jacket. Duke of Balmoral's Iris. Yellow and black
stripes. Lord Singleford's Rasper. Purple cap. Black sleeves.

"We scratched our other one, and put all hopes on your word," said the
Colonel. "Why, what is that? Silver Blaze favorite?"

"Five to four against Silver Blaze!" roared the ring. "Five to four
against Silver Blaze! Five to fifteen against Desborough! Five to four
on the field!"

"There are the numbers up," I cried. "They are all six there."

"All six there? Then my horse is running," cried the Colonel in great
agitation. "But I don't see him. My colors have not passed."

"Only five have passed. This must be he."

As I spoke a powerful bay horse swept out from the weighing enclosure
and cantered past us, bearing on its back the well-known black and red
of the Colonel.

"That's not my horse," cried the owner. "That beast has not a white hair
upon its body. What is this that you have done, Mr. Holmes?"

"Well, well, let us see how he gets on," said my friend, imperturbably.
For a few minutes he gazed through my field-glass. "Capital! An
excellent start!" he cried suddenly. "There they are, coming round the
curve!"

From our drag we had a superb view as they came up the straight. The six
horses were so close together that a carpet could have covered them,
but half way up the yellow of the Mapleton stable showed to the front.
Before they reached us, however, Desborough's bolt was shot, and the
Colonel's horse, coming away with a rush, passed the post a good six
lengths before its rival, the Duke of Balmoral's Iris making a bad
third.

"It's my race, anyhow," gasped the Colonel, passing his hand over his
eyes. "I confess that I can make neither head nor tail of it. Don't you
think that you have kept up your mystery long enough, Mr. Holmes?"

"Certainly, Colonel, you shall know everything. Let us all go round and
have a look at the horse together. Here he is," he continued, as we made
our way into the weighing enclosure, where only owners and their friends
find admittance. "You have only to wash his face and his leg in spirits
of wine, and you will find that he is the same old Silver Blaze as
ever."

"You take my breath away!"

"I found him in the hands of a faker, and took the liberty of running
him just as he was sent over."

"My dear sir, you have done wonders. The horse looks very fit and well.
It never went better in its life. I owe you a thousand apologies
for having doubted your ability. You have done me a great service by
recovering my horse. You would do me a greater still if you could lay
your hands on the murderer of John Straker."

"I have done so," said Holmes quietly.

The Colonel and I stared at him in amazement. "You have got him! Where
is he, then?"

"He is here."

"Here! Where?"

"In my company at the present moment."

The Colonel flushed angrily. "I quite recognize that I am under
obligations to you, Mr. Holmes," said he, "but I must regard what you
have just said as either a very bad joke or an insult."

Sherlock Holmes laughed. "I assure you that I have not associated
you with the crime, Colonel," said he. "The real murderer is standing
immediately behind you." He stepped past and laid his hand upon the
glossy neck of the thoroughbred.

"The horse!" cried both the Colonel and myself.

"Yes, the horse. And it may lessen his guilt if I say that it was
done in self-defence, and that John Straker was a man who was entirely
unworthy of your confidence. But there goes the bell, and as I stand
to win a little on this next race, I shall defer a lengthy explanation
until a more fitting time."



We had the corner of a Pullman car to ourselves that evening as we
whirled back to London, and I fancy that the journey was a short one
to Colonel Ross as well as to myself, as we listened to our
companion's narrative of the events which had occurred at the Dartmoor
training-stables upon the Monday night, and the means by which he had
unravelled them.

"I confess," said he, "that any theories which I had formed from
the newspaper reports were entirely erroneous. And yet there were
indications there, had they not been overlaid by other details which
concealed their true import. I went to Devonshire with the conviction
that Fitzroy Simpson was the true culprit, although, of course, I saw
that the evidence against him was by no means complete. It was while I
was in the carriage, just as we reached the trainer's house, that the
immense significance of the curried mutton occurred to me. You may
remember that I was distrait, and remained sitting after you had all
alighted. I was marvelling in my own mind how I could possibly have
overlooked so obvious a clue."

"I confess," said the Colonel, "that even now I cannot see how it helps
us."

"It was the first link in my chain of reasoning. Powdered opium is by no
means tasteless. The flavor is not disagreeable, but it is perceptible.
Were it mixed with any ordinary dish the eater would undoubtedly detect
it, and would probably eat no more. A curry was exactly the medium
which would disguise this taste. By no possible supposition could
this stranger, Fitzroy Simpson, have caused curry to be served in
the trainer's family that night, and it is surely too monstrous a
coincidence to suppose that he happened to come along with powdered
opium upon the very night when a dish happened to be served which would
disguise the flavor. That is unthinkable. Therefore Simpson becomes
eliminated from the case, and our attention centers upon Straker and
his wife, the only two people who could have chosen curried mutton for
supper that night. The opium was added after the dish was set aside
for the stable-boy, for the others had the same for supper with no ill
effects. Which of them, then, had access to that dish without the maid
seeing them?

"Before deciding that question I had grasped the significance of the
silence of the dog, for one true inference invariably suggests others.
The Simpson incident had shown me that a dog was kept in the stables,
and yet, though some one had been in and had fetched out a horse, he
had not barked enough to arouse the two lads in the loft. Obviously the
midnight visitor was some one whom the dog knew well.

"I was already convinced, or almost convinced, that John Straker went
down to the stables in the dead of the night and took out Silver Blaze.
For what purpose? For a dishonest one, obviously, or why should he drug
his own stable-boy? And yet I was at a loss to know why. There have been
cases before now where trainers have made sure of great sums of money
by laying against their own horses, through agents, and then preventing
them from winning by fraud. Sometimes it is a pulling jockey. Sometimes
it is some surer and subtler means. What was it here? I hoped that the
contents of his pockets might help me to form a conclusion.

"And they did so. You cannot have forgotten the singular knife which was
found in the dead man's hand, a knife which certainly no sane man would
choose for a weapon. It was, as Dr. Watson told us, a form of knife
which is used for the most delicate operations known in surgery. And it
was to be used for a delicate operation that night. You must know, with
your wide experience of turf matters, Colonel Ross, that it is possible
to make a slight nick upon the tendons of a horse's ham, and to do it
subcutaneously, so as to leave absolutely no trace. A horse so treated
would develop a slight lameness, which would be put down to a strain in
exercise or a touch of rheumatism, but never to foul play."

"Villain! Scoundrel!" cried the Colonel.

"We have here the explanation of why John Straker wished to take the
horse out on to the moor. So spirited a creature would have certainly
roused the soundest of sleepers when it felt the prick of the knife. It
was absolutely necessary to do it in the open air."

"I have been blind!" cried the Colonel. "Of course that was why he
needed the candle, and struck the match."

"Undoubtedly. But in examining his belongings I was fortunate enough to
discover not only the method of the crime, but even its motives. As a
man of the world, Colonel, you know that men do not carry other people's
bills about in their pockets. We have most of us quite enough to do to
settle our own. I at once concluded that Straker was leading a double
life, and keeping a second establishment. The nature of the bill showed
that there was a lady in the case, and one who had expensive tastes.
Liberal as you are with your servants, one can hardly expect that they
can buy twenty-guinea walking dresses for their ladies. I questioned
Mrs. Straker as to the dress without her knowing it, and having
satisfied myself that it had never reached her, I made a note of the
milliner's address, and felt that by calling there with Straker's
photograph I could easily dispose of the mythical Derbyshire.

"From that time on all was plain. Straker had led out the horse to a
hollow where his light would be invisible. Simpson in his flight had
dropped his cravat, and Straker had picked it up--with some idea,
perhaps, that he might use it in securing the horse's leg. Once in the
hollow, he had got behind the horse and had struck a light; but the
creature frightened at the sudden glare, and with the strange instinct
of animals feeling that some mischief was intended, had lashed out, and
the steel shoe had struck Straker full on the forehead. He had already,
in spite of the rain, taken off his overcoat in order to do his delicate
task, and so, as he fell, his knife gashed his thigh. Do I make it
clear?"

"Wonderful!" cried the Colonel. "Wonderful! You might have been there!"

"My final shot was, I confess a very long one. It struck me that so
astute a man as Straker would not undertake this delicate tendon-nicking
without a little practice. What could he practice on? My eyes fell upon
the sheep, and I asked a question which, rather to my surprise, showed
that my surmise was correct.

"When I returned to London I called upon the milliner, who had
recognized Straker as an excellent customer of the name of Derbyshire,
who had a very dashing wife, with a strong partiality for expensive
dresses. I have no doubt that this woman had plunged him over head and
ears in debt, and so led him into this miserable plot."

"You have explained all but one thing," cried the Colonel. "Where was
the horse?"

"Ah, it bolted, and was cared for by one of your neighbors. We must have
an amnesty in that direction, I think. This is Clapham Junction, if I am
not mistaken, and we shall be in Victoria in less than ten minutes. If
you care to smoke a cigar in our rooms, Colonel, I shall be happy to
give you any other details which might interest you."




Adventure II. The Yellow Face


[In publishing these short sketches based upon the numerous cases in
which my companion's singular gifts have made us the listeners to, and
eventually the actors in, some strange drama, it is only natural that I
should dwell rather upon his successes than upon his failures. And this
not so much for the sake of his reputation--for, indeed, it was when
he was at his wits' end that his energy and his versatility were most
admirable--but because where he failed it happened too often that no one
else succeeded, and that the tale was left forever without a conclusion.
Now and again, however, it chanced that even when he erred, the truth
was still discovered. I have noted of some half-dozen cases of the
kind; the Adventure of the Musgrave Ritual and that which I am about to
recount are the two which present the strongest features of interest.]

Sherlock Holmes was a man who seldom took exercise for exercise's sake.
Few men were capable of greater muscular effort, and he was undoubtedly
one of the finest boxers of his weight that I have ever seen; but he
looked upon aimless bodily exertion as a waste of energy, and he seldom
bestirred himself save when there was some professional object to be
served. Then he was absolutely untiring and indefatigable. That he
should have kept himself in training under such circumstances is
remarkable, but his diet was usually of the sparest, and his habits
were simple to the verge of austerity. Save for the occasional use of
cocaine, he had no vices, and he only turned to the drug as a protest
against the monotony of existence when cases were scanty and the papers
uninteresting.

One day in early spring he had so far relaxed as to go for a walk with
me in the Park, where the first faint shoots of green were breaking out
upon the elms, and the sticky spear-heads of the chestnuts were just
beginning to burst into their five-fold leaves. For two hours we rambled
about together, in silence for the most part, as befits two men who know
each other intimately. It was nearly five before we were back in Baker
Street once more.

"Beg pardon, sir," said our page-boy, as he opened the door. "There's
been a gentleman here asking for you, sir."

Holmes glanced reproachfully at me. "So much for afternoon walks!" said
he. "Has this gentleman gone, then?"

"Yes, sir."

"Didn't you ask him in?"

"Yes, sir; he came in."

"How long did he wait?"

"Half an hour, sir. He was a very restless gentleman, sir, a-walkin'
and a-stampin' all the time he was here. I was waitin' outside the door,
sir, and I could hear him. At last he outs into the passage, and he
cries, 'Is that man never goin' to come?' Those were his very words,
sir. 'You'll only need to wait a little longer,' says I. 'Then I'll wait
in the open air, for I feel half choked,' says he. 'I'll be back before
long.' And with that he ups and he outs, and all I could say wouldn't
hold him back."

"Well, well, you did your best," said Holmes, as we walked into our
room. "It's very annoying, though, Watson. I was badly in need of
a case, and this looks, from the man's impatience, as if it were of
importance. Hullo! That's not your pipe on the table. He must have
left his behind him. A nice old brier with a good long stem of what the
tobacconists call amber. I wonder how many real amber mouthpieces there
are in London? Some people think that a fly in it is a sign. Well, he
must have been disturbed in his mind to leave a pipe behind him which he
evidently values highly."

"How do you know that he values it highly?" I asked.

"Well, I should put the original cost of the pipe at seven and sixpence.
Now it has, you see, been twice mended, once in the wooden stem and once
in the amber. Each of these mends, done, as you observe, with silver
bands, must have cost more than the pipe did originally. The man must
value the pipe highly when he prefers to patch it up rather than buy a
new one with the same money."

"Anything else?" I asked, for Holmes was turning the pipe about in his
hand, and staring at it in his peculiar pensive way.

He held it up and tapped on it with his long, thin fore-finger, as a
professor might who was lecturing on a bone.

"Pipes are occasionally of extraordinary interest," said he. "Nothing
has more individuality, save perhaps watches and bootlaces. The
indications here, however, are neither very marked nor very important.
The owner is obviously a muscular man, left-handed, with an excellent
set of teeth, careless in his habits, and with no need to practise
economy."

My friend threw out the information in a very offhand way, but I saw
that he cocked his eye at me to see if I had followed his reasoning.

"You think a man must be well-to-do if he smokes a seven-shilling pipe,"
said I.

"This is Grosvenor mixture at eightpence an ounce," Holmes answered,
knocking a little out on his palm. "As he might get an excellent smoke
for half the price, he has no need to practise economy."

"And the other points?"

"He has been in the habit of lighting his pipe at lamps and gas-jets.
You can see that it is quite charred all down one side. Of course a
match could not have done that. Why should a man hold a match to the
side of his pipe? But you cannot light it at a lamp without getting the
bowl charred. And it is all on the right side of the pipe. From that I
gather that he is a left-handed man. You hold your own pipe to the lamp,
and see how naturally you, being right-handed, hold the left side to the
flame. You might do it once the other way, but not as a constancy. This
has always been held so. Then he has bitten through his amber. It takes
a muscular, energetic fellow, and one with a good set of teeth, to do
that. But if I am not mistaken I hear him upon the stair, so we shall
have something more interesting than his pipe to study."

An instant later our door opened, and a tall young man entered the room.
He was well but quietly dressed in a dark-gray suit, and carried a brown
wide-awake in his hand. I should have put him at about thirty, though he
was really some years older.

"I beg your pardon," said he, with some embarrassment; "I suppose I
should have knocked. Yes, of course I should have knocked. The fact
is that I am a little upset, and you must put it all down to that." He
passed his hand over his forehead like a man who is half dazed, and then
fell rather than sat down upon a chair.

"I can see that you have not slept for a night or two," said Holmes,
in his easy, genial way. "That tries a man's nerves more than work, and
more even than pleasure. May I ask how I can help you?"

"I wanted your advice, sir. I don't know what to do and my whole life
seems to have gone to pieces."

"You wish to employ me as a consulting detective?"

"Not that only. I want your opinion as a judicious man--as a man of the
world. I want to know what I ought to do next. I hope to God you'll be
able to tell me."

He spoke in little, sharp, jerky outbursts, and it seemed to me that to
speak at all was very painful to him, and that his will all through was
overriding his inclinations.

"It's a very delicate thing," said he. "One does not like to speak of
one's domestic affairs to strangers. It seems dreadful to discuss the
conduct of one's wife with two men whom I have never seen before. It's
horrible to have to do it. But I've got to the end of my tether, and I
must have advice."

"My dear Mr. Grant Munro--" began Holmes.

Our visitor sprang from his chair. "What!" he cried, "you know my name?"

"If you wish to preserve your incognito," said Holmes, smiling, "I would
suggest that you cease to write your name upon the lining of your
hat, or else that you turn the crown towards the person whom you are
addressing. I was about to say that my friend and I have listened to a
good many strange secrets in this room, and that we have had the good
fortune to bring peace to many troubled souls. I trust that we may do as
much for you. Might I beg you, as time may prove to be of importance, to
furnish me with the facts of your case without further delay?"

Our visitor again passed his hand over his forehead, as if he found it
bitterly hard. From every gesture and expression I could see that he was
a reserved, self-contained man, with a dash of pride in his nature, more
likely to hide his wounds than to expose them. Then suddenly, with a
fierce gesture of his closed hand, like one who throws reserve to the
winds, he began.

"The facts are these, Mr. Holmes," said he. "I am a married man, and
have been so for three years. During that time my wife and I have loved
each other as fondly and lived as happily as any two that ever were
joined. We have not had a difference, not one, in thought or word or
deed. And now, since last Monday, there has suddenly sprung up a barrier
between us, and I find that there is something in her life and in her
thought of which I know as little as if she were the woman who brushes
by me in the street. We are estranged, and I want to know why.

"Now there is one thing that I want to impress upon you before I go
any further, Mr. Holmes. Effie loves me. Don't let there be any mistake
about that. She loves me with her whole heart and soul, and never more
than now. I know it. I feel it. I don't want to argue about that. A man
can tell easily enough when a woman loves him. But there's this secret
between us, and we can never be the same until it is cleared."

"Kindly let me have the facts, Mr. Munro," said Holmes, with some
impatience.

"I'll tell you what I know about Effie's history. She was a widow when
I met her first, though quite young--only twenty-five. Her name then was
Mrs. Hebron. She went out to America when she was young, and lived in
the town of Atlanta, where she married this Hebron, who was a lawyer
with a good practice. They had one child, but the yellow fever broke out
badly in the place, and both husband and child died of it. I have seen
his death certificate. This sickened her of America, and she came back
to live with a maiden aunt at Pinner, in Middlesex. I may mention that
her husband had left her comfortably off, and that she had a capital of
about four thousand five hundred pounds, which had been so well invested
by him that it returned an average of seven per cent. She had only been
six months at Pinner when I met her; we fell in love with each other,
and we married a few weeks afterwards.

"I am a hop merchant myself, and as I have an income of seven or
eight hundred, we found ourselves comfortably off, and took a nice
eighty-pound-a-year villa at Norbury. Our little place was very
countrified, considering that it is so close to town. We had an inn and
two houses a little above us, and a single cottage at the other side of
the field which faces us, and except those there were no houses until
you got half way to the station. My business took me into town at
certain seasons, but in summer I had less to do, and then in our country
home my wife and I were just as happy as could be wished. I tell you
that there never was a shadow between us until this accursed affair
began.

"There's one thing I ought to tell you before I go further. When we
married, my wife made over all her property to me--rather against my
will, for I saw how awkward it would be if my business affairs went
wrong. However, she would have it so, and it was done. Well, about six
weeks ago she came to me.

"'Jack,' said she, 'when you took my money you said that if ever I
wanted any I was to ask you for it.'

"'Certainly,' said I. 'It's all your own.'

"'Well,' said she, 'I want a hundred pounds.'

"I was a bit staggered at this, for I had imagined it was simply a new
dress or something of the kind that she was after.

"'What on earth for?' I asked.

"'Oh,' said she, in her playful way, 'you said that you were only my
banker, and bankers never ask questions, you know.'

"'If you really mean it, of course you shall have the money,' said I.

"'Oh, yes, I really mean it.'

"'And you won't tell me what you want it for?'

"'Some day, perhaps, but not just at present, Jack.'

"So I had to be content with that, though it was the first time that
there had ever been any secret between us. I gave her a check, and I
never thought any more of the matter. It may have nothing to do with
what came afterwards, but I thought it only right to mention it.

"Well, I told you just now that there is a cottage not far from our
house. There is just a field between us, but to reach it you have to
go along the road and then turn down a lane. Just beyond it is a nice
little grove of Scotch firs, and I used to be very fond of strolling
down there, for trees are always a neighborly kind of things. The
cottage had been standing empty this eight months, and it was a pity,
for it was a pretty two-storied place, with an old-fashioned porch and
honeysuckle about it. I have stood many a time and thought what a neat
little homestead it would make.

"Well, last Monday evening I was taking a stroll down that way, when
I met an empty van coming up the lane, and saw a pile of carpets and
things lying about on the grass-plot beside the porch. It was clear that
the cottage had at last been let. I walked past it, and wondered what
sort of folk they were who had come to live so near us. And as I looked
I suddenly became aware that a face was watching me out of one of the
upper windows.

"I don't know what there was about that face, Mr. Holmes, but it seemed
to send a chill right down my back. I was some little way off, so that
I could not make out the features, but there was something unnatural and
inhuman about the face. That was the impression that I had, and I moved
quickly forwards to get a nearer view of the person who was watching
me. But as I did so the face suddenly disappeared, so suddenly that it
seemed to have been plucked away into the darkness of the room. I stood
for five minutes thinking the business over, and trying to analyze my
impressions. I could not tell if the face were that of a man or a
woman. It had been too far from me for that. But its color was what had
impressed me most. It was of a livid chalky white, and with something
set and rigid about it which was shockingly unnatural. So disturbed
was I that I determined to see a little more of the new inmates of
the cottage. I approached and knocked at the door, which was instantly
opened by a tall, gaunt woman with a harsh, forbidding face.

"'What may you be wantin'?' she asked, in a Northern accent.

"'I am your neighbor over yonder,' said I, nodding towards my house. 'I
see that you have only just moved in, so I thought that if I could be of
any help to you in any--'

"'Ay, we'll just ask ye when we want ye,' said she, and shut the door
in my face. Annoyed at the churlish rebuff, I turned my back and walked
home. All evening, though I tried to think of other things, my mind
would still turn to the apparition at the window and the rudeness of the
woman. I determined to say nothing about the former to my wife, for
she is a nervous, highly strung woman, and I had no wish that she would
share the unpleasant impression which had been produced upon myself. I
remarked to her, however, before I fell asleep, that the cottage was now
occupied, to which she returned no reply.

"I am usually an extremely sound sleeper. It has been a standing jest
in the family that nothing could ever wake me during the night. And yet
somehow on that particular night, whether it may have been the slight
excitement produced by my little adventure or not I know not, but
I slept much more lightly than usual. Half in my dreams I was dimly
conscious that something was going on in the room, and gradually became
aware that my wife had dressed herself and was slipping on her mantle
and her bonnet. My lips were parted to murmur out some sleepy words of
surprise or remonstrance at this untimely preparation, when suddenly my
half-opened eyes fell upon her face, illuminated by the candle-light,
and astonishment held me dumb. She wore an expression such as I had
never seen before--such as I should have thought her incapable of
assuming. She was deadly pale and breathing fast, glancing furtively
towards the bed as she fastened her mantle, to see if she had disturbed
me. Then, thinking that I was still asleep, she slipped noiselessly from
the room, and an instant later I heard a sharp creaking which could only
come from the hinges of the front door. I sat up in bed and rapped my
knuckles against the rail to make certain that I was truly awake. Then
I took my watch from under the pillow. It was three in the morning. What
on this earth could my wife be doing out on the country road at three in
the morning?

"I had sat for about twenty minutes turning the thing over in my mind
and trying to find some possible explanation. The more I thought, the
more extraordinary and inexplicable did it appear. I was still puzzling
over it when I heard the door gently close again, and her footsteps
coming up the stairs.

"'Where in the world have you been, Effie?' I asked as she entered.

"She gave a violent start and a kind of gasping cry when I spoke, and
that cry and start troubled me more than all the rest, for there was
something indescribably guilty about them. My wife had always been
a woman of a frank, open nature, and it gave me a chill to see her
slinking into her own room, and crying out and wincing when her own
husband spoke to her.

"'You awake, Jack!' she cried, with a nervous laugh. 'Why, I thought
that nothing could awake you.'

"'Where have you been?' I asked, more sternly.

"'I don't wonder that you are surprised,' said she, and I could see that
her fingers were trembling as she undid the fastenings of her mantle.
'Why, I never remember having done such a thing in my life before. The
fact is that I felt as though I were choking, and had a perfect longing
for a breath of fresh air. I really think that I should have fainted if
I had not gone out. I stood at the door for a few minutes, and now I am
quite myself again.'

"All the time that she was telling me this story she never once looked
in my direction, and her voice was quite unlike her usual tones. It
was evident to me that she was saying what was false. I said nothing
in reply, but turned my face to the wall, sick at heart, with my mind
filled with a thousand venomous doubts and suspicions. What was it that
my wife was concealing from me? Where had she been during that strange
expedition? I felt that I should have no peace until I knew, and yet I
shrank from asking her again after once she had told me what was false.
All the rest of the night I tossed and tumbled, framing theory after
theory, each more unlikely than the last.

"I should have gone to the City that day, but I was too disturbed in my
mind to be able to pay attention to business matters. My wife seemed
to be as upset as myself, and I could see from the little questioning
glances which she kept shooting at me that she understood that I
disbelieved her statement, and that she was at her wits' end what to do.
We hardly exchanged a word during breakfast, and immediately afterwards
I went out for a walk, that I might think the matter out in the fresh
morning air.

"I went as far as the Crystal Palace, spent an hour in the grounds, and
was back in Norbury by one o'clock. It happened that my way took me past
the cottage, and I stopped for an instant to look at the windows, and to
see if I could catch a glimpse of the strange face which had looked
out at me on the day before. As I stood there, imagine my surprise, Mr.
Holmes, when the door suddenly opened and my wife walked out.

"I was struck dumb with astonishment at the sight of her; but my
emotions were nothing to those which showed themselves upon her face
when our eyes met. She seemed for an instant to wish to shrink back
inside the house again; and then, seeing how useless all concealment
must be, she came forward, with a very white face and frightened eyes
which belied the smile upon her lips.

"'Ah, Jack,' she said, 'I have just been in to see if I can be of any
assistance to our new neighbors. Why do you look at me like that, Jack?
You are not angry with me?'

"'So,' said I, 'this is where you went during the night.'

"'What do you mean?' she cried.

"'You came here. I am sure of it. Who are these people, that you should
visit them at such an hour?'

"'I have not been here before.'

"'How can you tell me what you know is false?' I cried. 'Your very voice
changes as you speak. When have I ever had a secret from you? I shall
enter that cottage, and I shall probe the matter to the bottom.'

"'No, no, Jack, for God's sake!' she gasped, in uncontrollable emotion.
Then, as I approached the door, she seized my sleeve and pulled me back
with convulsive strength.

"'I implore you not to do this, Jack,' she cried. 'I swear that I will
tell you everything some day, but nothing but misery can come of it if
you enter that cottage.' Then, as I tried to shake her off, she clung to
me in a frenzy of entreaty.

"'Trust me, Jack!' she cried. 'Trust me only this once. You will never
have cause to regret it. You know that I would not have a secret from
you if it were not for your own sake. Our whole lives are at stake in
this. If you come home with me, all will be well. If you force your way
into that cottage, all is over between us.'

"There was such earnestness, such despair, in her manner that her words
arrested me, and I stood irresolute before the door.

"'I will trust you on one condition, and on one condition only,' said I
at last. 'It is that this mystery comes to an end from now. You are
at liberty to preserve your secret, but you must promise me that there
shall be no more nightly visits, no more doings which are kept from my
knowledge. I am willing to forget those which are passed if you will
promise that there shall be no more in the future.'

"'I was sure that you would trust me,' she cried, with a great sigh of
relief. 'It shall be just as you wish. Come away--oh, come away up to
the house.'

"Still pulling at my sleeve, she led me away from the cottage. As we
went I glanced back, and there was that yellow livid face watching us
out of the upper window. What link could there be between that creature
and my wife? Or how could the coarse, rough woman whom I had seen the
day before be connected with her? It was a strange puzzle, and yet I
knew that my mind could never know ease again until I had solved it.

"For two days after this I stayed at home, and my wife appeared to abide
loyally by our engagement, for, as far as I know, she never stirred out
of the house. On the third day, however, I had ample evidence that
her solemn promise was not enough to hold her back from this secret
influence which drew her away from her husband and her duty.

"I had gone into town on that day, but I returned by the 2.40 instead of
the 3.36, which is my usual train. As I entered the house the maid ran
into the hall with a startled face.

"'Where is your mistress?' I asked.

"'I think that she has gone out for a walk,' she answered.

"My mind was instantly filled with suspicion. I rushed upstairs to make
sure that she was not in the house. As I did so I happened to glance out
of one of the upper windows, and saw the maid with whom I had just been
speaking running across the field in the direction of the cottage. Then
of course I saw exactly what it all meant. My wife had gone over there,
and had asked the servant to call her if I should return. Tingling with
anger, I rushed down and hurried across, determined to end the matter
once and forever. I saw my wife and the maid hurrying back along the
lane, but I did not stop to speak with them. In the cottage lay the
secret which was casting a shadow over my life. I vowed that, come what
might, it should be a secret no longer. I did not even knock when I
reached it, but turned the handle and rushed into the passage.

"It was all still and quiet upon the ground floor. In the kitchen a
kettle was singing on the fire, and a large black cat lay coiled up in
the basket; but there was no sign of the woman whom I had seen before.
I ran into the other room, but it was equally deserted. Then I rushed up
the stairs, only to find two other rooms empty and deserted at the top.
There was no one at all in the whole house. The furniture and pictures
were of the most common and vulgar description, save in the one chamber
at the window of which I had seen the strange face. That was comfortable
and elegant, and all my suspicions rose into a fierce bitter flame when
I saw that on the mantelpiece stood a copy of a full-length photograph
of my wife, which had been taken at my request only three months ago.

"I stayed long enough to make certain that the house was absolutely
empty. Then I left it, feeling a weight at my heart such as I had never
had before. My wife came out into the hall as I entered my house; but I
was too hurt and angry to speak with her, and pushing past her, I made
my way into my study. She followed me, however, before I could close the
door.

"'I am sorry that I broke my promise, Jack,' said she; 'but if you knew
all the circumstances I am sure that you would forgive me.'

"'Tell me everything, then,' said I.

"'I cannot, Jack, I cannot,' she cried.

"'Until you tell me who it is that has been living in that cottage, and
who it is to whom you have given that photograph, there can never be any
confidence between us,' said I, and breaking away from her, I left the
house. That was yesterday, Mr. Holmes, and I have not seen her since,
nor do I know anything more about this strange business. It is the first
shadow that has come between us, and it has so shaken me that I do not
know what I should do for the best. Suddenly this morning it occurred to
me that you were the man to advise me, so I have hurried to you now, and
I place myself unreservedly in your hands. If there is any point which I
have not made clear, pray question me about it. But, above all, tell me
quickly what I am to do, for this misery is more than I can bear."

Holmes and I had listened with the utmost interest to this extraordinary
statement, which had been delivered in the jerky, broken fashion of a
man who is under the influence of extreme emotions. My companion sat
silent for some time, with his chin upon his hand, lost in thought.

"Tell me," said he at last, "could you swear that this was a man's face
which you saw at the window?"

"Each time that I saw it I was some distance away from it, so that it is
impossible for me to say."

"You appear, however, to have been disagreeably impressed by it."

"It seemed to be of an unnatural color, and to have a strange rigidity
about the features. When I approached, it vanished with a jerk."

"How long is it since your wife asked you for a hundred pounds?"

"Nearly two months."

"Have you ever seen a photograph of her first husband?"

"No; there was a great fire at Atlanta very shortly after his death, and
all her papers were destroyed."

"And yet she had a certificate of death. You say that you saw it."

"Yes; she got a duplicate after the fire."

"Did you ever meet any one who knew her in America?"

"No."

"Did she ever talk of revisiting the place?"

"No."

"Or get letters from it?"

"No."

"Thank you. I should like to think over the matter a little now. If the
cottage is now permanently deserted we may have some difficulty. If, on
the other hand, as I fancy is more likely, the inmates were warned of
your coming, and left before you entered yesterday, then they may be
back now, and we should clear it all up easily. Let me advise you, then,
to return to Norbury, and to examine the windows of the cottage again.
If you have reason to believe that it is inhabited, do not force your
way in, but send a wire to my friend and me. We shall be with you within
an hour of receiving it, and we shall then very soon get to the bottom
of the business."

"And if it is still empty?"

"In that case I shall come out to-morrow and talk it over with you.
Good-by; and, above all, do not fret until you know that you really have
a cause for it."

"I am afraid that this is a bad business, Watson," said my companion, as
he returned after accompanying Mr. Grant Munro to the door. "What do you
make of it?"

"It had an ugly sound," I answered.

"Yes. There's blackmail in it, or I am much mistaken."

"And who is the blackmailer?"

"Well, it must be the creature who lives in the only comfortable room
in the place, and has her photograph above his fireplace. Upon my word,
Watson, there is something very attractive about that livid face at the
window, and I would not have missed the case for worlds."

"You have a theory?"

"Yes, a provisional one. But I shall be surprised if it does not turn
out to be correct. This woman's first husband is in that cottage."

"Why do you think so?"

"How else can we explain her frenzied anxiety that her second one should
not enter it? The facts, as I read them, are something like this:
This woman was married in America. Her husband developed some hateful
qualities; or shall we say that he contracted some loathsome disease,
and became a leper or an imbecile? She flies from him at last, returns
to England, changes her name, and starts her life, as she thinks,
afresh. She has been married three years, and believes that her position
is quite secure, having shown her husband the death certificate of
some man whose name she has assumed, when suddenly her whereabouts
is discovered by her first husband; or, we may suppose, by some
unscrupulous woman who has attached herself to the invalid. They write
to the wife, and threaten to come and expose her. She asks for a hundred
pounds, and endeavors to buy them off. They come in spite of it, and
when the husband mentions casually to the wife that there are new-comers
in the cottage, she knows in some way that they are her pursuers. She
waits until her husband is asleep, and then she rushes down to endeavor
to persuade them to leave her in peace. Having no success, she goes
again next morning, and her husband meets her, as he has told us, as
she comes out. She promises him then not to go there again, but two days
afterwards the hope of getting rid of those dreadful neighbors was too
strong for her, and she made another attempt, taking down with her the
photograph which had probably been demanded from her. In the midst of
this interview the maid rushed in to say that the master had come home,
on which the wife, knowing that he would come straight down to the
cottage, hurried the inmates out at the back door, into the grove of
fir-trees, probably, which was mentioned as standing near. In this way
he found the place deserted. I shall be very much surprised, however, if
it is still so when he reconnoitres it this evening. What do you think
of my theory?"

"It is all surmise."

"But at least it covers all the facts. When new facts come to our
knowledge which cannot be covered by it, it will be time enough to
reconsider it. We can do nothing more until we have a message from our
friend at Norbury."

But we had not a very long time to wait for that. It came just as we had
finished our tea. "The cottage is still tenanted," it said. "Have seen
the face again at the window. Will meet the seven o'clock train, and
will take no steps until you arrive."


He was waiting on the platform when we stepped out, and we could see in
the light of the station lamps that he was very pale, and quivering with
agitation.

"They are still there, Mr. Holmes," said he, laying his hand hard upon
my friend's sleeve. "I saw lights in the cottage as I came down. We
shall settle it now once and for all."

"What is your plan, then?" asked Holmes, as he walked down the dark
tree-lined road.

"I am going to force my way in and see for myself who is in the house. I
wish you both to be there as witnesses."

"You are quite determined to do this, in spite of your wife's warning
that it is better that you should not solve the mystery?"

"Yes, I am determined."

"Well, I think that you are in the right. Any truth is better than
indefinite doubt. We had better go up at once. Of course, legally, we
are putting ourselves hopelessly in the wrong; but I think that it is
worth it."

It was a very dark night, and a thin rain began to fall as we turned
from the high road into a narrow lane, deeply rutted, with hedges on
either side. Mr. Grant Munro pushed impatiently forward, however, and we
stumbled after him as best we could.

"There are the lights of my house," he murmured, pointing to a glimmer
among the trees. "And here is the cottage which I am going to enter."

We turned a corner in the lane as he spoke, and there was the building
close beside us. A yellow bar falling across the black foreground showed
that the door was not quite closed, and one window in the upper story
was brightly illuminated. As we looked, we saw a dark blur moving across
the blind.

"There is that creature!" cried Grant Munro. "You can see for yourselves
that some one is there. Now follow me, and we shall soon know all."

We approached the door; but suddenly a woman appeared out of the shadow
and stood in the golden track of the lamp-light. I could not see her
face in the darkness, but her arms were thrown out in an attitude of
entreaty.

"For God's sake, don't Jack!" she cried. "I had a presentiment that you
would come this evening. Think better of it, dear! Trust me again, and
you will never have cause to regret it."

"I have trusted you too long, Effie," he cried, sternly. "Leave go of
me! I must pass you. My friends and I are going to settle this matter
once and forever!" He pushed her to one side, and we followed closely
after him. As he threw the door open an old woman ran out in front of
him and tried to bar his passage, but he thrust her back, and an instant
afterwards we were all upon the stairs. Grant Munro rushed into the
lighted room at the top, and we entered at his heels.

It was a cosey, well-furnished apartment, with two candles burning upon
the table and two upon the mantelpiece. In the corner, stooping over a
desk, there sat what appeared to be a little girl. Her face was turned
away as we entered, but we could see that she was dressed in a red
frock, and that she had long white gloves on. As she whisked round
to us, I gave a cry of surprise and horror. The face which she turned
towards us was of the strangest livid tint, and the features were
absolutely devoid of any expression. An instant later the mystery was
explained. Holmes, with a laugh, passed his hand behind the child's
ear, a mask peeled off from her countenance, and there was a little coal
black negress, with all her white teeth flashing in amusement at our
amazed faces. I burst out laughing, out of sympathy with her merriment;
but Grant Munro stood staring, with his hand clutching his throat.

"My God!" he cried. "What can be the meaning of this?"

"I will tell you the meaning of it," cried the lady, sweeping into
the room with a proud, set face. "You have forced me, against my own
judgment, to tell you, and now we must both make the best of it. My
husband died at Atlanta. My child survived."

"Your child?"

She drew a large silver locket from her bosom. "You have never seen this
open."

"I understood that it did not open."

She touched a spring, and the front hinged back. There was a portrait
within of a man strikingly handsome and intelligent-looking, but bearing
unmistakable signs upon his features of his African descent.

"That is John Hebron, of Atlanta," said the lady, "and a nobler man
never walked the earth. I cut myself off from my race in order to wed
him, but never once while he lived did I for an instant regret it. It
was our misfortune that our only child took after his people rather than
mine. It is often so in such matches, and little Lucy is darker far than
ever her father was. But dark or fair, she is my own dear little girlie,
and her mother's pet." The little creature ran across at the words and
nestled up against the lady's dress. "When I left her in America," she
continued, "it was only because her health was weak, and the change
might have done her harm. She was given to the care of a faithful Scotch
woman who had once been our servant. Never for an instant did I dream
of disowning her as my child. But when chance threw you in my way, Jack,
and I learned to love you, I feared to tell you about my child. God
forgive me, I feared that I should lose you, and I had not the courage
to tell you. I had to choose between you, and in my weakness I turned
away from my own little girl. For three years I have kept her existence
a secret from you, but I heard from the nurse, and I knew that all was
well with her. At last, however, there came an overwhelming desire to
see the child once more. I struggled against it, but in vain. Though I
knew the danger, I determined to have the child over, if it were but
for a few weeks. I sent a hundred pounds to the nurse, and I gave her
instructions about this cottage, so that she might come as a neighbor,
without my appearing to be in any way connected with her. I pushed my
precautions so far as to order her to keep the child in the house during
the daytime, and to cover up her little face and hands so that even
those who might see her at the window should not gossip about there
being a black child in the neighborhood. If I had been less cautious
I might have been more wise, but I was half crazy with fear that you
should learn the truth.

"It was you who told me first that the cottage was occupied. I should
have waited for the morning, but I could not sleep for excitement, and
so at last I slipped out, knowing how difficult it is to awake you. But
you saw me go, and that was the beginning of my troubles. Next day you
had my secret at your mercy, but you nobly refrained from pursuing your
advantage. Three days later, however, the nurse and child only just
escaped from the back door as you rushed in at the front one. And now
to-night you at last know all, and I ask you what is to become of us, my
child and me?" She clasped her hands and waited for an answer.

It was a long ten minutes before Grant Munro broke the silence, and
when his answer came it was one of which I love to think. He lifted
the little child, kissed her, and then, still carrying her, he held his
other hand out to his wife and turned towards the door.

"We can talk it over more comfortably at home," said he. "I am not a
very good man, Effie, but I think that I am a better one than you have
given me credit for being."

Holmes and I followed them down the lane, and my friend plucked at my
sleeve as we came out.

"I think," said he, "that we shall be of more use in London than in
Norbury."

Not another word did he say of the case until late that night, when he
was turning away, with his lighted candle, for his bedroom.

"Watson," said he, "if it should ever strike you that I am getting a
little over-confident in my powers, or giving less pains to a case
than it deserves, kindly whisper 'Norbury' in my ear, and I shall be
infinitely obliged to you."




Adventure III. The Stock-Broker's Clerk


Shortly after my marriage I had bought a connection in the Paddington
district. Old Mr. Farquhar, from whom I purchased it, had at one time an
excellent general practice; but his age, and an affliction of the nature
of St. Vitus's dance from which he suffered, had very much thinned it.
The public not unnaturally goes on the principle that he who would heal
others must himself be whole, and looks askance at the curative powers
of the man whose own case is beyond the reach of his drugs. Thus as my
predecessor weakened his practice declined, until when I purchased
it from him it had sunk from twelve hundred to little more than three
hundred a year. I had confidence, however, in my own youth and energy,
and was convinced that in a very few years the concern would be as
flourishing as ever.

For three months after taking over the practice I was kept very closely
at work, and saw little of my friend Sherlock Holmes, for I was too busy
to visit Baker Street, and he seldom went anywhere himself save upon
professional business. I was surprised, therefore, when, one morning in
June, as I sat reading the British Medical Journal after breakfast, I
heard a ring at the bell, followed by the high, somewhat strident tones
of my old companion's voice.

"Ah, my dear Watson," said he, striding into the room, "I am very
delighted to see you! I trust that Mrs. Watson has entirely recovered
from all the little excitements connected with our adventure of the Sign
of Four."

"Thank you, we are both very well," said I, shaking him warmly by the
hand.

"And I hope, also," he continued, sitting down in the rocking-chair,
"that the cares of medical practice have not entirely obliterated the
interest which you used to take in our little deductive problems."

"On the contrary," I answered, "it was only last night that I was
looking over my old notes, and classifying some of our past results."

"I trust that you don't consider your collection closed."

"Not at all. I should wish nothing better than to have some more of such
experiences."

"To-day, for example?"

"Yes, to-day, if you like."

"And as far off as Birmingham?"

"Certainly, if you wish it."

"And the practice?"

"I do my neighbor's when he goes. He is always ready to work off the
debt."

"Ha! Nothing could be better," said Holmes, leaning back in his chair
and looking keenly at me from under his half closed lids. "I perceive
that you have been unwell lately. Summer colds are always a little
trying."

"I was confined to the house by a severe chill for three days last week.
I thought, however, that I had cast off every trace of it."

"So you have. You look remarkably robust."

"How, then, did you know of it?"

"My dear fellow, you know my methods."

"You deduced it, then?"

"Certainly."

"And from what?"

"From your slippers."

I glanced down at the new patent leathers which I was wearing. "How on
earth--" I began, but Holmes answered my question before it was asked.

"Your slippers are new," he said. "You could not have had them more than
a few weeks. The soles which you are at this moment presenting to me are
slightly scorched. For a moment I thought they might have got wet and
been burned in the drying. But near the instep there is a small circular
wafer of paper with the shopman's hieroglyphics upon it. Damp would of
course have removed this. You had, then, been sitting with your feet
outstretched to the fire, which a man would hardly do even in so wet a
June as this if he were in his full health."

Like all Holmes's reasoning the thing seemed simplicity itself when it
was once explained. He read the thought upon my features, and his smile
had a tinge of bitterness.

"I am afraid that I rather give myself away when I explain," said he.
"Results without causes are much more impressive. You are ready to come
to Birmingham, then?"

"Certainly. What is the case?"

"You shall hear it all in the train. My client is outside in a
four-wheeler. Can you come at once?"

"In an instant." I scribbled a note to my neighbor, rushed upstairs to
explain the matter to my wife, and joined Holmes upon the door-step.

"Your neighbor is a doctor," said he, nodding at the brass plate.

"Yes; he bought a practice as I did."

"An old-established one?"

"Just the same as mine. Both have been ever since the houses were
built."

"Ah! Then you got hold of the best of the two."

"I think I did. But how do you know?"

"By the steps, my boy. Yours are worn three inches deeper than his. But
this gentleman in the cab is my client, Mr. Hall Pycroft. Allow me to
introduce you to him. Whip your horse up, cabby, for we have only just
time to catch our train."

The man whom I found myself facing was a well built, fresh-complexioned
young fellow, with a frank, honest face and a slight, crisp, yellow
mustache. He wore a very shiny top hat and a neat suit of sober black,
which made him look what he was--a smart young City man, of the class
who have been labeled cockneys, but who give us our crack volunteer
regiments, and who turn out more fine athletes and sportsmen than any
body of men in these islands. His round, ruddy face was naturally full
of cheeriness, but the corners of his mouth seemed to me to be pulled
down in a half-comical distress. It was not, however, until we were
all in a first-class carriage and well started upon our journey to
Birmingham that I was able to learn what the trouble was which had
driven him to Sherlock Holmes.

"We have a clear run here of seventy minutes," Holmes remarked. "I
want you, Mr. Hall Pycroft, to tell my friend your very interesting
experience exactly as you have told it to me, or with more detail if
possible. It will be of use to me to hear the succession of events
again. It is a case, Watson, which may prove to have something in it, or
may prove to have nothing, but which, at least, presents those unusual
and outré features which are as dear to you as they are to me. Now, Mr.
Pycroft, I shall not interrupt you again."

Our young companion looked at me with a twinkle in his eye.

"The worst of the story is," said he, "that I show myself up as such a
confounded fool. Of course it may work out all right, and I don't see
that I could have done otherwise; but if I have lost my crib and get
nothing in exchange I shall feel what a soft Johnnie I have been. I'm
not very good at telling a story, Dr. Watson, but it is like this with
me:

"I used to have a billet at Coxon & Woodhouse's, of Draper's Gardens,
but they were let in early in the spring through the Venezuelan loan,
as no doubt you remember, and came a nasty cropper. I had been with them
five years, and old Coxon gave me a ripping good testimonial when
the smash came, but of course we clerks were all turned adrift, the
twenty-seven of us. I tried here and tried there, but there were lots of
other chaps on the same lay as myself, and it was a perfect frost for a
long time. I had been taking three pounds a week at Coxon's, and I had
saved about seventy of them, but I soon worked my way through that and
out at the other end. I was fairly at the end of my tether at last,
and could hardly find the stamps to answer the advertisements or the
envelopes to stick them to. I had worn out my boots paddling up office
stairs, and I seemed just as far from getting a billet as ever.

"At last I saw a vacancy at Mawson & Williams's, the great stock-broking
firm in Lombard Street. I dare say E. C. is not much in your line, but
I can tell you that this is about the richest house in London.
The advertisement was to be answered by letter only. I sent in my
testimonial and application, but without the least hope of getting it.
Back came an answer by return, saying that if I would appear next Monday
I might take over my new duties at once, provided that my appearance was
satisfactory. No one knows how these things are worked. Some people say
that the manager just plunges his hand into the heap and takes the first
that comes. Anyhow it was my innings that time, and I don't ever wish to
feel better pleased. The screw was a pound a week rise, and the duties
just about the same as at Coxon's.

"And now I come to the queer part of the business. I was in diggings out
Hampstead way, 17 Potter's Terrace. Well, I was sitting doing a smoke
that very evening after I had been promised the appointment, when up
came my landlady with a card which had 'Arthur Pinner, Financial Agent,'
printed upon it. I had never heard the name before and could not imagine
what he wanted with me; but, of course, I asked her to show him up. In
he walked, a middle-sized, dark-haired, dark-eyed, black-bearded man,
with a touch of the Sheeny about his nose. He had a brisk kind of way
with him and spoke sharply, like a man who knew the value of time."

"'Mr. Hall Pycroft, I believe?'" said he.

"'Yes, sir,' I answered, pushing a chair towards him.

"'Lately engaged at Coxon & Woodhouse's?'

"'Yes, sir.'

"'And now on the staff of Mawson's.'

"'Quite so.'

"'Well,' said he, 'the fact is that I have heard some really
extraordinary stories about your financial ability. You remember Parker,
who used to be Coxon's manager? He can never say enough about it.'

"Of course I was pleased to hear this. I had always been pretty sharp in
the office, but I had never dreamed that I was talked about in the City
in this fashion.

"'You have a good memory?' said he.

"'Pretty fair,' I answered, modestly.

"'Have you kept in touch with the market while you have been out of
work?' he asked.

"'Yes. I read the stock exchange list every morning.'

"'Now that shows real application!' he cried. 'That is the way to
prosper! You won't mind my testing you, will you? Let me see. How are
Ayrshires?'

"'A hundred and six and a quarter to a hundred and five and
seven-eighths.'

"'And New Zealand consolidated?'

"'A hundred and four.

"'And British Broken Hills?'

"'Seven to seven-and-six.'

"'Wonderful!' he cried, with his hands up. 'This quite fits in with all
that I had heard. My boy, my boy, you are very much too good to be a
clerk at Mawson's!'

"This outburst rather astonished me, as you can think. 'Well,' said I,
'other people don't think quite so much of me as you seem to do, Mr.
Pinner. I had a hard enough fight to get this berth, and I am very glad
to have it.'

"'Pooh, man; you should soar above it. You are not in your true sphere.
Now, I'll tell you how it stands with me. What I have to offer is little
enough when measured by your ability, but when compared with Mawson's,
it's light to dark. Let me see. When do you go to Mawson's?'

"'On Monday.'

"'Ha, ha! I think I would risk a little sporting flutter that you don't
go there at all.'

"'Not go to Mawson's?'

"'No, sir. By that day you will be the business manager of the
Franco-Midland Hardware Company, Limited, with a hundred and thirty-four
branches in the towns and villages of France, not counting one in
Brussels and one in San Remo.'

"This took my breath away. 'I never heard of it,' said I.

"'Very likely not. It has been kept very quiet, for the capital was all
privately subscribed, and it's too good a thing to let the public
into. My brother, Harry Pinner, is promoter, and joins the board after
allotment as managing director. He knew I was in the swim down here, and
asked me to pick up a good man cheap. A young, pushing man with plenty
of snap about him. Parker spoke of you, and that brought me here
to-night. We can only offer you a beggarly five hundred to start with.'

"'Five hundred a year!' I shouted.

"'Only that at the beginning; but you are to have an overriding
commission of one per cent on all business done by your agents, and you
may take my word for it that this will come to more than your salary.'

"'But I know nothing about hardware.'

"'Tut, my boy; you know about figures.'

"My head buzzed, and I could hardly sit still in my chair. But suddenly
a little chill of doubt came upon me.

"'I must be frank with you,' said I. 'Mawson only gives me two hundred,
but Mawson is safe. Now, really, I know so little about your company
that--'

"'Ah, smart, smart!' he cried, in a kind of ecstasy of delight. 'You
are the very man for us. You are not to be talked over, and quite right,
too. Now, here's a note for a hundred pounds, and if you think that we
can do business you may just slip it into your pocket as an advance upon
your salary.'

"'That is very handsome,' said I. 'When should I take over my new
duties?'

"'Be in Birmingham to-morrow at one,' said he. 'I have a note in my
pocket here which you will take to my brother. You will find him at
126b Corporation Street, where the temporary offices of the company
are situated. Of course he must confirm your engagement, but between
ourselves it will be all right.'

"'Really, I hardly know how to express my gratitude, Mr. Pinner,' said
I.

"'Not at all, my boy. You have only got your deserts. There are one or
two small things--mere formalities--which I must arrange with you.
You have a bit of paper beside you there. Kindly write upon it "I am
perfectly willing to act as business manager to the Franco-Midland
Hardware Company, Limited, at a minimum salary of L500."'

"I did as he asked, and he put the paper in his pocket.

"'There is one other detail,' said he. 'What do you intend to do about
Mawson's?'

"I had forgotten all about Mawson's in my joy. 'I'll write and resign,'
said I.

"'Precisely what I don't want you to do. I had a row over you with
Mawson's manager. I had gone up to ask him about you, and he was very
offensive; accused me of coaxing you away from the service of the firm,
and that sort of thing. At last I fairly lost my temper. "If you want
good men you should pay them a good price," said I.'

"'He would rather have our small price than your big one,' said he.

"'I'll lay you a fiver,' said I, 'that when he has my offer you'll never
so much as hear from him again.'

"'Done!' said he. 'We picked him out of the gutter, and he won't leave
us so easily.' Those were his very words."

"'The impudent scoundrel!' I cried. 'I've never so much as seen him in
my life. Why should I consider him in any way? I shall certainly not
write if you would rather I didn't.'

"'Good! That's a promise,' said he, rising from his chair. 'Well, I'm
delighted to have got so good a man for my brother. Here's your advance
of a hundred pounds, and here is the letter. Make a note of the address,
126b Corporation Street, and remember that one o'clock to-morrow is
your appointment. Good-night; and may you have all the fortune that you
deserve!'

"That's just about all that passed between us, as near as I can
remember. You can imagine, Dr. Watson, how pleased I was at such an
extraordinary bit of good fortune. I sat up half the night hugging
myself over it, and next day I was off to Birmingham in a train that
would take me in plenty time for my appointment. I took my things to
a hotel in New Street, and then I made my way to the address which had
been given me.

"It was a quarter of an hour before my time, but I thought that would
make no difference. 126b was a passage between two large shops, which
led to a winding stone stair, from which there were many flats, let as
offices to companies or professional men. The names of the occupants
were painted at the bottom on the wall, but there was no such name as
the Franco-Midland Hardware Company, Limited. I stood for a few minutes
with my heart in my boots, wondering whether the whole thing was an
elaborate hoax or not, when up came a man and addressed me. He was very
like the chap I had seen the night before, the same figure and voice,
but he was clean shaven and his hair was lighter.

"'Are you Mr. Hall Pycroft?' he asked.

"'Yes,' said I.

"'Oh! I was expecting you, but you are a trifle before your time. I had
a note from my brother this morning in which he sang your praises very
loudly.'

"'I was just looking for the offices when you came.

"'We have not got our name up yet, for we only secured these temporary
premises last week. Come up with me, and we will talk the matter over.'

"I followed him to the top of a very lofty stair, and there, right under
the slates, were a couple of empty, dusty little rooms, uncarpeted and
uncurtained, into which he led me. I had thought of a great office with
shining tables and rows of clerks, such as I was used to, and I dare say
I stared rather straight at the two deal chairs and one little table,
which, with a ledger and a waste paper basket, made up the whole
furniture.

"'Don't be disheartened, Mr. Pycroft,' said my new acquaintance, seeing
the length of my face. 'Rome was not built in a day, and we have lots of
money at our backs, though we don't cut much dash yet in offices. Pray
sit down, and let me have your letter.'

"I gave it to him, and he read it over very carefully.

"'You seem to have made a vast impression upon my brother Arthur,' said
he; 'and I know that he is a pretty shrewd judge. He swears by London,
you know; and I by Birmingham; but this time I shall follow his advice.
Pray consider yourself definitely engaged."

"'What are my duties?' I asked.

"'You will eventually manage the great depot in Paris, which will pour
a flood of English crockery into the shops of a hundred and thirty-four
agents in France. The purchase will be completed in a week, and
meanwhile you will remain in Birmingham and make yourself useful.'

"'How?'

"For answer, he took a big red book out of a drawer.

"'This is a directory of Paris,' said he, 'with the trades after the
names of the people. I want you to take it home with you, and to mark
off all the hardware sellers, with their addresses. It would be of the
greatest use to me to have them.'

"'Surely there are classified lists?' I suggested.

"'Not reliable ones. Their system is different from ours. Stick at it,
and let me have the lists by Monday, at twelve. Good-day, Mr. Pycroft.
If you continue to show zeal and intelligence you will find the company
a good master.'

"I went back to the hotel with the big book under my arm, and with very
conflicting feelings in my breast. On the one hand, I was definitely
engaged and had a hundred pounds in my pocket; on the other, the look
of the offices, the absence of name on the wall, and other of the points
which would strike a business man had left a bad impression as to the
position of my employers. However, come what might, I had my money, so I
settled down to my task. All Sunday I was kept hard at work, and yet by
Monday I had only got as far as H. I went round to my employer, found
him in the same dismantled kind of room, and was told to keep at
it until Wednesday, and then come again. On Wednesday it was still
unfinished, so I hammered away until Friday--that is, yesterday. Then I
brought it round to Mr. Harry Pinner.

"'Thank you very much,' said he; 'I fear that I underrated the
difficulty of the task. This list will be of very material assistance to
me.'

"'It took some time,' said I.

"'And now,' said he, 'I want you to make a list of the furniture shops,
for they all sell crockery.'

"'Very good.'

"'And you can come up to-morrow evening, at seven, and let me know how
you are getting on. Don't overwork yourself. A couple of hours at Day's
Music Hall in the evening would do you no harm after your labors.' He
laughed as he spoke, and I saw with a thrill that his second tooth upon
the left-hand side had been very badly stuffed with gold."


Sherlock Holmes rubbed his hands with delight, and I stared with
astonishment at our client.

"You may well look surprised, Dr. Watson; but it is this way," said he:
"When I was speaking to the other chap in London, at the time that he
laughed at my not going to Mawson's, I happened to notice that his tooth
was stuffed in this very identical fashion. The glint of the gold in
each case caught my eye, you see. When I put that with the voice and
figure being the same, and only those things altered which might be
changed by a razor or a wig, I could not doubt that it was the same man.
Of course you expect two brothers to be alike, but not that they should
have the same tooth stuffed in the same way. He bowed me out, and I
found myself in the street, hardly knowing whether I was on my head or
my heels. Back I went to my hotel, put my head in a basin of cold water,
and tried to think it out. Why had he sent me from London to Birmingham?
Why had he got there before me? And why had he written a letter from
himself to himself? It was altogether too much for me, and I could make
no sense of it. And then suddenly it struck me that what was dark to me
might be very light to Mr. Sherlock Holmes. I had just time to get up to
town by the night train to see him this morning, and to bring you both
back with me to Birmingham."

There was a pause after the stock-broker's clerk had concluded his
surprising experience. Then Sherlock Holmes cocked his eye at me,
leaning back on the cushions with a pleased and yet critical face, like
a connoisseur who has just taken his first sip of a comet vintage.

"Rather fine, Watson, is it not?" said he. "There are points in it which
please me. I think that you will agree with me that an interview with
Mr. Arthur Harry Pinner in the temporary offices of the Franco-Midland
Hardware Company, Limited, would be a rather interesting experience for
both of us."

"But how can we do it?" I asked.

"Oh, easily enough," said Hall Pycroft, cheerily. "You are two friends
of mine who are in want of a billet, and what could be more natural than
that I should bring you both round to the managing director?"

"Quite so, of course," said Holmes. "I should like to have a look at
the gentleman, and see if I can make anything of his little game.
What qualities have you, my friend, which would make your services
so valuable? or is it possible that--" He began biting his nails and
staring blankly out of the window, and we hardly drew another word from
him until we were in New Street.

At seven o'clock that evening we were walking, the three of us, down
Corporation Street to the company's offices.

"It is no use our being at all before our time," said our client. "He
only comes there to see me, apparently, for the place is deserted up to
the very hour he names."

"That is suggestive," remarked Holmes.

"By Jove, I told you so!" cried the clerk. "That's he walking ahead of
us there."

He pointed to a smallish, dark, well-dressed man who was bustling along
the other side of the road. As we watched him he looked across at a boy
who was bawling out the latest edition of the evening paper, and running
over among the cabs and busses, he bought one from him. Then, clutching
it in his hand, he vanished through a door-way.

"There he goes!" cried Hall Pycroft. "These are the company's offices
into which he has gone. Come with me, and I'll fix it up as easily as
possible."

Following his lead, we ascended five stories, until we found ourselves
outside a half-opened door, at which our client tapped. A voice within
bade us enter, and we entered a bare, unfurnished room such as Hall
Pycroft had described. At the single table sat the man whom we had seen
in the street, with his evening paper spread out in front of him, and as
he looked up at us it seemed to me that I had never looked upon a face
which bore such marks of grief, and of something beyond grief--of a
horror such as comes to few men in a lifetime. His brow glistened with
perspiration, his cheeks were of the dull, dead white of a fish's belly,
and his eyes were wild and staring. He looked at his clerk as though he
failed to recognize him, and I could see by the astonishment depicted
upon our conductor's face that this was by no means the usual appearance
of his employer.

"You look ill, Mr. Pinner!" he exclaimed.

"Yes, I am not very well," answered the other, making obvious efforts
to pull himself together, and licking his dry lips before he spoke. "Who
are these gentlemen whom you have brought with you?"

"One is Mr. Harris, of Bermondsey, and the other is Mr. Price, of this
town," said our clerk, glibly. "They are friends of mine and gentlemen
of experience, but they have been out of a place for some little time,
and they hoped that perhaps you might find an opening for them in the
company's employment."

"Very possibly! Very possibly!" cried Mr. Pinner with a ghastly smile.
"Yes, I have no doubt that we shall be able to do something for you.
What is your particular line, Mr. Harris?"

"I am an accountant," said Holmes.

"Ah yes, we shall want something of the sort. And you, Mr. Price?"

"A clerk," said I.

"I have every hope that the company may accommodate you. I will let you
know about it as soon as we come to any conclusion. And now I beg that
you will go. For God's sake leave me to myself!"

These last words were shot out of him, as though the constraint which
he was evidently setting upon himself had suddenly and utterly burst
asunder. Holmes and I glanced at each other, and Hall Pycroft took a
step towards the table.

"You forget, Mr. Pinner, that I am here by appointment to receive some
directions from you," said he.

"Certainly, Mr. Pycroft, certainly," the other resumed in a calmer tone.
"You may wait here a moment; and there is no reason why your friends
should not wait with you. I will be entirely at your service in three
minutes, if I might trespass upon your patience so far." He rose with a
very courteous air, and, bowing to us, he passed out through a door at
the farther end of the room, which he closed behind him.

"What now?" whispered Holmes. "Is he giving us the slip?"

"Impossible," answered Pycroft.

"Why so?"

"That door leads into an inner room."

"There is no exit?"

"None."

"Is it furnished?"

"It was empty yesterday."

"Then what on earth can he be doing? There is something which I don't
understand in this manner. If ever a man was three parts mad with
terror, that man's name is Pinner. What can have put the shivers on
him?"

"He suspects that we are detectives," I suggested.

"That's it," cried Pycroft.

Holmes shook his head. "He did not turn pale. He was pale when we
entered the room," said he. "It is just possible that--"

His words were interrupted by a sharp rat-tat from the direction of the
inner door.

"What the deuce is he knocking at his own door for?" cried the clerk.

Again and much louder came the rat-tat-tat. We all gazed expectantly at
the closed door. Glancing at Holmes, I saw his face turn rigid, and he
leaned forward in intense excitement. Then suddenly came a low guggling,
gargling sound, and a brisk drumming upon woodwork. Holmes sprang
frantically across the room and pushed at the door. It was fastened on
the inner side. Following his example, we threw ourselves upon it with
all our weight. One hinge snapped, then the other, and down came the
door with a crash. Rushing over it, we found ourselves in the inner
room. It was empty.

But it was only for a moment that we were at fault. At one corner, the
corner nearest the room which we had left, there was a second door.
Holmes sprang to it and pulled it open. A coat and waistcoat were lying
on the floor, and from a hook behind the door, with his own braces
round his neck, was hanging the managing director of the Franco-Midland
Hardware Company. His knees were drawn up, his head hung at a dreadful
angle to his body, and the clatter of his heels against the door made
the noise which had broken in upon our conversation. In an instant I
had caught him round the waist, and held him up while Holmes and Pycroft
untied the elastic bands which had disappeared between the livid creases
of skin. Then we carried him into the other room, where he lay with
a clay-colored face, puffing his purple lips in and out with every
breath--a dreadful wreck of all that he had been but five minutes
before.

"What do you think of him, Watson?" asked Holmes.

I stooped over him and examined him. His pulse was feeble and
intermittent, but his breathing grew longer, and there was a little
shivering of his eyelids, which showed a thin white slit of ball
beneath.

"It has been touch and go with him," said I, "but he'll live now. Just
open that window, and hand me the water carafe." I undid his collar,
poured the cold water over his face, and raised and sank his arms until
he drew a long, natural breath. "It's only a question of time now," said
I, as I turned away from him.

Holmes stood by the table, with his hands deep in his trouser's pockets
and his chin upon his breast.

"I suppose we ought to call the police in now," said he. "And yet I
confess that I'd like to give them a complete case when they come."

"It's a blessed mystery to me," cried Pycroft, scratching his head.
"Whatever they wanted to bring me all the way up here for, and then--"

"Pooh! All that is clear enough," said Holmes impatiently. "It is this
last sudden move."

"You understand the rest, then?"

"I think that it is fairly obvious. What do you say, Watson?"

I shrugged my shoulders. "I must confess that I am out of my depths,"
said I.

"Oh surely if you consider the events at first they can only point to
one conclusion."

"What do you make of them?"

"Well, the whole thing hinges upon two points. The first is the making
of Pycroft write a declaration by which he entered the service of this
preposterous company. Do you not see how very suggestive that is?"

"I am afraid I miss the point."

"Well, why did they want him to do it? Not as a business matter, for
these arrangements are usually verbal, and there was no earthly business
reason why this should be an exception. Don't you see, my young friend,
that they were very anxious to obtain a specimen of your handwriting,
and had no other way of doing it?"

"And why?"

"Quite so. Why? When we answer that we have made some progress with our
little problem. Why? There can be only one adequate reason. Some one
wanted to learn to imitate your writing, and had to procure a specimen
of it first. And now if we pass on to the second point we find that each
throws light upon the other. That point is the request made by Pinner
that you should not resign your place, but should leave the manager of
this important business in the full expectation that a Mr. Hall Pycroft,
whom he had never seen, was about to enter the office upon the Monday
morning."

"My God!" cried our client, "what a blind beetle I have been!"

"Now you see the point about the handwriting. Suppose that some one
turned up in your place who wrote a completely different hand from that
in which you had applied for the vacancy, of course the game would have
been up. But in the interval the rogue had learned to imitate you,
and his position was therefore secure, as I presume that nobody in the
office had ever set eyes upon you."

"Not a soul," groaned Hall Pycroft.

"Very good. Of course it was of the utmost importance to prevent you
from thinking better of it, and also to keep you from coming into
contact with any one who might tell you that your double was at work
in Mawson's office. Therefore they gave you a handsome advance on your
salary, and ran you off to the Midlands, where they gave you enough work
to do to prevent your going to London, where you might have burst their
little game up. That is all plain enough."

"But why should this man pretend to be his own brother?"

"Well, that is pretty clear also. There are evidently only two of them
in it. The other is impersonating you at the office. This one acted
as your engager, and then found that he could not find you an employer
without admitting a third person into his plot. That he was most
unwilling to do. He changed his appearance as far as he could, and
trusted that the likeness, which you could not fail to observe, would be
put down to a family resemblance. But for the happy chance of the gold
stuffing, your suspicions would probably never have been aroused."

Hall Pycroft shook his clinched hands in the air. "Good Lord!" he cried,
"while I have been fooled in this way, what has this other Hall Pycroft
been doing at Mawson's? What should we do, Mr. Holmes? Tell me what to
do."

"We must wire to Mawson's."

"They shut at twelve on Saturdays."

"Never mind. There may be some door-keeper or attendant--"

"Ah yes, they keep a permanent guard there on account of the value of
the securities that they hold. I remember hearing it talked of in the
City."

"Very good; we shall wire to him, and see if all is well, and if a clerk
of your name is working there. That is clear enough; but what is not so
clear is why at sight of us one of the rogues should instantly walk out
of the room and hang himself."

"The paper!" croaked a voice behind us. The man was sitting up, blanched
and ghastly, with returning reason in his eyes, and hands which rubbed
nervously at the broad red band which still encircled his throat.

"The paper! Of course!" yelled Holmes, in a paroxysm of excitement.
"Idiot that I was! I thought so much of our visit that the paper never
entered my head for an instant. To be sure, the secret must be there."
He flattened it out upon the table, and a cry of triumph burst from his
lips. "Look at this, Watson," he cried. "It is a London paper, an early
edition of the Evening Standard. Here is what we want. Look at the
headlines: 'Crime in the City. Murder at Mawson & Williams's. Gigantic
attempted Robbery. Capture of the Criminal.' Here, Watson, we are all
equally anxious to hear it, so kindly read it aloud to us."

It appeared from its position in the paper to have been the one event of
importance in town, and the account of it ran in this way:

"A desperate attempt at robbery, culminating in the death of one man and
the capture of the criminal, occurred this afternoon in the City. For
some time back Mawson & Williams, the famous financial house, have been
the guardians of securities which amount in the aggregate to a sum of
considerably over a million sterling. So conscious was the manager of
the responsibility which devolved upon him in consequence of the great
interests at stake that safes of the very latest construction have
been employed, and an armed watchman has been left day and night in the
building. It appears that last week a new clerk named Hall Pycroft was
engaged by the firm. This person appears to have been none other than
Beddington, the famous forger and cracksman, who, with his brother, had
only recently emerged from a five years' spell of penal servitude. By
some means, which are not yet clear, he succeeded in winning, under a
false name, this official position in the office, which he utilized in
order to obtain moulding of various locks, and a thorough knowledge of
the position of the strong room and the safes.

"It is customary at Mawson's for the clerks to leave at midday on
Saturday. Sergeant Tuson, of the City Police, was somewhat surprised,
therefore to see a gentleman with a carpet bag come down the steps at
twenty minutes past one. His suspicions being aroused, the sergeant
followed the man, and with the aid of Constable Pollock succeeded, after
a most desperate resistance, in arresting him. It was at once clear
that a daring and gigantic robbery had been committed. Nearly a hundred
thousand pounds' worth of American railway bonds, with a large amount
of scrip in mines and other companies, was discovered in the bag. On
examining the premises the body of the unfortunate watchman was found
doubled up and thrust into the largest of the safes, where it would not
have been discovered until Monday morning had it not been for the prompt
action of Sergeant Tuson. The man's skull had been shattered by a
blow from a poker delivered from behind. There could be no doubt
that Beddington had obtained entrance by pretending that he had left
something behind him, and having murdered the watchman, rapidly rifled
the large safe, and then made off with his booty. His brother, who
usually works with him, has not appeared in this job as far as can
at present be ascertained, although the police are making energetic
inquiries as to his whereabouts."

"Well, we may save the police some little trouble in that direction,"
said Holmes, glancing at the haggard figure huddled up by the window.
"Human nature is a strange mixture, Watson. You see that even a villain
and murderer can inspire such affection that his brother turns to
suicide when he learns that his neck is forfeited. However, we have
no choice as to our action. The doctor and I will remain on guard, Mr.
Pycroft, if you will have the kindness to step out for the police."




Adventure IV. The "_Gloria Scott_"


"I have some papers here," said my friend Sherlock Holmes, as we sat
one winter's night on either side of the fire, "which I really think,
Watson, that it would be worth your while to glance over. These are the
documents in the extraordinary case of the Gloria Scott, and this is the
message which struck Justice of the Peace Trevor dead with horror when
he read it."

He had picked from a drawer a little tarnished cylinder, and, undoing
the tape, he handed me a short note scrawled upon a half-sheet of
slate-gray paper.

"The supply of game for London is going steadily up," it ran.
"Head-keeper Hudson, we believe, has been now told to receive all orders
for fly-paper and for preservation of your hen-pheasant's life."

As I glanced up from reading this enigmatical message, I saw Holmes
chuckling at the expression upon my face.

"You look a little bewildered," said he.

"I cannot see how such a message as this could inspire horror. It seems
to me to be rather grotesque than otherwise."

"Very likely. Yet the fact remains that the reader, who was a fine,
robust old man, was knocked clean down by it as if it had been the butt
end of a pistol."

"You arouse my curiosity," said I. "But why did you say just now that
there were very particular reasons why I should study this case?"

"Because it was the first in which I was ever engaged."

I had often endeavored to elicit from my companion what had first turned
his mind in the direction of criminal research, but had never caught him
before in a communicative humor. Now he sat forward in this arm-chair
and spread out the documents upon his knees. Then he lit his pipe and
sat for some time smoking and turning them over.

"You never heard me talk of Victor Trevor?" he asked. "He was the only
friend I made during the two years I was at college. I was never a very
sociable fellow, Watson, always rather fond of moping in my rooms and
working out my own little methods of thought, so that I never mixed
much with the men of my year. Bar fencing and boxing I had few athletic
tastes, and then my line of study was quite distinct from that of the
other fellows, so that we had no points of contact at all. Trevor was
the only man I knew, and that only through the accident of his bull
terrier freezing on to my ankle one morning as I went down to chapel.

"It was a prosaic way of forming a friendship, but it was effective.
I was laid by the heels for ten days, but Trevor used to come in to
inquire after me. At first it was only a minute's chat, but soon his
visits lengthened, and before the end of the term we were close friends.
He was a hearty, full-blooded fellow, full of spirits and energy,
the very opposite to me in most respects, but we had some subjects
in common, and it was a bond of union when I found that he was as
friendless as I. Finally, he invited me down to his father's place at
Donnithorpe, in Norfolk, and I accepted his hospitality for a month of
the long vacation.

"Old Trevor was evidently a man of some wealth and consideration, a
J.P., and a landed proprietor. Donnithorpe is a little hamlet just to
the north of Langmere, in the country of the Broads. The house was
an old-fashioned, wide-spread, oak-beamed brick building, with a fine
lime-lined avenue leading up to it. There was excellent wild-duck
shooting in the fens, remarkably good fishing, a small but select
library, taken over, as I understood, from a former occupant, and a
tolerable cook, so that he would be a fastidious man who could not put
in a pleasant month there.

"Trevor senior was a widower, and my friend his only son.

"There had been a daughter, I heard, but she had died of diphtheria
while on a visit to Birmingham. The father interested me extremely.
He was a man of little culture, but with a considerable amount of rude
strength, both physically and mentally. He knew hardly any books, but
he had traveled far, had seen much of the world. And had remembered
all that he had learned. In person he was a thick-set, burly man with
a shock of grizzled hair, a brown, weather-beaten face, and blue eyes
which were keen to the verge of fierceness. Yet he had a reputation for
kindness and charity on the country-side, and was noted for the leniency
of his sentences from the bench.

"One evening, shortly after my arrival, we were sitting over a glass of
port after dinner, when young Trevor began to talk about those habits
of observation and inference which I had already formed into a system,
although I had not yet appreciated the part which they were to play in
my life. The old man evidently thought that his son was exaggerating in
his description of one or two trivial feats which I had performed.

"'Come, now, Mr. Holmes,' said he, laughing good-humoredly. 'I'm an
excellent subject, if you can deduce anything from me.'

"'I fear there is not very much,' I answered; 'I might suggest that
you have gone about in fear of some personal attack within the last
twelvemonth.'

"The laugh faded from his lips, and he stared at me in great surprise.

"'Well, that's true enough,' said he. 'You know, Victor,' turning to his
son, 'when we broke up that poaching gang they swore to knife us, and
Sir Edward Holly has actually been attacked. I've always been on my
guard since then, though I have no idea how you know it.'

"'You have a very handsome stick,' I answered. 'By the inscription I
observed that you had not had it more than a year. But you have taken
some pains to bore the head of it and pour melted lead into the hole so
as to make it a formidable weapon. I argued that you would not take such
precautions unless you had some danger to fear.'

"'Anything else?' he asked, smiling.

"'You have boxed a good deal in your youth.'

"'Right again. How did you know it? Is my nose knocked a little out of
the straight?'

"'No,' said I. 'It is your ears. They have the peculiar flattening and
thickening which marks the boxing man.'

"'Anything else?'

"'You have done a good deal of digging by your callosities.'

"'Made all my money at the gold fields.'

"'You have been in New Zealand.'

"'Right again.'

"'You have visited Japan.'

"'Quite true.'

"'And you have been most intimately associated with some one whose
initials were J. A., and whom you afterwards were eager to entirely
forget.'

"Mr. Trevor stood slowly up, fixed his large blue eyes upon me with a
strange wild stare, and then pitched forward, with his face among the
nutshells which strewed the cloth, in a dead faint.

"You can imagine, Watson, how shocked both his son and I were. His
attack did not last long, however, for when we undid his collar, and
sprinkled the water from one of the finger-glasses over his face, he
gave a gasp or two and sat up.

"'Ah, boys,' said he, forcing a smile, 'I hope I haven't frightened you.
Strong as I look, there is a weak place in my heart, and it does not
take much to knock me over. I don't know how you manage this, Mr.
Holmes, but it seems to me that all the detectives of fact and of fancy
would be children in your hands. That's your line of life, sir, and you
may take the word of a man who has seen something of the world.'

"And that recommendation, with the exaggerated estimate of my ability
with which he prefaced it, was, if you will believe me, Watson, the very
first thing which ever made me feel that a profession might be made
out of what had up to that time been the merest hobby. At the moment,
however, I was too much concerned at the sudden illness of my host to
think of anything else.

"'I hope that I have said nothing to pain you?' said I.

"'Well, you certainly touched upon rather a tender point. Might I ask
how you know, and how much you know?' He spoke now in a half-jesting
fashion, but a look of terror still lurked at the back of his eyes.

"'It is simplicity itself,' said I. 'When you bared your arm to draw
that fish into the boat I saw that J. A. had been tattooed in the bend
of the elbow. The letters were still legible, but it was perfectly clear
from their blurred appearance, and from the staining of the skin round
them, that efforts had been made to obliterate them. It was obvious,
then, that those initials had once been very familiar to you, and that
you had afterwards wished to forget them.'

"What an eye you have!" he cried, with a sigh of relief. 'It is just as
you say. But we won't talk of it. Of all ghosts the ghosts of our old
lovers are the worst. Come into the billiard-room and have a quiet
cigar.'


"From that day, amid all his cordiality, there was always a touch of
suspicion in Mr. Trevor's manner towards me. Even his son remarked it.
'You've given the governor such a turn,' said he, 'that he'll never be
sure again of what you know and what you don't know.' He did not mean
to show it, I am sure, but it was so strongly in his mind that it peeped
out at every action. At last I became so convinced that I was causing
him uneasiness that I drew my visit to a close. On the very day,
however, before I left, an incident occurred which proved in the sequel
to be of importance.

"We were sitting out upon the lawn on garden chairs, the three of us,
basking in the sun and admiring the view across the Broads, when a maid
came out to say that there was a man at the door who wanted to see Mr.
Trevor.

"'What is his name?' asked my host.

"'He would not give any.'

"'What does he want, then?'

"'He says that you know him, and that he only wants a moment's
conversation.'

"'Show him round here.' An instant afterwards there appeared a little
wizened fellow with a cringing manner and a shambling style of
walking. He wore an open jacket, with a splotch of tar on the sleeve,
a red-and-black check shirt, dungaree trousers, and heavy boots badly
worn. His face was thin and brown and crafty, with a perpetual smile
upon it, which showed an irregular line of yellow teeth, and his
crinkled hands were half closed in a way that is distinctive of sailors.
As he came slouching across the lawn I heard Mr. Trevor make a sort of
hiccoughing noise in his throat, and jumping out of his chair, he ran
into the house. He was back in a moment, and I smelt a strong reek of
brandy as he passed me.

"'Well, my man,' said he. 'What can I do for you?'

"The sailor stood looking at him with puckered eyes, and with the same
loose-lipped smile upon his face.

"'You don't know me?' he asked.

"'Why, dear me, it is surely Hudson,' said Mr. Trevor in a tone of
surprise.

"'Hudson it is, sir,' said the seaman. 'Why, it's thirty year and more
since I saw you last. Here you are in your house, and me still picking
my salt meat out of the harness cask.'

"'Tut, you will find that I have not forgotten old times,' cried Mr.
Trevor, and, walking towards the sailor, he said something in a low
voice. 'Go into the kitchen,' he continued out loud, 'and you will get
food and drink. I have no doubt that I shall find you a situation.'

"'Thank you, sir,' said the seaman, touching his fore-lock. 'I'm just
off a two-yearer in an eight-knot tramp, short-handed at that, and I
wants a rest. I thought I'd get it either with Mr. Beddoes or with you.'

"'Ah!' cried Trevor. 'You know where Mr. Beddoes is?'

"'Bless you, sir, I know where all my old friends are,' said the
fellow with a sinister smile, and he slouched off after the maid to the
kitchen. Mr. Trevor mumbled something to us about having been shipmate
with the man when he was going back to the diggings, and then, leaving
us on the lawn, he went indoors. An hour later, when we entered the
house, we found him stretched dead drunk upon the dining-room sofa. The
whole incident left a most ugly impression upon my mind, and I was
not sorry next day to leave Donnithorpe behind me, for I felt that my
presence must be a source of embarrassment to my friend.

"All this occurred during the first month of the long vacation. I went
up to my London rooms, where I spent seven weeks working out a few
experiments in organic chemistry. One day, however, when the autumn was
far advanced and the vacation drawing to a close, I received a telegram
from my friend imploring me to return to Donnithorpe, and saying that
he was in great need of my advice and assistance. Of course I dropped
everything and set out for the North once more.

"He met me with the dog-cart at the station, and I saw at a glance that
the last two months had been very trying ones for him. He had grown thin
and careworn, and had lost the loud, cheery manner for which he had been
remarkable.

"'The governor is dying,' were the first words he said.

"'Impossible!' I cried. 'What is the matter?'

"'Apoplexy. Nervous shock, He's been on the verge all day. I doubt if we
shall find him alive.'

"I was, as you may think, Watson, horrified at this unexpected news.

"'What has caused it?' I asked.

"'Ah, that is the point. Jump in and we can talk it over while we drive.
You remember that fellow who came upon the evening before you left us?'

"'Perfectly.'

"'Do you know who it was that we let into the house that day?'

"'I have no idea.'

"'It was the devil, Holmes,' he cried.

"I stared at him in astonishment.

"'Yes, it was the devil himself. We have not had a peaceful hour
since--not one. The governor has never held up his head from that
evening, and now the life has been crushed out of him and his heart
broken, all through this accursed Hudson.'

"'What power had he, then?'

"'Ah, that is what I would give so much to know. The kindly, charitable,
good old governor--how could he have fallen into the clutches of such a
ruffian! But I am so glad that you have come, Holmes. I trust very much
to your judgment and discretion, and I know that you will advise me for
the best.'

"We were dashing along the smooth white country road, with the long
stretch of the Broads in front of us glimmering in the red light of the
setting sun. From a grove upon our left I could already see the high
chimneys and the flag-staff which marked the squire's dwelling.

"'My father made the fellow gardener,' said my companion, 'and then, as
that did not satisfy him, he was promoted to be butler. The house seemed
to be at his mercy, and he wandered about and did what he chose in it.
The maids complained of his drunken habits and his vile language. The
dad raised their wages all round to recompense them for the annoyance.
The fellow would take the boat and my father's best gun and treat
himself to little shooting trips. And all this with such a sneering,
leering, insolent face that I would have knocked him down twenty times
over if he had been a man of my own age. I tell you, Holmes, I have
had to keep a tight hold upon myself all this time; and now I am asking
myself whether, if I had let myself go a little more, I might not have
been a wiser man.

"'Well, matters went from bad to worse with us, and this animal Hudson
became more and more intrusive, until at last, on making some insolent
reply to my father in my presence one day, I took him by the shoulders
and turned him out of the room. He slunk away with a livid face and two
venomous eyes which uttered more threats than his tongue could do. I
don't know what passed between the poor dad and him after that, but the
dad came to me next day and asked me whether I would mind apologizing to
Hudson. I refused, as you can imagine, and asked my father how he
could allow such a wretch to take such liberties with himself and his
household.

"'"Ah, my boy," said he, "it is all very well to talk, but you don't
know how I am placed. But you shall know, Victor. I'll see that you
shall know, come what may. You wouldn't believe harm of your poor old
father, would you, lad?" He was very much moved, and shut himself up
in the study all day, where I could see through the window that he was
writing busily.

"'That evening there came what seemed to me to be a grand release,
for Hudson told us that he was going to leave us. He walked into the
dining-room as we sat after dinner, and announced his intention in the
thick voice of a half-drunken man.

"'"I've had enough of Norfolk," said he. "I'll run down to Mr. Beddoes
in Hampshire. He'll be as glad to see me as you were, I dare say."

"'"You're not going away in an unkind spirit, Hudson, I hope," said my
father, with a tameness which made my blood boil.

"'"I've not had my 'pology," said he sulkily, glancing in my direction.

"'"Victor, you will acknowledge that you have used this worthy fellow
rather roughly," said the dad, turning to me.

"'"On the contrary, I think that we have both shown extraordinary
patience towards him," I answered.

"'"Oh, you do, do you?" he snarls. "Very good, mate. We'll see about
that!"

"'He slouched out of the room, and half an hour afterwards left the
house, leaving my father in a state of pitiable nervousness. Night after
night I heard him pacing his room, and it was just as he was recovering
his confidence that the blow did at last fall.'

"'And how?' I asked eagerly.

"'In a most extraordinary fashion. A letter arrived for my father
yesterday evening, bearing the Fordingbridge post-mark. My father read
it, clapped both his hands to his head, and began running round the room
in little circles like a man who has been driven out of his senses. When
I at last drew him down on to the sofa, his mouth and eyelids were all
puckered on one side, and I saw that he had a stroke. Dr. Fordham came
over at once. We put him to bed; but the paralysis has spread, he has
shown no sign of returning consciousness, and I think that we shall
hardly find him alive.'

"'You horrify me, Trevor!' I cried. 'What then could have been in this
letter to cause so dreadful a result?'

"'Nothing. There lies the inexplicable part of it. The message was
absurd and trivial. Ah, my God, it is as I feared!'

"As he spoke we came round the curve of the avenue, and saw in the
fading light that every blind in the house had been drawn down. As
we dashed up to the door, my friend's face convulsed with grief, a
gentleman in black emerged from it.

"'When did it happen, doctor?' asked Trevor.

"'Almost immediately after you left.'

"'Did he recover consciousness?'

"'For an instant before the end.'

"'Any message for me.'

"'Only that the papers were in the back drawer of the Japanese cabinet.'

"My friend ascended with the doctor to the chamber of death, while I
remained in the study, turning the whole matter over and over in my
head, and feeling as sombre as ever I had done in my life. What was the
past of this Trevor, pugilist, traveler, and gold-digger, and how had he
placed himself in the power of this acid-faced seaman? Why, too, should
he faint at an allusion to the half-effaced initials upon his arm, and
die of fright when he had a letter from Fordingham? Then I remembered
that Fordingham was in Hampshire, and that this Mr. Beddoes, whom the
seaman had gone to visit and presumably to blackmail, had also been
mentioned as living in Hampshire. The letter, then, might either come
from Hudson, the seaman, saying that he had betrayed the guilty secret
which appeared to exist, or it might come from Beddoes, warning an old
confederate that such a betrayal was imminent. So far it seemed clear
enough. But then how could this letter be trivial and grotesque, as
described by the son? He must have misread it. If so, it must have been
one of those ingenious secret codes which mean one thing while they seem
to mean another. I must see this letter. If there were a hidden meaning
in it, I was confident that I could pluck it forth. For an hour I sat
pondering over it in the gloom, until at last a weeping maid brought in
a lamp, and close at her heels came my friend Trevor, pale but composed,
with these very papers which lie upon my knee held in his grasp. He sat
down opposite to me, drew the lamp to the edge of the table, and handed
me a short note scribbled, as you see, upon a single sheet of gray
paper. 'The supply of game for London is going steadily up,' it ran.
'Head-keeper Hudson, we believe, has been now told to receive all orders
for fly-paper and for preservation of your hen-pheasant's life.'

"I dare say my face looked as bewildered as yours did just now when
first I read this message. Then I reread it very carefully. It was
evidently as I had thought, and some secret meaning must lie buried
in this strange combination of words. Or could it be that there was
a prearranged significance to such phrases as 'fly-paper' and
'hen-pheasant'? Such a meaning would be arbitrary and could not be
deduced in any way. And yet I was loath to believe that this was the
case, and the presence of the word Hudson seemed to show that the
subject of the message was as I had guessed, and that it was from
Beddoes rather than the sailor. I tried it backwards, but the
combination 'life pheasant's hen' was not encouraging. Then I tried
alternate words, but neither 'the of for' nor 'supply game London'
promised to throw any light upon it.

"And then in an instant the key of the riddle was in my hands, and I saw
that every third word, beginning with the first, would give a message
which might well drive old Trevor to despair.

"It was short and terse, the warning, as I now read it to my companion:

"'The game is up. Hudson has told all. Fly for your life.'

"Victor Trevor sank his face into his shaking hands. 'It must be that,
I suppose,' said he. "This is worse than death, for it means disgrace
as well. But what is the meaning of these "head-keepers" and
"hen-pheasants"?'

"'It means nothing to the message, but it might mean a good deal to us
if we had no other means of discovering the sender. You see that he has
begun by writing "The...game...is," and so on. Afterwards he had, to
fulfill the prearranged cipher, to fill in any two words in each space.
He would naturally use the first words which came to his mind, and
if there were so many which referred to sport among them, you may
be tolerably sure that he is either an ardent shot or interested in
breeding. Do you know anything of this Beddoes?'

"'Why, now that you mention it,' said he, 'I remember that my poor
father used to have an invitation from him to shoot over his preserves
every autumn.'

"'Then it is undoubtedly from him that the note comes,' said I. 'It only
remains for us to find out what this secret was which the sailor Hudson
seems to have held over the heads of these two wealthy and respected
men.'

"'Alas, Holmes, I fear that it is one of sin and shame!' cried my
friend. 'But from you I shall have no secrets. Here is the statement
which was drawn up by my father when he knew that the danger from Hudson
had become imminent. I found it in the Japanese cabinet, as he told the
doctor. Take it and read it to me, for I have neither the strength nor
the courage to do it myself.'

"These are the very papers, Watson, which he handed to me, and I will
read them to you, as I read them in the old study that night to him.
They are endorsed outside, as you see, 'Some particulars of the voyage
of the bark _Gloria Scott_, from her leaving Falmouth on the 8th
October, 1855, to her destruction in N. Lat. 15 degrees 20', W. Long.
25 degrees 14' on Nov. 6th.' It is in the form of a letter, and runs in
this way:

"'My dear, dear son, now that approaching disgrace begins to darken the
closing years of my life, I can write with all truth and honesty that it
is not the terror of the law, it is not the loss of my position in the
county, nor is it my fall in the eyes of all who have known me, which
cuts me to the heart; but it is the thought that you should come to
blush for me--you who love me and who have seldom, I hope, had reason to
do other than respect me. But if the blow falls which is forever hanging
over me, then I should wish you to read this, that you may know straight
from me how far I have been to blame. On the other hand, if all should
go well (which may kind God Almighty grant!), then if by any chance this
paper should be still undestroyed and should fall into your hands, I
conjure you, by all you hold sacred, by the memory of your dear mother,
and by the love which had been between us, to hurl it into the fire and
to never give one thought to it again.

"'If then your eye goes on to read this line, I know that I shall
already have been exposed and dragged from my home, or as is more
likely, for you know that my heart is weak, by lying with my tongue
sealed forever in death. In either case the time for suppression is
past, and every word which I tell you is the naked truth, and this I
swear as I hope for mercy.

"'My name, dear lad, is not Trevor. I was James Armitage in my younger
days, and you can understand now the shock that it was to me a few weeks
ago when your college friend addressed me in words which seemed to imply
that he had surprised my secret. As Armitage it was that I entered a
London banking-house, and as Armitage I was convicted of breaking my
country's laws, and was sentenced to transportation. Do not think very
harshly of me, laddie. It was a debt of honor, so called, which I had
to pay, and I used money which was not my own to do it, in the certainty
that I could replace it before there could be any possibility of its
being missed. But the most dreadful ill-luck pursued me. The money which
I had reckoned upon never came to hand, and a premature examination of
accounts exposed my deficit. The case might have been dealt leniently
with, but the laws were more harshly administered thirty years ago than
now, and on my twenty-third birthday I found myself chained as a felon
with thirty-seven other convicts in 'tween-decks of the bark _Gloria
Scott_, bound for Australia.

"'It was the year '55 when the Crimean war was at its height, and the
old convict ships had been largely used as transports in the Black
Sea. The government was compelled, therefore, to use smaller and less
suitable vessels for sending out their prisoners. The Gloria Scott
had been in the Chinese tea-trade, but she was an old-fashioned,
heavy-bowed, broad-beamed craft, and the new clippers had cut her
out. She was a five-hundred-ton boat; and besides her thirty-eight
jail-birds, she carried twenty-six of a crew, eighteen soldiers, a
captain, three mates, a doctor, a chaplain, and four warders. Nearly a
hundred souls were in her, all told, when we set sail from Falmouth.

"'The partitions between the cells of the convicts, instead of being of
thick oak, as is usual in convict-ships, were quite thin and frail.
The man next to me, upon the aft side, was one whom I had particularly
noticed when we were led down the quay. He was a young man with a
clear, hairless face, a long, thin nose, and rather nut-cracker jaws.
He carried his head very jauntily in the air, had a swaggering style
of walking, and was, above all else, remarkable for his extraordinary
height. I don't think any of our heads would have come up to his
shoulder, and I am sure that he could not have measured less than six
and a half feet. It was strange among so many sad and weary faces to see
one which was full of energy and resolution. The sight of it was to me
like a fire in a snow-storm. I was glad, then, to find that he was my
neighbor, and gladder still when, in the dead of the night, I heard a
whisper close to my ear, and found that he had managed to cut an opening
in the board which separated us.

"'"Hullo, chummy!" said he, "what's your name, and what are you here
for?"

"'I answered him, and asked in turn who I was talking with.

"'"I'm Jack Prendergast," said he, "and by God! You'll learn to bless my
name before you've done with me."

"'I remembered hearing of his case, for it was one which had made an
immense sensation throughout the country some time before my own arrest.
He was a man of good family and of great ability, but of incurably
vicious habits, who had by an ingenious system of fraud obtained huge
sums of money from the leading London merchants.

"'"Ha, ha! You remember my case!" said he proudly.

"'"Very well, indeed."

"'"Then maybe you remember something queer about it?"

"'"What was that, then?"

"'"I'd had nearly a quarter of a million, hadn't I?"

"'"So it was said."

"'"But none was recovered, eh?"

"'"No."

"'"Well, where d'ye suppose the balance is?" he asked.

"'"I have no idea," said I.

"'"Right between my finger and thumb," he cried. "By God! I've got more
pounds to my name than you've hairs on your head. And if you've money,
my son, and know how to handle it and spread it, you can do anything.
Now, you don't think it likely that a man who could do anything is going
to wear his breeches out sitting in the stinking hold of a rat-gutted,
beetle-ridden, mouldy old coffin of a China coaster. No, sir, such
a man will look after himself and will look after his chums. You may lay
to that! You hold on to him, and you may kiss the book that he'll haul
you through."

"'That was his style of talk, and at first I thought it meant nothing;
but after a while, when he had tested me and sworn me in with all
possible solemnity, he let me understand that there really was a plot
to gain command of the vessel. A dozen of the prisoners had hatched it
before they came aboard, Prendergast was the leader, and his money was
the motive power.

"'"I'd a partner," said he, "a rare good man, as true as a stock to a
barrel. He's got the dibbs, he has, and where do you think he is at this
moment? Why, he's the chaplain of this ship--the chaplain, no less! He
came aboard with a black coat, and his papers right, and money enough in
his box to buy the thing right up from keel to main-truck. The crew
are his, body and soul. He could buy 'em at so much a gross with a cash
discount, and he did it before ever they signed on. He's got two of the
warders and Mereer, the second mate, and he'd get the captain himself,
if he thought him worth it."

"'"What are we to do, then?" I asked.

"'"What do you think?" said he. "We'll make the coats of some of these
soldiers redder than ever the tailor did."

"'"But they are armed," said I.

"'"And so shall we be, my boy. There's a brace of pistols for every
mother's son of us, and if we can't carry this ship, with the crew at
our back, it's time we were all sent to a young misses' boarding-school.
You speak to your mate upon the left to-night, and see if he is to be
trusted."

"'I did so, and found my other neighbor to be a young fellow in much
the same position as myself, whose crime had been forgery. His name was
Evans, but he afterwards changed it, like myself, and he is now a rich
and prosperous man in the south of England. He was ready enough to join
the conspiracy, as the only means of saving ourselves, and before we had
crossed the Bay there were only two of the prisoners who were not in the
secret. One of these was of weak mind, and we did not dare to trust him,
and the other was suffering from jaundice, and could not be of any use
to us.

"'From the beginning there was really nothing to prevent us from taking
possession of the ship. The crew were a set of ruffians, specially
picked for the job. The sham chaplain came into our cells to exhort us,
carrying a black bag, supposed to be full of tracts, and so often did
he come that by the third day we had each stowed away at the foot of our
beds a file, a brace of pistols, a pound of powder, and twenty slugs.
Two of the warders were agents of Prendergast, and the second mate was
his right-hand man. The captain, the two mates, two warders, Lieutenant
Martin, his eighteen soldiers, and the doctor were all that we had
against us. Yet, safe as it was, we determined to neglect no precaution,
and to make our attack suddenly by night. It came, however, more quickly
than we expected, and in this way.

"'One evening, about the third week after our start, the doctor had come
down to see one of the prisoners who was ill, and putting his hand down
on the bottom of his bunk he felt the outline of the pistols. If he had
been silent he might have blown the whole thing, but he was a nervous
little chap, so he gave a cry of surprise and turned so pale that the
man knew what was up in an instant and seized him. He was gagged before
he could give the alarm, and tied down upon the bed. He had unlocked
the door that led to the deck, and we were through it in a rush. The two
sentries were shot down, and so was a corporal who came running to see
what was the matter. There were two more soldiers at the door of the
state-room, and their muskets seemed not to be loaded, for they never
fired upon us, and they were shot while trying to fix their bayonets.
Then we rushed on into the captain's cabin, but as we pushed open the
door there was an explosion from within, and there he lay with his
brains smeared over the chart of the Atlantic which was pinned upon the
table, while the chaplain stood with a smoking pistol in his hand at
his elbow. The two mates had both been seized by the crew, and the whole
business seemed to be settled.

"'The state-room was next the cabin, and we flocked in there and flopped
down on the settees, all speaking together, for we were just mad with
the feeling that we were free once more. There were lockers all round,
and Wilson, the sham chaplain, knocked one of them in, and pulled out a
dozen of brown sherry. We cracked off the necks of the bottles, poured
the stuff out into tumblers, and were just tossing them off, when in an
instant without warning there came the roar of muskets in our ears, and
the saloon was so full of smoke that we could not see across the table.
When it cleared again the place was a shambles. Wilson and eight others
were wriggling on the top of each other on the floor, and the blood and
the brown sherry on that table turn me sick now when I think of it. We
were so cowed by the sight that I think we should have given the job up
if it had not been for Prendergast. He bellowed like a bull and rushed
for the door with all that were left alive at his heels. Out we ran,
and there on the poop were the lieutenant and ten of his men. The swing
skylights above the saloon table had been a bit open, and they had fired
on us through the slit. We got on them before they could load, and they
stood to it like men; but we had the upper hand of them, and in five
minutes it was all over. My God! Was there ever a slaughter-house
like that ship! Prendergast was like a raging devil, and he picked the
soldiers up as if they had been children and threw them overboard alive
or dead. There was one sergeant that was horribly wounded and yet kept
on swimming for a surprising time, until some one in mercy blew out his
brains. When the fighting was over there was no one left of our enemies
except just the warders, the mates, and the doctor.

"'It was over them that the great quarrel arose. There were many of us
who were glad enough to win back our freedom, and yet who had no wish
to have murder on our souls. It was one thing to knock the soldiers over
with their muskets in their hands, and it was another to stand by while
men were being killed in cold blood. Eight of us, five convicts and
three sailors, said that we would not see it done. But there was no
moving Prendergast and those who were with him. Our only chance of
safety lay in making a clean job of it, said he, and he would not leave
a tongue with power to wag in a witness-box. It nearly came to our
sharing the fate of the prisoners, but at last he said that if we wished
we might take a boat and go. We jumped at the offer, for we were already
sick of these bloodthirsty doings, and we saw that there would be worse
before it was done. We were given a suit of sailor togs each, a barrel
of water, two casks, one of junk and one of biscuits, and a compass.
Prendergast threw us over a chart, told us that we were shipwrecked
mariners whose ship had foundered in Lat. 15 degrees and Long 25 degrees
west, and then cut the painter and let us go.

"'And now I come to the most surprising part of my story, my dear son.
The seamen had hauled the fore-yard aback during the rising, but now as
we left them they brought it square again, and as there was a light wind
from the north and east the bark began to draw slowly away from us. Our
boat lay, rising and falling, upon the long, smooth rollers, and Evans
and I, who were the most educated of the party, were sitting in the
sheets working out our position and planning what coast we should make
for. It was a nice question, for the Cape de Verdes were about five
hundred miles to the north of us, and the African coast about seven
hundred to the east. On the whole, as the wind was coming round to the
north, we thought that Sierra Leone might be best, and turned our head
in that direction, the bark being at that time nearly hull down on our
starboard quarter. Suddenly as we looked at her we saw a dense black
cloud of smoke shoot up from her, which hung like a monstrous tree upon
the sky line. A few seconds later a roar like thunder burst upon our
ears, and as the smoke thinned away there was no sign left of the
_Gloria Scott_. In an instant we swept the boat's head round again and
pulled with all our strength for the place where the haze still trailing
over the water marked the scene of this catastrophe.

"'It was a long hour before we reached it, and at first we feared that
we had come too late to save any one. A splintered boat and a number of
crates and fragments of spars rising and falling on the waves showed us
where the vessel had foundered; but there was no sign of life, and we
had turned away in despair when we heard a cry for help, and saw at some
distance a piece of wreckage with a man lying stretched across it. When
we pulled him aboard the boat he proved to be a young seaman of the
name of Hudson, who was so burned and exhausted that he could give us no
account of what had happened until the following morning.

"'It seemed that after we had left, Prendergast and his gang had
proceeded to put to death the five remaining prisoners. The two warders
had been shot and thrown overboard, and so also had the third mate.
Prendergast then descended into the 'tween-decks and with his own hands
cut the throat of the unfortunate surgeon. There only remained the first
mate, who was a bold and active man. When he saw the convict approaching
him with the bloody knife in his hand he kicked off his bonds, which he
had somehow contrived to loosen, and rushing down the deck he plunged
into the after-hold. A dozen convicts, who descended with their pistols
in search of him, found him with a match-box in his hand seated beside
an open powder-barrel, which was one of a hundred carried on board, and
swearing that he would blow all hands up if he were in any way molested.
An instant later the explosion occurred, though Hudson thought it was
caused by the misdirected bullet of one of the convicts rather than the
mate's match. Be the cause what it may, it was the end of the _Gloria
Scott_ and of the rabble who held command of her.

"'Such, in a few words, my dear boy, is the history of this terrible
business in which I was involved. Next day we were picked up by the brig
_Hotspur_, bound for Australia, whose captain found no difficulty in
believing that we were the survivors of a passenger ship which had
foundered. The transport ship Gloria Scott was set down by the Admiralty
as being lost at sea, and no word has ever leaked out as to her true
fate. After an excellent voyage the _Hotspur_ landed us at Sydney, where
Evans and I changed our names and made our way to the diggings,
where, among the crowds who were gathered from all nations, we had no
difficulty in losing our former identities. The rest I need not relate.
We prospered, we traveled, we came back as rich colonials to England,
and we bought country estates. For more than twenty years we have
led peaceful and useful lives, and we hoped that our past was forever
buried. Imagine, then, my feelings when in the seaman who came to us I
recognized instantly the man who had been picked off the wreck. He had
tracked us down somehow, and had set himself to live upon our fears. You
will understand now how it was that I strove to keep the peace with him,
and you will in some measure sympathize with me in the fears which fill
me, now that he has gone from me to his other victim with threats upon
his tongue.'

"Underneath is written in a hand so shaky as to be hardly legible,
'Beddoes writes in cipher to say H. has told all. Sweet Lord, have mercy
on our souls!'

"That was the narrative which I read that night to young Trevor, and I
think, Watson, that under the circumstances it was a dramatic one.
The good fellow was heart-broken at it, and went out to the Terai tea
planting, where I hear that he is doing well. As to the sailor and
Beddoes, neither of them was ever heard of again after that day on which
the letter of warning was written. They both disappeared utterly and
completely. No complaint had been lodged with the police, so that
Beddoes had mistaken a threat for a deed. Hudson had been seen lurking
about, and it was believed by the police that he had done away with
Beddoes and had fled. For myself I believe that the truth was exactly
the opposite. I think that it is most probable that Beddoes, pushed to
desperation and believing himself to have been already betrayed, had
revenged himself upon Hudson, and had fled from the country with as much
money as he could lay his hands on. Those are the facts of the case,
Doctor, and if they are of any use to your collection, I am sure that
they are very heartily at your service."




Adventure V. The Musgrave Ritual


An anomaly which often struck me in the character of my friend Sherlock
Holmes was that, although in his methods of thought he was the neatest
and most methodical of mankind, and although also he affected a certain
quiet primness of dress, he was none the less in his personal habits one
of the most untidy men that ever drove a fellow-lodger to distraction.
Not that I am in the least conventional in that respect myself. The
rough-and-tumble work in Afghanistan, coming on the top of a natural
Bohemianism of disposition, has made me rather more lax than befits a
medical man. But with me there is a limit, and when I find a man who
keeps his cigars in the coal-scuttle, his tobacco in the toe end of
a Persian slipper, and his unanswered correspondence transfixed by a
jack-knife into the very centre of his wooden mantelpiece, then I begin
to give myself virtuous airs. I have always held, too, that pistol
practice should be distinctly an open-air pastime; and when Holmes, in
one of his queer humors, would sit in an arm-chair with his hair-trigger
and a hundred Boxer cartridges, and proceed to adorn the opposite
wall with a patriotic V. R. done in bullet-pocks, I felt strongly that
neither the atmosphere nor the appearance of our room was improved by
it.

Our chambers were always full of chemicals and of criminal relics which
had a way of wandering into unlikely positions, and of turning up in
the butter-dish or in even less desirable places. But his papers were
my great crux. He had a horror of destroying documents, especially those
which were connected with his past cases, and yet it was only once in
every year or two that he would muster energy to docket and arrange
them; for, as I have mentioned somewhere in these incoherent memoirs,
the outbursts of passionate energy when he performed the remarkable
feats with which his name is associated were followed by reactions of
lethargy during which he would lie about with his violin and his books,
hardly moving save from the sofa to the table. Thus month after month
his papers accumulated, until every corner of the room was stacked with
bundles of manuscript which were on no account to be burned, and which
could not be put away save by their owner. One winter's night, as we
sat together by the fire, I ventured to suggest to him that, as he had
finished pasting extracts into his common-place book, he might employ
the next two hours in making our room a little more habitable. He could
not deny the justice of my request, so with a rather rueful face he went
off to his bedroom, from which he returned presently pulling a large tin
box behind him. This he placed in the middle of the floor and, squatting
down upon a stool in front of it, he threw back the lid. I could see
that it was already a third full of bundles of paper tied up with red
tape into separate packages.

"There are cases enough here, Watson," said he, looking at me with
mischievous eyes. "I think that if you knew all that I had in this box
you would ask me to pull some out instead of putting others in."

"These are the records of your early work, then?" I asked. "I have often
wished that I had notes of those cases."

"Yes, my boy, these were all done prematurely before my biographer
had come to glorify me." He lifted bundle after bundle in a tender,
caressing sort of way. "They are not all successes, Watson," said he.
"But there are some pretty little problems among them. Here's the record
of the Tarleton murders, and the case of Vamberry, the wine merchant,
and the adventure of the old Russian woman, and the singular affair
of the aluminium crutch, as well as a full account of Ricoletti of the
club-foot, and his abominable wife. And here--ah, now, this really is
something a little recherché."

He dived his arm down to the bottom of the chest, and brought up a small
wooden box with a sliding lid, such as children's toys are kept in. From
within he produced a crumpled piece of paper, an old-fashioned brass
key, a peg of wood with a ball of string attached to it, and three rusty
old disks of metal.

"Well, my boy, what do you make of this lot?" he asked, smiling at my
expression.

"It is a curious collection."

"Very curious, and the story that hangs round it will strike you as
being more curious still."

"These relics have a history then?"

"So much so that they are history."

"What do you mean by that?"

Sherlock Holmes picked them up one by one, and laid them along the edge
of the table. Then he reseated himself in his chair and looked them over
with a gleam of satisfaction in his eyes.

"These," said he, "are all that I have left to remind me of the
adventure of the Musgrave Ritual."

I had heard him mention the case more than once, though I had never been
able to gather the details. "I should be so glad," said I, "if you would
give me an account of it."

"And leave the litter as it is?" he cried, mischievously. "Your tidiness
won't bear much strain after all, Watson. But I should be glad that you
should add this case to your annals, for there are points in it which
make it quite unique in the criminal records of this or, I believe,
of any other country. A collection of my trifling achievements would
certainly be incomplete which contained no account of this very singular
business.

"You may remember how the affair of the _Gloria Scott_, and my
conversation with the unhappy man whose fate I told you of, first turned
my attention in the direction of the profession which has become my
life's work. You see me now when my name has become known far and
wide, and when I am generally recognized both by the public and by the
official force as being a final court of appeal in doubtful cases.
Even when you knew me first, at the time of the affair which you have
commemorated in 'A Study in Scarlet,' I had already established a
considerable, though not a very lucrative, connection. You can hardly
realize, then, how difficult I found it at first, and how long I had to
wait before I succeeded in making any headway.

"When I first came up to London I had rooms in Montague Street, just
round the corner from the British Museum, and there I waited, filling in
my too abundant leisure time by studying all those branches of science
which might make me more efficient. Now and again cases came in my way,
principally through the introduction of old fellow-students, for during
my last years at the University there was a good deal of talk there
about myself and my methods. The third of these cases was that of the
Musgrave Ritual, and it is to the interest which was aroused by that
singular chain of events, and the large issues which proved to be at
stake, that I trace my first stride towards the position which I now
hold.

"Reginald Musgrave had been in the same college as myself, and I had
some slight acquaintance with him. He was not generally popular among
the undergraduates, though it always seemed to me that what was set down
as pride was really an attempt to cover extreme natural diffidence.
In appearance he was a man of exceedingly aristocratic type, thin,
high-nosed, and large-eyed, with languid and yet courtly manners. He was
indeed a scion of one of the very oldest families in the kingdom,
though his branch was a cadet one which had separated from the northern
Musgraves some time in the sixteenth century, and had established itself
in western Sussex, where the Manor House of Hurlstone is perhaps the
oldest inhabited building in the county. Something of his birth place
seemed to cling to the man, and I never looked at his pale, keen face
or the poise of his head without associating him with gray archways and
mullioned windows and all the venerable wreckage of a feudal keep. Once
or twice we drifted into talk, and I can remember that more than once he
expressed a keen interest in my methods of observation and inference.

"For four years I had seen nothing of him until one morning he walked
into my room in Montague Street. He had changed little, was dressed like
a young man of fashion--he was always a bit of a dandy--and preserved
the same quiet, suave manner which had formerly distinguished him.

"'How has all gone with you Musgrave?' I asked, after we had cordially
shaken hands.

"'You probably heard of my poor father's death,' said he; 'he was
carried off about two years ago. Since then I have of course had the
Hurlstone estates to manage, and as I am member for my district as well,
my life has been a busy one. But I understand, Holmes, that you are
turning to practical ends those powers with which you used to amaze us?'

"'Yes,' said I, 'I have taken to living by my wits.'

"'I am delighted to hear it, for your advice at present would be
exceedingly valuable to me. We have had some very strange doings at
Hurlstone, and the police have been able to throw no light upon the
matter. It is really the most extraordinary and inexplicable business.'

"You can imagine with what eagerness I listened to him, Watson, for
the very chance for which I had been panting during all those months
of inaction seemed to have come within my reach. In my inmost heart I
believed that I could succeed where others failed, and now I had the
opportunity to test myself.

"'Pray, let me have the details,' I cried.

"Reginald Musgrave sat down opposite to me, and lit the cigarette which
I had pushed towards him.

"'You must know,' said he, 'that though I am a bachelor, I have to keep
up a considerable staff of servants at Hurlstone, for it is a rambling
old place, and takes a good deal of looking after. I preserve, too, and
in the pheasant months I usually have a house-party, so that it would
not do to be short-handed. Altogether there are eight maids, the cook,
the butler, two footmen, and a boy. The garden and the stables of course
have a separate staff.

"'Of these servants the one who had been longest in our service was
Brunton the butler. He was a young school-master out of place when he
was first taken up by my father, but he was a man of great energy and
character, and he soon became quite invaluable in the household. He was
a well-grown, handsome man, with a splendid forehead, and though he has
been with us for twenty years he cannot be more than forty now. With
his personal advantages and his extraordinary gifts--for he can speak
several languages and play nearly every musical instrument--it is
wonderful that he should have been satisfied so long in such a position,
but I suppose that he was comfortable, and lacked energy to make any
change. The butler of Hurlstone is always a thing that is remembered by
all who visit us.

"'But this paragon has one fault. He is a bit of a Don Juan, and you can
imagine that for a man like him it is not a very difficult part to play
in a quiet country district. When he was married it was all right, but
since he has been a widower we have had no end of trouble with him. A
few months ago we were in hopes that he was about to settle down again
for he became engaged to Rachel Howells, our second house-maid; but he
has thrown her over since then and taken up with Janet Tregellis, the
daughter of the head game-keeper. Rachel--who is a very good girl, but
of an excitable Welsh temperament--had a sharp touch of brain-fever,
and goes about the house now--or did until yesterday--like a black-eyed
shadow of her former self. That was our first drama at Hurlstone; but a
second one came to drive it from our minds, and it was prefaced by the
disgrace and dismissal of butler Brunton.

"'This was how it came about. I have said that the man was intelligent,
and this very intelligence has caused his ruin, for it seems to have
led to an insatiable curiosity about things which did not in the least
concern him. I had no idea of the lengths to which this would carry him,
until the merest accident opened my eyes to it.

"'I have said that the house is a rambling one. One day last week--on
Thursday night, to be more exact--I found that I could not sleep,
having foolishly taken a cup of strong café noir after my dinner. After
struggling against it until two in the morning, I felt that it was quite
hopeless, so I rose and lit the candle with the intention of continuing
a novel which I was reading. The book, however, had been left in the
billiard-room, so I pulled on my dressing-gown and started off to get
it.

"'In order to reach the billiard-room I had to descend a flight of
stairs and then to cross the head of a passage which led to the library
and the gun-room. You can imagine my surprise when, as I looked down
this corridor, I saw a glimmer of light coming from the open door of the
library. I had myself extinguished the lamp and closed the door before
coming to bed. Naturally my first thought was of burglars. The corridors
at Hurlstone have their walls largely decorated with trophies of old
weapons. From one of these I picked a battle-axe, and then, leaving my
candle behind me, I crept on tiptoe down the passage and peeped in at
the open door.

"'Brunton, the butler, was in the library. He was sitting, fully
dressed, in an easy-chair, with a slip of paper which looked like a
map upon his knee, and his forehead sunk forward upon his hand in deep
thought. I stood dumb with astonishment, watching him from the darkness.
A small taper on the edge of the table shed a feeble light which
sufficed to show me that he was fully dressed. Suddenly, as I looked,
he rose from his chair, and walking over to a bureau at the side, he
unlocked it and drew out one of the drawers. From this he took a paper,
and returning to his seat he flattened it out beside the taper on the
edge of the table, and began to study it with minute attention. My
indignation at this calm examination of our family documents overcame
me so far that I took a step forward, and Brunton, looking up, saw me
standing in the doorway. He sprang to his feet, his face turned livid
with fear, and he thrust into his breast the chart-like paper which he
had been originally studying.

"'"So!" said I. "This is how you repay the trust which we have reposed
in you. You will leave my service to-morrow."

"'He bowed with the look of a man who is utterly crushed, and slunk past
me without a word. The taper was still on the table, and by its light
I glanced to see what the paper was which Brunton had taken from the
bureau. To my surprise it was nothing of any importance at all,
but simply a copy of the questions and answers in the singular old
observance called the Musgrave Ritual. It is a sort of ceremony peculiar
to our family, which each Musgrave for centuries past has gone through
on his coming of age--a thing of private interest, and perhaps of some
little importance to the archaeologist, like our own blazonings and
charges, but of no practical use whatever.'

"'We had better come back to the paper afterwards,' said I.

"'If you think it really necessary,' he answered, with some hesitation.
'To continue my statement, however: I relocked the bureau, using the key
which Brunton had left, and I had turned to go when I was surprised to
find that the butler had returned, and was standing before me.

"'"Mr. Musgrave, sir," he cried, in a voice which was hoarse with
emotion, "I can't bear disgrace, sir. I've always been proud above my
station in life, and disgrace would kill me. My blood will be on your
head, sir--it will, indeed--if you drive me to despair. If you cannot
keep me after what has passed, then for God's sake let me give you
notice and leave in a month, as if of my own free will. I could stand
that, Mr. Musgrave, but not to be cast out before all the folk that I
know so well."

"'"You don't deserve much consideration, Brunton," I answered. "Your
conduct has been most infamous. However, as you have been a long time in
the family, I have no wish to bring public disgrace upon you. A month,
however is too long. Take yourself away in a week, and give what reason
you like for going."

"'"Only a week, sir?" he cried, in a despairing voice. "A fortnight--say
at least a fortnight!"

"'"A week," I repeated, "and you may consider yourself to have been very
leniently dealt with."

"'He crept away, his face sunk upon his breast, like a broken man, while
I put out the light and returned to my room.


"'"For two days after this Brunton was most assiduous in his attention
to his duties. I made no allusion to what had passed, and waited with
some curiosity to see how he would cover his disgrace. On the third
morning, however he did not appear, as was his custom, after breakfast
to receive my instructions for the day. As I left the dining-room I
happened to meet Rachel Howells, the maid. I have told you that she had
only recently recovered from an illness, and was looking so wretchedly
pale and wan that I remonstrated with her for being at work.

"'"You should be in bed," I said. "Come back to your duties when you are
stronger."

"'She looked at me with so strange an expression that I began to suspect
that her brain was affected.

"'"I am strong enough, Mr. Musgrave," said she.

"'"We will see what the doctor says," I answered. "You must stop work
now, and when you go downstairs just say that I wish to see Brunton."

"'"The butler is gone," said she.

"'"Gone! Gone where?"

"'"He is gone. No one has seen him. He is not in his room. Oh, yes, he
is gone, he is gone!" She fell back against the wall with shriek after
shriek of laughter, while I, horrified at this sudden hysterical attack,
rushed to the bell to summon help. The girl was taken to her room, still
screaming and sobbing, while I made inquiries about Brunton. There was
no doubt about it that he had disappeared. His bed had not been slept
in, he had been seen by no one since he had retired to his room the
night before, and yet it was difficult to see how he could have left
the house, as both windows and doors were found to be fastened in the
morning. His clothes, his watch, and even his money were in his room,
but the black suit which he usually wore was missing. His slippers,
too, were gone, but his boots were left behind. Where then could butler
Brunton have gone in the night, and what could have become of him now?

"'Of course we searched the house from cellar to garret, but there was
no trace of him. It is, as I have said, a labyrinth of an old house,
especially the original wing, which is now practically uninhabited; but
we ransacked every room and cellar without discovering the least sign
of the missing man. It was incredible to me that he could have gone away
leaving all his property behind him, and yet where could he be? I called
in the local police, but without success. Rain had fallen on the night
before and we examined the lawn and the paths all round the house, but
in vain. Matters were in this state, when a new development quite drew
our attention away from the original mystery.

"'For two days Rachel Howells had been so ill, sometimes delirious,
sometimes hysterical, that a nurse had been employed to sit up with her
at night. On the third night after Brunton's disappearance, the nurse,
finding her patient sleeping nicely, had dropped into a nap in the
arm-chair, when she woke in the early morning to find the bed empty, the
window open, and no signs of the invalid. I was instantly aroused, and,
with the two footmen, started off at once in search of the missing girl.
It was not difficult to tell the direction which she had taken, for,
starting from under her window, we could follow her footmarks easily
across the lawn to the edge of the mere, where they vanished close to
the gravel path which leads out of the grounds. The lake there is eight
feet deep, and you can imagine our feelings when we saw that the trail
of the poor demented girl came to an end at the edge of it.

"'Of course, we had the drags at once, and set to work to recover the
remains, but no trace of the body could we find. On the other hand, we
brought to the surface an object of a most unexpected kind. It was a
linen bag which contained within it a mass of old rusted and discolored
metal and several dull-colored pieces of pebble or glass. This strange
find was all that we could get from the mere, and, although we made
every possible search and inquiry yesterday, we know nothing of the fate
either of Rachel Howells or of Richard Brunton. The county police are at
their wits' end, and I have come up to you as a last resource.'

"You can imagine, Watson, with what eagerness I listened to this
extraordinary sequence of events, and endeavored to piece them together,
and to devise some common thread upon which they might all hang. The
butler was gone. The maid was gone. The maid had loved the butler, but
had afterwards had cause to hate him. She was of Welsh blood, fiery
and passionate. She had been terribly excited immediately after his
disappearance. She had flung into the lake a bag containing some
curious contents. These were all factors which had to be taken into
consideration, and yet none of them got quite to the heart of the
matter. What was the starting-point of this chain of events? There lay
the end of this tangled line.

"'I must see that paper, Musgrave,' said I, 'which this butler of yours
thought it worth his while to consult, even at the risk of the loss of
his place.'

"'It is rather an absurd business, this ritual of ours,' he answered.
'But it has at least the saving grace of antiquity to excuse it. I have
a copy of the questions and answers here if you care to run your eye
over them.'

"He handed me the very paper which I have here, Watson, and this is the
strange catechism to which each Musgrave had to submit when he came to
man's estate. I will read you the questions and answers as they stand.

"'Whose was it?'

"'His who is gone.'

"'Who shall have it?'

"'He who will come.'

"'Where was the sun?'

"'Over the oak.'

"'Where was the shadow?'

"'Under the elm.'

"How was it stepped?'

"'North by ten and by ten, east by five and by five, south by two and by
two, west by one and by one, and so under.'

"'What shall we give for it?'

"'All that is ours.'

"'Why should we give it?'

"'For the sake of the trust.'

"'The original has no date, but is in the spelling of the middle of the
seventeenth century,' remarked Musgrave. 'I am afraid, however, that it
can be of little help to you in solving this mystery.'

"'At least,' said I, 'it gives us another mystery, and one which is even
more interesting than the first. It may be that the solution of the one
may prove to be the solution of the other. You will excuse me, Musgrave,
if I say that your butler appears to me to have been a very clever man,
and to have had a clearer insight than ten generations of his masters.'

"'I hardly follow you,' said Musgrave. 'The paper seems to me to be of
no practical importance.'

"'But to me it seems immensely practical, and I fancy that Brunton took
the same view. He had probably seen it before that night on which you
caught him.'

"'It is very possible. We took no pains to hide it.'

"'He simply wished, I should imagine, to refresh his memory upon that
last occasion. He had, as I understand, some sort of map or chart which
he was comparing with the manuscript, and which he thrust into his
pocket when you appeared.'

"'That is true. But what could he have to do with this old family custom
of ours, and what does this rigmarole mean?'

"'I don't think that we should have much difficulty in determining
that,' said I; 'with your permission we will take the first train down
to Sussex, and go a little more deeply into the matter upon the spot.'


"The same afternoon saw us both at Hurlstone. Possibly you have seen
pictures and read descriptions of the famous old building, so I will
confine my account of it to saying that it is built in the shape of
an L, the long arm being the more modern portion, and the shorter the
ancient nucleus, from which the other had developed. Over the low,
heavily-lintelled door, in the centre of this old part, is chiseled the
date, 1607, but experts are agreed that the beams and stone-work are
really much older than this. The enormously thick walls and tiny windows
of this part had in the last century driven the family into building the
new wing, and the old one was used now as a store-house and a cellar,
when it was used at all. A splendid park with fine old timber surrounds
the house, and the lake, to which my client had referred, lay close to
the avenue, about two hundred yards from the building.

"I was already firmly convinced, Watson, that there were not three
separate mysteries here, but one only, and that if I could read the
Musgrave Ritual aright I should hold in my hand the clue which would
lead me to the truth concerning both the butler Brunton and the maid
Howells. To that then I turned all my energies. Why should this servant
be so anxious to master this old formula? Evidently because he saw
something in it which had escaped all those generations of country
squires, and from which he expected some personal advantage. What was it
then, and how had it affected his fate?

"It was perfectly obvious to me, on reading the ritual, that the
measurements must refer to some spot to which the rest of the document
alluded, and that if we could find that spot, we should be in a fair way
towards finding what the secret was which the old Musgraves had thought
it necessary to embalm in so curious a fashion. There were two guides
given us to start with, an oak and an elm. As to the oak there could be
no question at all. Right in front of the house, upon the left-hand
side of the drive, there stood a patriarch among oaks, one of the most
magnificent trees that I have ever seen.

"'That was there when your ritual was drawn up,' said I, as we drove
past it.

"'It was there at the Norman Conquest in all probability,' he answered.
'It has a girth of twenty-three feet.'

"'Have you any old elms?' I asked.

"'There used to be a very old one over yonder but it was struck by
lightning ten years ago, and we cut down the stump.'

"'You can see where it used to be?'

"'Oh, yes.'

"'There are no other elms?'

"'No old ones, but plenty of beeches.'

"'I should like to see where it grew.'

"We had driven up in a dog-cart, and my client led me away at once,
without our entering the house, to the scar on the lawn where the
elm had stood. It was nearly midway between the oak and the house. My
investigation seemed to be progressing.

"'I suppose it is impossible to find out how high the elm was?' I asked.

"'I can give you it at once. It was sixty-four feet.'

"'How do you come to know it?' I asked, in surprise.

"'When my old tutor used to give me an exercise in trigonometry, it
always took the shape of measuring heights. When I was a lad I worked
out every tree and building in the estate.'

"This was an unexpected piece of luck. My data were coming more quickly
than I could have reasonably hoped.

"'Tell me,' I asked, 'did your butler ever ask you such a question?'

"Reginald Musgrave looked at me in astonishment. 'Now that you call it
to my mind,' he answered, 'Brunton did ask me about the height of the
tree some months ago, in connection with some little argument with the
groom.'

"This was excellent news, Watson, for it showed me that I was on the
right road. I looked up at the sun. It was low in the heavens, and I
calculated that in less than an hour it would lie just above the topmost
branches of the old oak. One condition mentioned in the Ritual would
then be fulfilled. And the shadow of the elm must mean the farther end
of the shadow, otherwise the trunk would have been chosen as the guide.
I had, then, to find where the far end of the shadow would fall when the
sun was just clear of the oak."

"That must have been difficult, Holmes, when the elm was no longer
there."

"Well, at least I knew that if Brunton could do it, I could also.
Besides, there was no real difficulty. I went with Musgrave to his study
and whittled myself this peg, to which I tied this long string with a
knot at each yard. Then I took two lengths of a fishing-rod, which came
to just six feet, and I went back with my client to where the elm had
been. The sun was just grazing the top of the oak. I fastened the rod
on end, marked out the direction of the shadow, and measured it. It was
nine feet in length.

"Of course the calculation now was a simple one. If a rod of six feet
threw a shadow of nine, a tree of sixty-four feet would throw one of
ninety-six, and the line of the one would of course be the line of the
other. I measured out the distance, which brought me almost to the
wall of the house, and I thrust a peg into the spot. You can imagine
my exultation, Watson, when within two inches of my peg I saw a conical
depression in the ground. I knew that it was the mark made by Brunton in
his measurements, and that I was still upon his trail.

"From this starting-point I proceeded to step, having first taken the
cardinal points by my pocket-compass. Ten steps with each foot took me
along parallel with the wall of the house, and again I marked my spot
with a peg. Then I carefully paced off five to the east and two to the
south. It brought me to the very threshold of the old door. Two steps
to the west meant now that I was to go two paces down the stone-flagged
passage, and this was the place indicated by the Ritual.

"Never have I felt such a cold chill of disappointment, Watson. For a
moment is seemed to me that there must be some radical mistake in my
calculations. The setting sun shone full upon the passage floor, and I
could see that the old, foot-worn gray stones with which it was paved
were firmly cemented together, and had certainly not been moved for many
a long year. Brunton had not been at work here. I tapped upon the floor,
but it sounded the same all over, and there was no sign of any crack
or crevice. But, fortunately, Musgrave, who had begun to appreciate the
meaning of my proceedings, and who was now as excited as myself, took
out his manuscript to check my calculation.

"'And under,' he cried. 'You have omitted the "and under."'

"I had thought that it meant that we were to dig, but now, of course,
I saw at once that I was wrong. 'There is a cellar under this then?' I
cried.

"'Yes, and as old as the house. Down here, through this door.'

"We went down a winding stone stair, and my companion, striking a match,
lit a large lantern which stood on a barrel in the corner. In an instant
it was obvious that we had at last come upon the true place, and that we
had not been the only people to visit the spot recently.

"It had been used for the storage of wood, but the billets, which had
evidently been littered over the floor, were now piled at the sides, so
as to leave a clear space in the middle. In this space lay a large and
heavy flagstone with a rusted iron ring in the centre to which a thick
shepherd's-check muffler was attached.

"'By Jove!' cried my client. 'That's Brunton's muffler. I have seen it
on him, and could swear to it. What has the villain been doing here?'

"At my suggestion a couple of the county police were summoned to be
present, and I then endeavored to raise the stone by pulling on the
cravat. I could only move it slightly, and it was with the aid of one
of the constables that I succeeded at last in carrying it to one side.
A black hole yawned beneath into which we all peered, while Musgrave,
kneeling at the side, pushed down the lantern.

"A small chamber about seven feet deep and four feet square lay open to
us. At one side of this was a squat, brass-bound wooden box, the lid of
which was hinged upwards, with this curious old-fashioned key projecting
from the lock. It was furred outside by a thick layer of dust, and damp
and worms had eaten through the wood, so that a crop of livid fungi
was growing on the inside of it. Several discs of metal, old coins
apparently, such as I hold here, were scattered over the bottom of the
box, but it contained nothing else.

"At the moment, however, we had no thought for the old chest, for our
eyes were riveted upon that which crouched beside it. It was the figure
of a man, clad in a suit of black, who squatted down upon his hams with
his forehead sunk upon the edge of the box and his two arms thrown out
on each side of it. The attitude had drawn all the stagnant blood to
the face, and no man could have recognized that distorted liver-colored
countenance; but his height, his dress, and his hair were all sufficient
to show my client, when we had drawn the body up, that it was indeed his
missing butler. He had been dead some days, but there was no wound or
bruise upon his person to show how he had met his dreadful end. When
his body had been carried from the cellar we found ourselves still
confronted with a problem which was almost as formidable as that with
which we had started.

"I confess that so far, Watson, I had been disappointed in my
investigation. I had reckoned upon solving the matter when once I had
found the place referred to in the Ritual; but now I was there, and was
apparently as far as ever from knowing what it was which the family had
concealed with such elaborate precautions. It is true that I had thrown
a light upon the fate of Brunton, but now I had to ascertain how that
fate had come upon him, and what part had been played in the matter by
the woman who had disappeared. I sat down upon a keg in the corner and
thought the whole matter carefully over.

"You know my methods in such cases, Watson. I put myself in the man's
place and, having first gauged his intelligence, I try to imagine how I
should myself have proceeded under the same circumstances. In this
case the matter was simplified by Brunton's intelligence being quite
first-rate, so that it was unnecessary to make any allowance for the
personal equation, as the astronomers have dubbed it. He knew that
something valuable was concealed. He had spotted the place. He found
that the stone which covered it was just too heavy for a man to move
unaided. What would he do next? He could not get help from outside, even
if he had some one whom he could trust, without the unbarring of doors
and considerable risk of detection. It was better, if he could, to have
his helpmate inside the house. But whom could he ask? This girl had been
devoted to him. A man always finds it hard to realize that he may have
finally lost a woman's love, however badly he may have treated her. He
would try by a few attentions to make his peace with the girl Howells,
and then would engage her as his accomplice. Together they would come at
night to the cellar, and their united force would suffice to raise the
stone. So far I could follow their actions as if I had actually seen
them.

"But for two of them, and one a woman, it must have been heavy work the
raising of that stone. A burly Sussex policeman and I had found it no
light job. What would they do to assist them? Probably what I should
have done myself. I rose and examined carefully the different billets
of wood which were scattered round the floor. Almost at once I came
upon what I expected. One piece, about three feet in length, had a very
marked indentation at one end, while several were flattened at the sides
as if they had been compressed by some considerable weight. Evidently,
as they had dragged the stone up they had thrust the chunks of wood into
the chink, until at last, when the opening was large enough to crawl
through, they would hold it open by a billet placed lengthwise, which
might very well become indented at the lower end, since the whole weight
of the stone would press it down on to the edge of this other slab. So
far I was still on safe ground.

"And now how was I to proceed to reconstruct this midnight drama?
Clearly, only one could fit into the hole, and that one was Brunton. The
girl must have waited above. Brunton then unlocked the box, handed up
the contents presumably--since they were not to be found--and then--and
then what happened?

"What smouldering fire of vengeance had suddenly sprung into flame in
this passionate Celtic woman's soul when she saw the man who had wronged
her--wronged her, perhaps, far more than we suspected--in her power?
Was it a chance that the wood had slipped, and that the stone had shut
Brunton into what had become his sepulchre? Had she only been guilty of
silence as to his fate? Or had some sudden blow from her hand dashed the
support away and sent the slab crashing down into its place? Be that
as it might, I seemed to see that woman's figure still clutching at her
treasure trove and flying wildly up the winding stair, with her ears
ringing perhaps with the muffled screams from behind her and with the
drumming of frenzied hands against the slab of stone which was choking
her faithless lover's life out.

"Here was the secret of her blanched face, her shaken nerves, her peals
of hysterical laughter on the next morning. But what had been in the
box? What had she done with that? Of course, it must have been the old
metal and pebbles which my client had dragged from the mere. She had
thrown them in there at the first opportunity to remove the last trace
of her crime.

"For twenty minutes I had sat motionless, thinking the matter out.
Musgrave still stood with a very pale face, swinging his lantern and
peering down into the hole.

"'These are coins of Charles the First,' said he, holding out the few
which had been in the box; 'you see we were right in fixing our date for
the Ritual.'

"'We may find something else of Charles the First,' I cried, as the
probable meaning of the first two questions of the Ritual broke suddenly
upon me. 'Let me see the contents of the bag which you fished from the
mere.'


"We ascended to his study, and he laid the debris before me. I could
understand his regarding it as of small importance when I looked at it,
for the metal was almost black and the stones lustreless and dull. I
rubbed one of them on my sleeve, however, and it glowed afterwards like
a spark in the dark hollow of my hand. The metal work was in the form
of a double ring, but it had been bent and twisted out of its original
shape.

"'You must bear in mind,' said I, 'that the royal party made head in
England even after the death of the king, and that when they at last
fled they probably left many of their most precious possessions buried
behind them, with the intention of returning for them in more peaceful
times.'

"'My ancestor, Sir Ralph Musgrave, was a prominent Cavalier and the
right-hand man of Charles the Second in his wanderings,' said my friend.

"'Ah, indeed!' I answered. 'Well now, I think that really should give us
the last link that we wanted. I must congratulate you on coming into
the possession, though in rather a tragic manner of a relic which is of
great intrinsic value, but of even greater importance as an historical
curiosity.'

"'What is it, then?' he gasped in astonishment.

"'It is nothing less than the ancient crown of the kings of England.'

"'The crown!'

"'Precisely. Consider what the Ritual says: How does it run? "Whose was
it?" "His who is gone." That was after the execution of Charles. Then,
"Who shall have it?" "He who will come." That was Charles the Second,
whose advent was already foreseen. There can, I think, be no doubt that
this battered and shapeless diadem once encircled the brows of the royal
Stuarts.'

"'And how came it in the pond?'

"'Ah, that is a question that will take some time to answer.' And with
that I sketched out to him the whole long chain of surmise and of proof
which I had constructed. The twilight had closed in and the moon was
shining brightly in the sky before my narrative was finished.

"'And how was it then that Charles did not get his crown when he
returned?' asked Musgrave, pushing back the relic into its linen bag.

"'Ah, there you lay your finger upon the one point which we shall
probably never be able to clear up. It is likely that the Musgrave who
held the secret died in the interval, and by some oversight left this
guide to his descendant without explaining the meaning of it. From that
day to this it has been handed down from father to son, until at last
it came within reach of a man who tore its secret out of it and lost his
life in the venture.'


"And that's the story of the Musgrave Ritual, Watson. They have the
crown down at Hurlstone--though they had some legal bother and a
considerable sum to pay before they were allowed to retain it. I am sure
that if you mentioned my name they would be happy to show it to you. Of
the woman nothing was ever heard, and the probability is that she got
away out of England and carried herself and the memory of her crime to
some land beyond the seas."




Adventure VI. The Reigate Puzzle


It was some time before the health of my friend Mr. Sherlock Holmes
recovered from the strain caused by his immense exertions in the spring
of '87. The whole question of the Netherland-Sumatra Company and of the
colossal schemes of Baron Maupertuis are too recent in the minds of the
public, and are too intimately concerned with politics and finance to be
fitting subjects for this series of sketches. They led, however, in an
indirect fashion to a singular and complex problem which gave my friend
an opportunity of demonstrating the value of a fresh weapon among the
many with which he waged his life-long battle against crime.

On referring to my notes I see that it was upon the 14th of April that
I received a telegram from Lyons which informed me that Holmes was
lying ill in the Hotel Dulong. Within twenty-four hours I was in his
sick-room, and was relieved to find that there was nothing formidable in
his symptoms. Even his iron constitution, however, had broken down
under the strain of an investigation which had extended over two months,
during which period he had never worked less than fifteen hours a day,
and had more than once, as he assured me, kept to his task for five days
at a stretch. Even the triumphant issue of his labors could not save him
from reaction after so terrible an exertion, and at a time when Europe
was ringing with his name and when his room was literally ankle-deep
with congratulatory telegrams I found him a prey to the blackest
depression. Even the knowledge that he had succeeded where the police of
three countries had failed, and that he had outmanoeuvred at every point
the most accomplished swindler in Europe, was insufficient to rouse him
from his nervous prostration.

Three days later we were back in Baker Street together; but it was
evident that my friend would be much the better for a change, and the
thought of a week of spring time in the country was full of attractions
to me also. My old friend, Colonel Hayter, who had come under my
professional care in Afghanistan, had now taken a house near Reigate in
Surrey, and had frequently asked me to come down to him upon a visit. On
the last occasion he had remarked that if my friend would only come
with me he would be glad to extend his hospitality to him also. A little
diplomacy was needed, but when Holmes understood that the establishment
was a bachelor one, and that he would be allowed the fullest freedom,
he fell in with my plans and a week after our return from Lyons we were
under the Colonel's roof. Hayter was a fine old soldier who had seen
much of the world, and he soon found, as I had expected, that Holmes and
he had much in common.

On the evening of our arrival we were sitting in the Colonel's gun-room
after dinner, Holmes stretched upon the sofa, while Hayter and I looked
over his little armory of Eastern weapons.

"By the way," said he suddenly, "I think I'll take one of these pistols
upstairs with me in case we have an alarm."

"An alarm!" said I.

"Yes, we've had a scare in this part lately. Old Acton, who is one of
our county magnates, had his house broken into last Monday. No great
damage done, but the fellows are still at large."

"No clue?" asked Holmes, cocking his eye at the Colonel.

"None as yet. But the affair is a petty one, one of our little country
crimes, which must seem too small for your attention, Mr. Holmes, after
this great international affair."

Holmes waved away the compliment, though his smile showed that it had
pleased him.

"Was there any feature of interest?"

"I fancy not. The thieves ransacked the library and got very little for
their pains. The whole place was turned upside down, drawers burst open,
and presses ransacked, with the result that an odd volume of Pope's
'Homer,' two plated candlesticks, an ivory letter-weight, a small oak
barometer, and a ball of twine are all that have vanished."

"What an extraordinary assortment!" I exclaimed.

"Oh, the fellows evidently grabbed hold of everything they could get."

Holmes grunted from the sofa.

"The county police ought to make something of that," said he; "why, it
is surely obvious that--"

But I held up a warning finger.

"You are here for a rest, my dear fellow. For Heaven's sake don't get
started on a new problem when your nerves are all in shreds."

Holmes shrugged his shoulders with a glance of comic resignation towards
the Colonel, and the talk drifted away into less dangerous channels.

It was destined, however, that all my professional caution should be
wasted, for next morning the problem obtruded itself upon us in such a
way that it was impossible to ignore it, and our country visit took a
turn which neither of us could have anticipated. We were at breakfast
when the Colonel's butler rushed in with all his propriety shaken out of
him.

"Have you heard the news, sir?" he gasped. "At the Cunningham's sir!"

"Burglary!" cried the Colonel, with his coffee-cup in mid-air.

"Murder!"

The Colonel whistled. "By Jove!" said he. "Who's killed, then? The J.P.
or his son?"

"Neither, sir. It was William the coachman. Shot through the heart, sir,
and never spoke again."

"Who shot him, then?"

"The burglar, sir. He was off like a shot and got clean away. He'd just
broke in at the pantry window when William came on him and met his end
in saving his master's property."

"What time?"

"It was last night, sir, somewhere about twelve."

"Ah, then, we'll step over afterwards," said the Colonel, coolly
settling down to his breakfast again. "It's a baddish business," he
added when the butler had gone; "he's our leading man about here, is old
Cunningham, and a very decent fellow too. He'll be cut up over this, for
the man has been in his service for years and was a good servant. It's
evidently the same villains who broke into Acton's."

"And stole that very singular collection," said Holmes, thoughtfully.

"Precisely."

"Hum! It may prove the simplest matter in the world, but all the same
at first glance this is just a little curious, is it not? A gang of
burglars acting in the country might be expected to vary the scene of
their operations, and not to crack two cribs in the same district within
a few days. When you spoke last night of taking precautions I remember
that it passed through my mind that this was probably the last parish
in England to which the thief or thieves would be likely to turn their
attention--which shows that I have still much to learn."

"I fancy it's some local practitioner," said the Colonel. "In that case,
of course, Acton's and Cunningham's are just the places he would go for,
since they are far the largest about here."

"And richest?"

"Well, they ought to be, but they've had a lawsuit for some years which
has sucked the blood out of both of them, I fancy. Old Acton has some
claim on half Cunningham's estate, and the lawyers have been at it with
both hands."

"If it's a local villain there should not be much difficulty in running
him down," said Holmes with a yawn. "All right, Watson, I don't intend
to meddle."

"Inspector Forrester, sir," said the butler, throwing open the door.

The official, a smart, keen-faced young fellow, stepped into the room.
"Good-morning, Colonel," said he; "I hope I don't intrude, but we hear
that Mr. Holmes of Baker Street is here."

The Colonel waved his hand towards my friend, and the Inspector bowed.

"We thought that perhaps you would care to step across, Mr. Holmes."

"The fates are against you, Watson," said he, laughing. "We were
chatting about the matter when you came in, Inspector. Perhaps you
can let us have a few details." As he leaned back in his chair in the
familiar attitude I knew that the case was hopeless.

"We had no clue in the Acton affair. But here we have plenty to go on,
and there's no doubt it is the same party in each case. The man was
seen."

"Ah!"

"Yes, sir. But he was off like a deer after the shot that killed poor
William Kirwan was fired. Mr. Cunningham saw him from the bedroom
window, and Mr. Alec Cunningham saw him from the back passage. It was
quarter to twelve when the alarm broke out. Mr. Cunningham had just got
into bed, and Mr. Alec was smoking a pipe in his dressing-gown. They
both heard William the coachman calling for help, and Mr. Alec ran down
to see what was the matter. The back door was open, and as he came to
the foot of the stairs he saw two men wrestling together outside. One of
them fired a shot, the other dropped, and the murderer rushed across the
garden and over the hedge. Mr. Cunningham, looking out of his bedroom,
saw the fellow as he gained the road, but lost sight of him at once. Mr.
Alec stopped to see if he could help the dying man, and so the villain
got clean away. Beyond the fact that he was a middle-sized man and
dressed in some dark stuff, we have no personal clue; but we are making
energetic inquiries, and if he is a stranger we shall soon find him
out."

"What was this William doing there? Did he say anything before he died?"

"Not a word. He lives at the lodge with his mother, and as he was a
very faithful fellow we imagine that he walked up to the house with
the intention of seeing that all was right there. Of course this Acton
business has put every one on their guard. The robber must have just
burst open the door--the lock has been forced--when William came upon
him."

"Did William say anything to his mother before going out?"

"She is very old and deaf, and we can get no information from her. The
shock has made her half-witted, but I understand that she was never
very bright. There is one very important circumstance, however. Look at
this!"

He took a small piece of torn paper from a note-book and spread it out
upon his knee.

"This was found between the finger and thumb of the dead man. It appears
to be a fragment torn from a larger sheet. You will observe that the
hour mentioned upon it is the very time at which the poor fellow met his
fate. You see that his murderer might have torn the rest of the sheet
from him or he might have taken this fragment from the murderer. It
reads almost as though it were an appointment."

Holmes took up the scrap of paper, a fac-simile of which is here
reproduced.

     d at quarter to twelve learn what maybe

"Presuming that it is an appointment," continued the Inspector, "it is
of course a conceivable theory that this William Kirwan--though he had
the reputation of being an honest man, may have been in league with the
thief. He may have met him there, may even have helped him to break in
the door, and then they may have fallen out between themselves."

"This writing is of extraordinary interest," said Holmes, who had been
examining it with intense concentration. "These are much deeper waters
than I had thought." He sank his head upon his hands, while the Inspector
smiled at the effect which his case had had upon the famous London
specialist.

"Your last remark," said Holmes, presently, "as to the possibility of
there being an understanding between the burglar and the servant, and
this being a note of appointment from one to the other, is an ingenious
and not entirely impossible supposition. But this writing opens up--" He
sank his head into his hands again and remained for some minutes in the
deepest thought. When he raised his face again, I was surprised to see
that his cheek was tinged with color, and his eyes as bright as before
his illness. He sprang to his feet with all his old energy.

"I'll tell you what," said he, "I should like to have a quiet little
glance into the details of this case. There is something in it which
fascinates me extremely. If you will permit me, Colonel, I will leave my
friend Watson and you, and I will step round with the Inspector to test
the truth of one or two little fancies of mine. I will be with you again
in half an hour."

An hour and half had elapsed before the Inspector returned alone.

"Mr. Holmes is walking up and down in the field outside," said he. "He
wants us all four to go up to the house together."

"To Mr. Cunningham's?"

"Yes, sir."

"What for?"

The Inspector shrugged his shoulders. "I don't quite know, sir. Between
ourselves, I think Mr. Holmes had not quite got over his illness yet.
He's been behaving very queerly, and he is very much excited."

"I don't think you need alarm yourself," said I. "I have usually found
that there was method in his madness."

"Some folks might say there was madness in his method," muttered the
Inspector. "But he's all on fire to start, Colonel, so we had best go
out if you are ready."

We found Holmes pacing up and down in the field, his chin sunk upon his
breast, and his hands thrust into his trousers pockets.

"The matter grows in interest," said he. "Watson, your country-trip has
been a distinct success. I have had a charming morning."

"You have been up to the scene of the crime, I understand," said the
Colonel.

"Yes; the Inspector and I have made quite a little reconnaissance
together."

"Any success?"

"Well, we have seen some very interesting things. I'll tell you what we
did as we walk. First of all, we saw the body of this unfortunate man.
He certainly died from a revolver wound as reported."

"Had you doubted it, then?"

"Oh, it is as well to test everything. Our inspection was not wasted. We
then had an interview with Mr. Cunningham and his son, who were able
to point out the exact spot where the murderer had broken through the
garden-hedge in his flight. That was of great interest."

"Naturally."

"Then we had a look at this poor fellow's mother. We could get no
information from her, however, as she is very old and feeble."

"And what is the result of your investigations?"

"The conviction that the crime is a very peculiar one. Perhaps our visit
now may do something to make it less obscure. I think that we are both
agreed, Inspector that the fragment of paper in the dead man's hand,
bearing, as it does, the very hour of his death written upon it, is of
extreme importance."

"It should give a clue, Mr. Holmes."

"It does give a clue. Whoever wrote that note was the man who brought
William Kirwan out of his bed at that hour. But where is the rest of
that sheet of paper?"

"I examined the ground carefully in the hope of finding it," said the
Inspector.

"It was torn out of the dead man's hand. Why was some one so anxious to
get possession of it? Because it incriminated him. And what would he do
with it? Thrust it into his pocket, most likely, never noticing that a
corner of it had been left in the grip of the corpse. If we could get
the rest of that sheet it is obvious that we should have gone a long way
towards solving the mystery."

"Yes, but how can we get at the criminal's pocket before we catch the
criminal?"

"Well, well, it was worth thinking over. Then there is another obvious
point. The note was sent to William. The man who wrote it could not have
taken it; otherwise, of course, he might have delivered his own message
by word of mouth. Who brought the note, then? Or did it come through the
post?"

"I have made inquiries," said the Inspector. "William received a letter
by the afternoon post yesterday. The envelope was destroyed by him."

"Excellent!" cried Holmes, clapping the Inspector on the back. "You've
seen the postman. It is a pleasure to work with you. Well, here is the
lodge, and if you will come up, Colonel, I will show you the scene of
the crime."

We passed the pretty cottage where the murdered man had lived, and
walked up an oak-lined avenue to the fine old Queen Anne house, which
bears the date of Malplaquet upon the lintel of the door. Holmes and
the Inspector led us round it until we came to the side gate, which is
separated by a stretch of garden from the hedge which lines the road. A
constable was standing at the kitchen door.

"Throw the door open, officer," said Holmes. "Now, it was on those
stairs that young Mr. Cunningham stood and saw the two men struggling
just where we are. Old Mr. Cunningham was at that window--the second on
the left--and he saw the fellow get away just to the left of that bush.
Then Mr. Alec ran out and knelt beside the wounded man. The ground is
very hard, you see, and there are no marks to guide us." As he spoke two
men came down the garden path, from round the angle of the house. The
one was an elderly man, with a strong, deep-lined, heavy-eyed face; the
other a dashing young fellow, whose bright, smiling expression and showy
dress were in strange contrast with the business which had brought us
there.

"Still at it, then?" said he to Holmes. "I thought you Londoners were
never at fault. You don't seem to be so very quick, after all."

"Ah, you must give us a little time," said Holmes good-humoredly.

"You'll want it," said young Alec Cunningham. "Why, I don't see that we
have any clue at all."

"There's only one," answered the Inspector. "We thought that if we could
only find--Good heavens, Mr. Holmes! What is the matter?"

My poor friend's face had suddenly assumed the most dreadful expression.
His eyes rolled upwards, his features writhed in agony, and with a
suppressed groan he dropped on his face upon the ground. Horrified
at the suddenness and severity of the attack, we carried him into the
kitchen, where he lay back in a large chair, and breathed heavily for
some minutes. Finally, with a shamefaced apology for his weakness, he
rose once more.

"Watson would tell you that I have only just recovered from a severe
illness," he explained. "I am liable to these sudden nervous attacks."

"Shall I send you home in my trap?" asked old Cunningham.

"Well, since I am here, there is one point on which I should like to
feel sure. We can very easily verify it."

"What was it?"

"Well, it seems to me that it is just possible that the arrival of
this poor fellow William was not before, but after, the entrance of
the burglar into the house. You appear to take it for granted that,
although the door was forced, the robber never got in."

"I fancy that is quite obvious," said Mr. Cunningham, gravely. "Why, my
son Alec had not yet gone to bed, and he would certainly have heard any
one moving about."

"Where was he sitting?"

"I was smoking in my dressing-room."

"Which window is that?"

"The last on the left next my father's."

"Both of your lamps were lit, of course?"

"Undoubtedly."

"There are some very singular points here," said Holmes, smiling. "Is
it not extraordinary that a burglar--and a burglar who had had some
previous experience--should deliberately break into a house at a time
when he could see from the lights that two of the family were still
afoot?"

"He must have been a cool hand."

"Well, of course, if the case were not an odd one we should not have
been driven to ask you for an explanation," said young Mr. Alec. "But as
to your ideas that the man had robbed the house before William tackled
him, I think it a most absurd notion. Wouldn't we have found the place
disarranged, and missed the things which he had taken?"

"It depends on what the things were," said Holmes. "You must remember
that we are dealing with a burglar who is a very peculiar fellow, and
who appears to work on lines of his own. Look, for example, at the
queer lot of things which he took from Acton's--what was it?--a ball of
string, a letter-weight, and I don't know what other odds and ends."

"Well, we are quite in your hands, Mr. Holmes," said old Cunningham.
"Anything which you or the Inspector may suggest will most certainly be
done."

"In the first place," said Holmes, "I should like you to offer a
reward--coming from yourself, for the officials may take a little time
before they would agree upon the sum, and these things cannot be done
too promptly. I have jotted down the form here, if you would not mind
signing it. Fifty pounds was quite enough, I thought."

"I would willingly give five hundred," said the J.P., taking the slip
of paper and the pencil which Holmes handed to him. "This is not quite
correct, however," he added, glancing over the document.

"I wrote it rather hurriedly."

"You see you begin, 'Whereas, at about a quarter to one on Tuesday
morning an attempt was made,' and so on. It was at a quarter to twelve,
as a matter of fact."

I was pained at the mistake, for I knew how keenly Holmes would feel any
slip of the kind. It was his specialty to be accurate as to fact, but
his recent illness had shaken him, and this one little incident was
enough to show me that he was still far from being himself. He was
obviously embarrassed for an instant, while the Inspector raised his
eyebrows, and Alec Cunningham burst into a laugh. The old gentleman
corrected the mistake, however, and handed the paper back to Holmes.

"Get it printed as soon as possible," he said; "I think your idea is an
excellent one."

Holmes put the slip of paper carefully away into his pocket-book.

"And now," said he, "it really would be a good thing that we should all
go over the house together and make certain that this rather erratic
burglar did not, after all, carry anything away with him."

Before entering, Holmes made an examination of the door which had been
forced. It was evident that a chisel or strong knife had been thrust
in, and the lock forced back with it. We could see the marks in the wood
where it had been pushed in.

"You don't use bars, then?" he asked.

"We have never found it necessary."

"You don't keep a dog?"

"Yes, but he is chained on the other side of the house."

"When do the servants go to bed?"

"About ten."

"I understand that William was usually in bed also at that hour."

"Yes."

"It is singular that on this particular night he should have been up.
Now, I should be very glad if you would have the kindness to show us
over the house, Mr. Cunningham."

A stone-flagged passage, with the kitchens branching away from it, led
by a wooden staircase directly to the first floor of the house. It came
out upon the landing opposite to a second more ornamental stair which
came up from the front hall. Out of this landing opened the drawing-room
and several bedrooms, including those of Mr. Cunningham and his son.
Holmes walked slowly, taking keen note of the architecture of the house.
I could tell from his expression that he was on a hot scent, and yet
I could not in the least imagine in what direction his inferences were
leading him.

"My good sir," said Mr. Cunningham with some impatience, "this is surely
very unnecessary. That is my room at the end of the stairs, and my
son's is the one beyond it. I leave it to your judgment whether it was
possible for the thief to have come up here without disturbing us."

"You must try round and get on a fresh scent, I fancy," said the son
with a rather malicious smile.

"Still, I must ask you to humor me a little further. I should like, for
example, to see how far the windows of the bedrooms command the front.
This, I understand is your son's room"--he pushed open the door--"and
that, I presume, is the dressing-room in which he sat smoking when the
alarm was given. Where does the window of that look out to?" He stepped
across the bedroom, pushed open the door, and glanced round the other
chamber.

"I hope that you are satisfied now?" said Mr. Cunningham, tartly.

"Thank you, I think I have seen all that I wished."

"Then if it is really necessary we can go into my room."

"If it is not too much trouble."

The J. P. shrugged his shoulders, and led the way into his own chamber,
which was a plainly furnished and commonplace room. As we moved across
it in the direction of the window, Holmes fell back until he and I were
the last of the group. Near the foot of the bed stood a dish of oranges
and a carafe of water. As we passed it Holmes, to my unutterable
astonishment, leaned over in front of me and deliberately knocked the
whole thing over. The glass smashed into a thousand pieces and the fruit
rolled about into every corner of the room.

"You've done it now, Watson," said he, coolly. "A pretty mess you've
made of the carpet."

I stooped in some confusion and began to pick up the fruit,
understanding for some reason my companion desired me to take the blame
upon myself. The others did the same, and set the table on its legs
again.

"Hullo!" cried the Inspector, "where's he got to?"

Holmes had disappeared.

"Wait here an instant," said young Alec Cunningham. "The fellow is off
his head, in my opinion. Come with me, father, and see where he has got
to!"

They rushed out of the room, leaving the Inspector, the Colonel, and me
staring at each other.

"'Pon my word, I am inclined to agree with Master Alec," said the
official. "It may be the effect of this illness, but it seems to me
that--"

His words were cut short by a sudden scream of "Help! Help! Murder!"
With a thrill I recognized the voice of that of my friend. I rushed
madly from the room on to the landing. The cries, which had sunk down
into a hoarse, inarticulate shouting, came from the room which we had
first visited. I dashed in, and on into the dressing-room beyond. The
two Cunninghams were bending over the prostrate figure of Sherlock
Holmes, the younger clutching his throat with both hands, while the
elder seemed to be twisting one of his wrists. In an instant the three
of us had torn them away from him, and Holmes staggered to his feet,
very pale and evidently greatly exhausted.

"Arrest these men, Inspector," he gasped.

"On what charge?"

"That of murdering their coachman, William Kirwan."

The Inspector stared about him in bewilderment. "Oh, come now, Mr.
Holmes," said he at last, "I'm sure you don't really mean to--"

"Tut, man, look at their faces!" cried Holmes, curtly.

Never certainly have I seen a plainer confession of guilt upon human
countenances. The older man seemed numbed and dazed with a heavy, sullen
expression upon his strongly-marked face. The son, on the other hand,
had dropped all that jaunty, dashing style which had characterized him,
and the ferocity of a dangerous wild beast gleamed in his dark eyes
and distorted his handsome features. The Inspector said nothing, but,
stepping to the door, he blew his whistle. Two of his constables came at
the call.

"I have no alternative, Mr. Cunningham," said he. "I trust that this may
all prove to be an absurd mistake, but you can see that--Ah, would you?
Drop it!" He struck out with his hand, and a revolver which the younger
man was in the act of cocking clattered down upon the floor.

"Keep that," said Holmes, quietly putting his foot upon it; "you will
find it useful at the trial. But this is what we really wanted." He held
up a little crumpled piece of paper.

"The remainder of the sheet!" cried the Inspector.

"Precisely."

"And where was it?"

"Where I was sure it must be. I'll make the whole matter clear to you
presently. I think, Colonel, that you and Watson might return now, and
I will be with you again in an hour at the furthest. The Inspector and I
must have a word with the prisoners, but you will certainly see me back
at luncheon time."


Sherlock Holmes was as good as his word, for about one o'clock he
rejoined us in the Colonel's smoking-room. He was accompanied by a
little elderly gentleman, who was introduced to me as the Mr. Acton
whose house had been the scene of the original burglary.

"I wished Mr. Acton to be present while I demonstrated this small matter
to you," said Holmes, "for it is natural that he should take a keen
interest in the details. I am afraid, my dear Colonel, that you must
regret the hour that you took in such a stormy petrel as I am."

"On the contrary," answered the Colonel, warmly, "I consider it the
greatest privilege to have been permitted to study your methods of
working. I confess that they quite surpass my expectations, and that I
am utterly unable to account for your result. I have not yet seen the
vestige of a clue."

"I am afraid that my explanation may disillusion you but it has always
been my habit to hide none of my methods, either from my friend Watson
or from any one who might take an intelligent interest in them. But,
first, as I am rather shaken by the knocking about which I had in
the dressing-room, I think that I shall help myself to a dash of your
brandy, Colonel. My strength had been rather tried of late."

"I trust that you had no more of those nervous attacks."

Sherlock Holmes laughed heartily. "We will come to that in its turn,"
said he. "I will lay an account of the case before you in its due order,
showing you the various points which guided me in my decision. Pray
interrupt me if there is any inference which is not perfectly clear to
you.

"It is of the highest importance in the art of detection to be able
to recognize, out of a number of facts, which are incidental and which
vital. Otherwise your energy and attention must be dissipated instead of
being concentrated. Now, in this case there was not the slightest doubt
in my mind from the first that the key of the whole matter must be
looked for in the scrap of paper in the dead man's hand.

"Before going into this, I would draw your attention to the fact that,
if Alec Cunningham's narrative was correct, and if the assailant, after
shooting William Kirwan, had instantly fled, then it obviously could not
be he who tore the paper from the dead man's hand. But if it was not he,
it must have been Alec Cunningham himself, for by the time that the old
man had descended several servants were upon the scene. The point is a
simple one, but the Inspector had overlooked it because he had started
with the supposition that these county magnates had had nothing to do
with the matter. Now, I make a point of never having any prejudices,
and of following docilely wherever fact may lead me, and so, in the
very first stage of the investigation, I found myself looking a little
askance at the part which had been played by Mr. Alec Cunningham.

"And now I made a very careful examination of the corner of paper which
the Inspector had submitted to us. It was at once clear to me that it
formed part of a very remarkable document. Here it is. Do you not now
observe something very suggestive about it?"

"It has a very irregular look," said the Colonel.

"My dear sir," cried Holmes, "there cannot be the least doubt in the
world that it has been written by two persons doing alternate words.
When I draw your attention to the strong t's of 'at' and 'to', and ask
you to compare them with the weak ones of 'quarter' and 'twelve,' you
will instantly recognize the fact. A very brief analysis of these
four words would enable you to say with the utmost confidence that the
'learn' and the 'maybe' are written in the stronger hand, and the 'what'
in the weaker."

"By Jove, it's as clear as day!" cried the Colonel. "Why on earth should
two men write a letter in such a fashion?"

"Obviously the business was a bad one, and one of the men who distrusted
the other was determined that, whatever was done, each should have an
equal hand in it. Now, of the two men, it is clear that the one who
wrote the 'at' and 'to' was the ringleader."

"How do you get at that?"

"We might deduce it from the mere character of the one hand as compared
with the other. But we have more assured reasons than that for supposing
it. If you examine this scrap with attention you will come to the
conclusion that the man with the stronger hand wrote all his words
first, leaving blanks for the other to fill up. These blanks were not
always sufficient, and you can see that the second man had a squeeze
to fit his 'quarter' in between the 'at' and the 'to,' showing that the
latter were already written. The man who wrote all his words first is
undoubtedly the man who planned the affair."

"Excellent!" cried Mr. Acton.

"But very superficial," said Holmes. "We come now, however, to a point
which is of importance. You may not be aware that the deduction of a
man's age from his writing is one which been has brought to considerable
accuracy by experts. In normal cases one can place a man in his true
decade with tolerable confidence. I say normal cases, because ill-health
and physical weakness reproduce the signs of old age, even when the
invalid is a youth. In this case, looking at the bold, strong hand of
the one, and the rather broken-backed appearance of the other, which
still retains its legibility although the t's have begun to lose their
crossing, we can say that the one was a young man and the other was
advanced in years without being positively decrepit."

"Excellent!" cried Mr. Acton again.

"There is a further point, however, which is subtler and of greater
interest. There is something in common between these hands. They belong
to men who are blood-relatives. It may be most obvious to you in the
Greek e's, but to me there are many small points which indicate the same
thing. I have no doubt at all that a family mannerism can be traced in
these two specimens of writing. I am only, of course, giving you
the leading results now of my examination of the paper. There were
twenty-three other deductions which would be of more interest to experts
than to you. They all tend to deepen the impression upon my mind that
the Cunninghams, father and son, had written this letter.

"Having got so far, my next step was, of course, to examine into the
details of the crime, and to see how far they would help us. I went up
to the house with the Inspector, and saw all that was to be seen. The
wound upon the dead man was, as I was able to determine with absolute
confidence, fired from a revolver at the distance of something over
four yards. There was no powder-blackening on the clothes. Evidently,
therefore, Alec Cunningham had lied when he said that the two men were
struggling when the shot was fired. Again, both father and son agreed
as to the place where the man escaped into the road. At that point,
however, as it happens, there is a broadish ditch, moist at the bottom.
As there were no indications of bootmarks about this ditch, I was
absolutely sure not only that the Cunninghams had again lied, but that
there had never been any unknown man upon the scene at all.

"And now I have to consider the motive of this singular crime. To get
at this, I endeavored first of all to solve the reason of the original
burglary at Mr. Acton's. I understood, from something which the Colonel
told us, that a lawsuit had been going on between you, Mr. Acton, and
the Cunninghams. Of course, it instantly occurred to me that they had
broken into your library with the intention of getting at some document
which might be of importance in the case."

"Precisely so," said Mr. Acton. "There can be no possible doubt as to
their intentions. I have the clearest claim upon half of their present
estate, and if they could have found a single paper--which, fortunately,
was in the strong-box of my solicitors--they would undoubtedly have
crippled our case."

"There you are," said Holmes, smiling. "It was a dangerous, reckless
attempt, in which I seem to trace the influence of young Alec. Having
found nothing they tried to divert suspicion by making it appear to be
an ordinary burglary, to which end they carried off whatever they could
lay their hands upon. That is all clear enough, but there was much that
was still obscure. What I wanted above all was to get the missing part
of that note. I was certain that Alec had torn it out of the dead man's
hand, and almost certain that he must have thrust it into the pocket of
his dressing-gown. Where else could he have put it? The only question
was whether it was still there. It was worth an effort to find out, and
for that object we all went up to the house.

"The Cunninghams joined us, as you doubtless remember, outside the
kitchen door. It was, of course, of the very first importance that they
should not be reminded of the existence of this paper, otherwise they
would naturally destroy it without delay. The Inspector was about to
tell them the importance which we attached to it when, by the luckiest
chance in the world, I tumbled down in a sort of fit and so changed the
conversation.

"Good heavens!" cried the Colonel, laughing, "do you mean to say all our
sympathy was wasted and your fit an imposture?"

"Speaking professionally, it was admirably done," cried I, looking in
amazement at this man who was forever confounding me with some new phase
of his astuteness.

"It is an art which is often useful," said he. "When I recovered I
managed, by a device which had perhaps some little merit of ingenuity,
to get old Cunningham to write the word 'twelve,' so that I might
compare it with the 'twelve' upon the paper."

"Oh, what an ass I have been!" I exclaimed.

"I could see that you were commiserating me over my weakness," said
Holmes, laughing. "I was sorry to cause you the sympathetic pain which
I know that you felt. We then went upstairs together, and having entered
the room and seen the dressing-gown hanging up behind the door, I
contrived, by upsetting a table, to engage their attention for the
moment, and slipped back to examine the pockets. I had hardly got the
paper, however--which was, as I had expected, in one of them--when the
two Cunninghams were on me, and would, I verily believe, have murdered
me then and there but for your prompt and friendly aid. As it is, I feel
that young man's grip on my throat now, and the father has twisted my
wrist round in the effort to get the paper out of my hand. They saw that
I must know all about it, you see, and the sudden change from absolute
security to complete despair made them perfectly desperate.

"I had a little talk with old Cunningham afterwards as to the motive of
the crime. He was tractable enough, though his son was a perfect demon,
ready to blow out his own or anybody else's brains if he could have got
to his revolver. When Cunningham saw that the case against him was so
strong he lost all heart and made a clean breast of everything. It seems
that William had secretly followed his two masters on the night when
they made their raid upon Mr. Acton's, and having thus got them into
his power, proceeded, under threats of exposure, to levy blackmail upon
them. Mr. Alec, however, was a dangerous man to play games of that
sort with. It was a stroke of positive genius on his part to see in the
burglary scare which was convulsing the country side an opportunity of
plausibly getting rid of the man whom he feared. William was decoyed up
and shot, and had they only got the whole of the note and paid a little
more attention to detail in the accessories, it is very possible that
suspicion might never have been aroused."

"And the note?" I asked.

Sherlock Holmes placed the subjoined paper before us.

     If you will only come around to the east gate it will
     very much surprise you and be of the greatest service to you
     and also to Annie Morrison. But say nothing to anyone upon
     the matter.

"It is very much the sort of thing that I expected," said he. "Of
course, we do not yet know what the relations may have been between Alec
Cunningham, William Kirwan, and Annie Morrison. The results shows that
the trap was skillfully baited. I am sure that you cannot fail to be
delighted with the traces of heredity shown in the p's and in the tails
of the g's. The absence of the i-dots in the old man's writing is also
most characteristic. Watson, I think our quiet rest in the country has
been a distinct success, and I shall certainly return much invigorated
to Baker Street to-morrow."




Adventure VII. The Crooked Man


One summer night, a few months after my marriage, I was seated by my own
hearth smoking a last pipe and nodding over a novel, for my day's work
had been an exhausting one. My wife had already gone upstairs, and the
sound of the locking of the hall door some time before told me that the
servants had also retired. I had risen from my seat and was knocking out
the ashes of my pipe when I suddenly heard the clang of the bell.

I looked at the clock. It was a quarter to twelve. This could not be
a visitor at so late an hour. A patient, evidently, and possibly an
all-night sitting. With a wry face I went out into the hall and opened
the door. To my astonishment it was Sherlock Holmes who stood upon my
step.

"Ah, Watson," said he, "I hoped that I might not be too late to catch
you."

"My dear fellow, pray come in."

"You look surprised, and no wonder! Relieved, too, I fancy! Hum! You
still smoke the Arcadia mixture of your bachelor days then! There's no
mistaking that fluffy ash upon your coat. It's easy to tell that you
have been accustomed to wear a uniform, Watson. You'll never pass as
a pure-bred civilian as long as you keep that habit of carrying your
handkerchief in your sleeve. Could you put me up to-night?"

"With pleasure."

"You told me that you had bachelor quarters for one, and I see that you
have no gentleman visitor at present. Your hat-stand proclaims as much."

"I shall be delighted if you will stay."

"Thank you. I'll fill the vacant peg then. Sorry to see that you've had
the British workman in the house. He's a token of evil. Not the drains,
I hope?"

"No, the gas."

"Ah! He has left two nail-marks from his boot upon your linoleum
just where the light strikes it. No, thank you, I had some supper at
Waterloo, but I'll smoke a pipe with you with pleasure."

I handed him my pouch, and he seated himself opposite to me and smoked
for some time in silence. I was well aware that nothing but business
of importance would have brought him to me at such an hour, so I waited
patiently until he should come round to it.

"I see that you are professionally rather busy just now," said he,
glancing very keenly across at me.

"Yes, I've had a busy day," I answered. "It may seem very foolish in
your eyes," I added, "but really I don't know how you deduced it."

Holmes chuckled to himself.

"I have the advantage of knowing your habits, my dear Watson," said he.
"When your round is a short one you walk, and when it is a long one you
use a hansom. As I perceive that your boots, although used, are by
no means dirty, I cannot doubt that you are at present busy enough to
justify the hansom."

"Excellent!" I cried.

"Elementary," said he. "It is one of those instances where the reasoner
can produce an effect which seems remarkable to his neighbor, because
the latter has missed the one little point which is the basis of the
deduction. The same may be said, my dear fellow, for the effect of
some of these little sketches of yours, which is entirely meretricious,
depending as it does upon your retaining in your own hands some factors
in the problem which are never imparted to the reader. Now, at present
I am in the position of these same readers, for I hold in this hand
several threads of one of the strangest cases which ever perplexed a
man's brain, and yet I lack the one or two which are needful to complete
my theory. But I'll have them, Watson, I'll have them!" His eyes kindled
and a slight flush sprang into his thin cheeks. For an instant only.
When I glanced again his face had resumed that red-Indian composure
which had made so many regard him as a machine rather than a man.

"The problem presents features of interest," said he. "I may even say
exceptional features of interest. I have already looked into the matter,
and have come, as I think, within sight of my solution. If you could
accompany me in that last step you might be of considerable service to
me."

"I should be delighted."

"Could you go as far as Aldershot to-morrow?"

"I have no doubt Jackson would take my practice."

"Very good. I want to start by the 11.10 from Waterloo."

"That would give me time."

"Then, if you are not too sleepy, I will give you a sketch of what has
happened, and of what remains to be done."

"I was sleepy before you came. I am quite wakeful now."

"I will compress the story as far as may be done without omitting
anything vital to the case. It is conceivable that you may even have
read some account of the matter. It is the supposed murder of Colonel
Barclay, of the Royal Munsters, at Aldershot, which I am investigating."

"I have heard nothing of it."

"It has not excited much attention yet, except locally. The facts are
only two days old. Briefly they are these:

"The Royal Munsters is, as you know, one of the most famous Irish
regiments in the British army. It did wonders both in the Crimea and the
Mutiny, and has since that time distinguished itself upon every possible
occasion. It was commanded up to Monday night by James Barclay,
a gallant veteran, who started as a full private, was raised to
commissioned rank for his bravery at the time of the Mutiny, and so
lived to command the regiment in which he had once carried a musket.

"Colonel Barclay had married at the time when he was a sergeant, and
his wife, whose maiden name was Miss Nancy Devoy, was the daughter of a
former color-sergeant in the same corps. There was, therefore, as can
be imagined, some little social friction when the young couple (for
they were still young) found themselves in their new surroundings. They
appear, however, to have quickly adapted themselves, and Mrs. Barclay
has always, I understand, been as popular with the ladies of the
regiment as her husband was with his brother officers. I may add that
she was a woman of great beauty, and that even now, when she has been
married for upwards of thirty years, she is still of a striking and
queenly appearance.

"Colonel Barclay's family life appears to have been a uniformly happy
one. Major Murphy, to whom I owe most of my facts, assures me that he
has never heard of any misunderstanding between the pair. On the whole,
he thinks that Barclay's devotion to his wife was greater than his
wife's to Barclay. He was acutely uneasy if he were absent from her for
a day. She, on the other hand, though devoted and faithful, was less
obtrusively affectionate. But they were regarded in the regiment as
the very model of a middle-aged couple. There was absolutely nothing in
their mutual relations to prepare people for the tragedy which was to
follow.

"Colonel Barclay himself seems to have had some singular traits in his
character. He was a dashing, jovial old soldier in his usual mood,
but there were occasions on which he seemed to show himself capable
of considerable violence and vindictiveness. This side of his nature,
however, appears never to have been turned towards his wife. Another
fact, which had struck Major Murphy and three out of five of the other
officers with whom I conversed, was the singular sort of depression
which came upon him at times. As the major expressed it, the smile had
often been struck from his mouth, as if by some invisible hand, when he
has been joining the gayeties and chaff of the mess-table. For days on
end, when the mood was on him, he has been sunk in the deepest gloom.
This and a certain tinge of superstition were the only unusual traits
in his character which his brother officers had observed. The latter
peculiarity took the form of a dislike to being left alone, especially
after dark. This puerile feature in a nature which was conspicuously
manly had often given rise to comment and conjecture.

"The first battalion of the Royal Munsters (which is the old 117th) has
been stationed at Aldershot for some years. The married officers live
out of barracks, and the Colonel has during all this time occupied a
villa called Lachine, about half a mile from the north camp. The house
stands in its own grounds, but the west side of it is not more than
thirty yards from the high-road. A coachman and two maids form the
staff of servants. These with their master and mistress were the sole
occupants of Lachine, for the Barclays had no children, nor was it usual
for them to have resident visitors.

"Now for the events at Lachine between nine and ten on the evening of
last Monday."

"Mrs. Barclay was, it appears, a member of the Roman Catholic Church,
and had interested herself very much in the establishment of the Guild
of St. George, which was formed in connection with the Watt Street
Chapel for the purpose of supplying the poor with cast-off clothing.
A meeting of the Guild had been held that evening at eight, and Mrs.
Barclay had hurried over her dinner in order to be present at it. When
leaving the house she was heard by the coachman to make some commonplace
remark to her husband, and to assure him that she would be back before
very long. She then called for Miss Morrison, a young lady who lives
in the next villa, and the two went off together to their meeting. It
lasted forty minutes, and at a quarter-past nine Mrs. Barclay returned
home, having left Miss Morrison at her door as she passed.

"There is a room which is used as a morning-room at Lachine. This faces
the road and opens by a large glass folding-door on to the lawn. The
lawn is thirty yards across, and is only divided from the highway by
a low wall with an iron rail above it. It was into this room that Mrs.
Barclay went upon her return. The blinds were not down, for the room was
seldom used in the evening, but Mrs. Barclay herself lit the lamp and
then rang the bell, asking Jane Stewart, the house-maid, to bring her
a cup of tea, which was quite contrary to her usual habits. The Colonel
had been sitting in the dining-room, but hearing that his wife had
returned he joined her in the morning-room. The coachman saw him cross
the hall and enter it. He was never seen again alive.

"The tea which had been ordered was brought up at the end of ten
minutes; but the maid, as she approached the door, was surprised to
hear the voices of her master and mistress in furious altercation. She
knocked without receiving any answer, and even turned the handle, but
only to find that the door was locked upon the inside. Naturally enough
she ran down to tell the cook, and the two women with the coachman came
up into the hall and listened to the dispute which was still raging.
They all agreed that only two voices were to be heard, those of Barclay
and of his wife. Barclay's remarks were subdued and abrupt, so that none
of them were audible to the listeners. The lady's, on the other hand,
were most bitter, and when she raised her voice could be plainly heard.
'You coward!' she repeated over and over again. 'What can be done now?
What can be done now? Give me back my life. I will never so much as
breathe the same air with you again! You coward! You coward!' Those were
scraps of her conversation, ending in a sudden dreadful cry in the man's
voice, with a crash, and a piercing scream from the woman. Convinced
that some tragedy had occurred, the coachman rushed to the door and
strove to force it, while scream after scream issued from within. He was
unable, however, to make his way in, and the maids were too distracted
with fear to be of any assistance to him. A sudden thought struck him,
however, and he ran through the hall door and round to the lawn upon
which the long French windows open. One side of the window was open,
which I understand was quite usual in the summer-time, and he passed
without difficulty into the room. His mistress had ceased to scream and
was stretched insensible upon a couch, while with his feet tilted over
the side of an arm-chair, and his head upon the ground near the corner
of the fender, was lying the unfortunate soldier stone dead in a pool of
his own blood.

"Naturally, the coachman's first thought, on finding that he could do
nothing for his master, was to open the door. But here an unexpected and
singular difficulty presented itself. The key was not in the inner side
of the door, nor could he find it anywhere in the room. He went out
again, therefore, through the window, and having obtained the help of
a policeman and of a medical man, he returned. The lady, against whom
naturally the strongest suspicion rested, was removed to her room, still
in a state of insensibility. The Colonel's body was then placed upon the
sofa, and a careful examination made of the scene of the tragedy.

"The injury from which the unfortunate veteran was suffering was found
to be a jagged cut some two inches long at the back part of his head,
which had evidently been caused by a violent blow from a blunt weapon.
Nor was it difficult to guess what that weapon may have been. Upon the
floor, close to the body, was lying a singular club of hard carved wood
with a bone handle. The Colonel possessed a varied collection of weapons
brought from the different countries in which he had fought, and it
is conjectured by the police that his club was among his trophies. The
servants deny having seen it before, but among the numerous curiosities
in the house it is possible that it may have been overlooked. Nothing
else of importance was discovered in the room by the police, save the
inexplicable fact that neither upon Mrs. Barclay's person nor upon that
of the victim nor in any part of the room was the missing key to
be found. The door had eventually to be opened by a locksmith from
Aldershot.

"That was the state of things, Watson, when upon the Tuesday morning I,
at the request of Major Murphy, went down to Aldershot to supplement
the efforts of the police. I think that you will acknowledge that the
problem was already one of interest, but my observations soon made me
realize that it was in truth much more extraordinary than would at first
sight appear.

"Before examining the room I cross-questioned the servants, but only
succeeded in eliciting the facts which I have already stated. One other
detail of interest was remembered by Jane Stewart, the housemaid. You
will remember that on hearing the sound of the quarrel she descended and
returned with the other servants. On that first occasion, when she was
alone, she says that the voices of her master and mistress were sunk
so low that she could hear hardly anything, and judged by their tones
rather than their words that they had fallen out. On my pressing her,
however, she remembered that she heard the word David uttered twice by
the lady. The point is of the utmost importance as guiding us towards
the reason of the sudden quarrel. The Colonel's name, you remember, was
James.

"There was one thing in the case which had made the deepest impression
both upon the servants and the police. This was the contortion of the
Colonel's face. It had set, according to their account, into the most
dreadful expression of fear and horror which a human countenance is
capable of assuming. More than one person fainted at the mere sight
of him, so terrible was the effect. It was quite certain that he had
foreseen his fate, and that it had caused him the utmost horror. This,
of course, fitted in well enough with the police theory, if the Colonel
could have seen his wife making a murderous attack upon him. Nor was
the fact of the wound being on the back of his head a fatal objection to
this, as he might have turned to avoid the blow. No information could
be got from the lady herself, who was temporarily insane from an acute
attack of brain-fever.

"From the police I learned that Miss Morrison, who you remember went out
that evening with Mrs. Barclay, denied having any knowledge of what it
was which had caused the ill-humor in which her companion had returned.

"Having gathered these facts, Watson, I smoked several pipes over them,
trying to separate those which were crucial from others which were
merely incidental. There could be no question that the most distinctive
and suggestive point in the case was the singular disappearance of the
door-key. A most careful search had failed to discover it in the room.
Therefore it must have been taken from it. But neither the Colonel
nor the Colonel's wife could have taken it. That was perfectly clear.
Therefore a third person must have entered the room. And that third
person could only have come in through the window. It seemed to me that
a careful examination of the room and the lawn might possibly reveal
some traces of this mysterious individual. You know my methods, Watson.
There was not one of them which I did not apply to the inquiry. And it
ended by my discovering traces, but very different ones from those which
I had expected. There had been a man in the room, and he had crossed
the lawn coming from the road. I was able to obtain five very clear
impressions of his foot-marks: one in the roadway itself, at the point
where he had climbed the low wall, two on the lawn, and two very faint
ones upon the stained boards near the window where he had entered.
He had apparently rushed across the lawn, for his toe-marks were much
deeper than his heels. But it was not the man who surprised me. It was
his companion."

"His companion!"

Holmes pulled a large sheet of tissue-paper out of his pocket and
carefully unfolded it upon his knee.

"What do you make of that?" he asked.

The paper was covered with the tracings of the foot-marks of some small
animal. It had five well-marked foot-pads, an indication of long nails,
and the whole print might be nearly as large as a dessert-spoon.

"It's a dog," said I.

"Did you ever hear of a dog running up a curtain? I found distinct
traces that this creature had done so."

"A monkey, then?"

"But it is not the print of a monkey."

"What can it be, then?"

"Neither dog nor cat nor monkey nor any creature that we are familiar
with. I have tried to reconstruct it from the measurements. Here are
four prints where the beast has been standing motionless. You see that
it is no less than fifteen inches from fore-foot to hind. Add to that
the length of neck and head, and you get a creature not much less than
two feet long--probably more if there is any tail. But now observe this
other measurement. The animal has been moving, and we have the length
of its stride. In each case it is only about three inches. You have an
indication, you see, of a long body with very short legs attached to it.
It has not been considerate enough to leave any of its hair behind it.
But its general shape must be what I have indicated, and it can run up a
curtain, and it is carnivorous."

"How do you deduce that?"

"Because it ran up the curtain. A canary's cage was hanging in the
window, and its aim seems to have been to get at the bird."

"Then what was the beast?"

"Ah, if I could give it a name it might go a long way towards solving
the case. On the whole, it was probably some creature of the weasel and
stoat tribe--and yet it is larger than any of these that I have seen."

"But what had it to do with the crime?"

"That, also, is still obscure. But we have learned a good deal, you
perceive. We know that a man stood in the road looking at the quarrel
between the Barclays--the blinds were up and the room lighted. We know,
also, that he ran across the lawn, entered the room, accompanied by a
strange animal, and that he either struck the Colonel or, as is equally
possible, that the Colonel fell down from sheer fright at the sight of
him, and cut his head on the corner of the fender. Finally, we have the
curious fact that the intruder carried away the key with him when he
left."

"Your discoveries seem to have left the business more obscure that it
was before," said I.

"Quite so. They undoubtedly showed that the affair was much deeper than
was at first conjectured. I thought the matter over, and I came to
the conclusion that I must approach the case from another aspect. But
really, Watson, I am keeping you up, and I might just as well tell you
all this on our way to Aldershot to-morrow."

"Thank you, you have gone rather too far to stop."

"It is quite certain that when Mrs. Barclay left the house at half-past
seven she was on good terms with her husband. She was never, as I think
I have said, ostentatiously affectionate, but she was heard by the
coachman chatting with the Colonel in a friendly fashion. Now, it was
equally certain that, immediately on her return, she had gone to the
room in which she was least likely to see her husband, had flown to tea
as an agitated woman will, and finally, on his coming in to her, had
broken into violent recriminations. Therefore something had occurred
between seven-thirty and nine o'clock which had completely altered her
feelings towards him. But Miss Morrison had been with her during the
whole of that hour and a half. It was absolutely certain, therefore, in
spite of her denial, that she must know something of the matter.

"My first conjecture was, that possibly there had been some passages
between this young lady and the old soldier, which the former had now
confessed to the wife. That would account for the angry return, and
also for the girl's denial that anything had occurred. Nor would it be
entirely incompatible with most of the words overhead. But there was the
reference to David, and there was the known affection of the Colonel for
his wife, to weigh against it, to say nothing of the tragic intrusion
of this other man, which might, of course, be entirely disconnected with
what had gone before. It was not easy to pick one's steps, but, on the
whole, I was inclined to dismiss the idea that there had been anything
between the Colonel and Miss Morrison, but more than ever convinced that
the young lady held the clue as to what it was which had turned Mrs.
Barclay to hatred of her husband. I took the obvious course, therefore,
of calling upon Miss M., of explaining to her that I was perfectly
certain that she held the facts in her possession, and of assuring her
that her friend, Mrs. Barclay, might find herself in the dock upon a
capital charge unless the matter were cleared up.

"Miss Morrison is a little ethereal slip of a girl, with timid eyes
and blond hair, but I found her by no means wanting in shrewdness and
common-sense. She sat thinking for some time after I had spoken, and
then, turning to me with a brisk air of resolution, she broke into a
remarkable statement which I will condense for your benefit.

"'I promised my friend that I would say nothing of the matter, and a
promise is a promise,' said she; 'but if I can really help her when
so serious a charge is laid against her, and when her own mouth, poor
darling, is closed by illness, then I think I am absolved from my
promise. I will tell you exactly what happened upon Monday evening.

"'We were returning from the Watt Street Mission about a quarter to nine
o'clock. On our way we had to pass through Hudson Street, which is
a very quiet thoroughfare. There is only one lamp in it, upon the
left-hand side, and as we approached this lamp I saw a man coming
towards us with his back very bent, and something like a box slung over
one of his shoulders. He appeared to be deformed, for he carried his
head low and walked with his knees bent. We were passing him when he
raised his face to look at us in the circle of light thrown by the lamp,
and as he did so he stopped and screamed out in a dreadful voice, "My
God, it's Nancy!" Mrs. Barclay turned as white as death, and would have
fallen down had the dreadful-looking creature not caught hold of her. I
was going to call for the police, but she, to my surprise, spoke quite
civilly to the fellow.

"'"I thought you had been dead this thirty years, Henry," said she, in a
shaking voice.

"'"So I have," said he, and it was awful to hear the tones that he said
it in. He had a very dark, fearsome face, and a gleam in his eyes that
comes back to me in my dreams. His hair and whiskers were shot with
gray, and his face was all crinkled and puckered like a withered apple.

"'"Just walk on a little way, dear," said Mrs. Barclay; "I want to have
a word with this man. There is nothing to be afraid of." She tried to
speak boldly, but she was still deadly pale and could hardly get her
words out for the trembling of her lips.

"'I did as she asked me, and they talked together for a few minutes.
Then she came down the street with her eyes blazing, and I saw the
crippled wretch standing by the lamp-post and shaking his clenched fists
in the air as if he were mad with rage. She never said a word until we
were at the door here, when she took me by the hand and begged me to
tell no one what had happened.

"'"It's an old acquaintance of mine who has come down in the world,"
said she. When I promised her I would say nothing she kissed me, and I
have never seen her since. I have told you now the whole truth, and if
I withheld it from the police it is because I did not realize then the
danger in which my dear friend stood. I know that it can only be to her
advantage that everything should be known.'

"There was her statement, Watson, and to me, as you can imagine, it was
like a light on a dark night. Everything which had been disconnected
before began at once to assume its true place, and I had a shadowy
presentiment of the whole sequence of events. My next step obviously was
to find the man who had produced such a remarkable impression upon Mrs.
Barclay. If he were still in Aldershot it should not be a very difficult
matter. There are not such a very great number of civilians, and a
deformed man was sure to have attracted attention. I spent a day in the
search, and by evening--this very evening, Watson--I had run him down.
The man's name is Henry Wood, and he lives in lodgings in this same
street in which the ladies met him. He has only been five days in the
place. In the character of a registration-agent I had a most interesting
gossip with his landlady. The man is by trade a conjurer and performer,
going round the canteens after nightfall, and giving a little
entertainment at each. He carries some creature about with him in that
box; about which the landlady seemed to be in considerable trepidation,
for she had never seen an animal like it. He uses it in some of his
tricks according to her account. So much the woman was able to tell me,
and also that it was a wonder the man lived, seeing how twisted he was,
and that he spoke in a strange tongue sometimes, and that for the last
two nights she had heard him groaning and weeping in his bedroom. He
was all right, as far as money went, but in his deposit he had given her
what looked like a bad florin. She showed it to me, Watson, and it was
an Indian rupee.

"So now, my dear fellow, you see exactly how we stand and why it is I
want you. It is perfectly plain that after the ladies parted from this
man he followed them at a distance, that he saw the quarrel between
husband and wife through the window, that he rushed in, and that
the creature which he carried in his box got loose. That is all very
certain. But he is the only person in this world who can tell us exactly
what happened in that room."

"And you intend to ask him?"

"Most certainly--but in the presence of a witness."

"And I am the witness?"

"If you will be so good. If he can clear the matter up, well and good.
If he refuses, we have no alternative but to apply for a warrant."

"But how do you know he'll be there when we return?"

"You may be sure that I took some precautions. I have one of my Baker
Street boys mounting guard over him who would stick to him like a burr,
go where he might. We shall find him in Hudson Street to-morrow, Watson,
and meanwhile I should be the criminal myself if I kept you out of bed
any longer."

It was midday when we found ourselves at the scene of the tragedy, and,
under my companion's guidance, we made our way at once to Hudson Street.
In spite of his capacity for concealing his emotions, I could easily see
that Holmes was in a state of suppressed excitement, while I was myself
tingling with that half-sporting, half-intellectual pleasure which
I invariably experienced when I associated myself with him in his
investigations.

"This is the street," said he, as we turned into a short thoroughfare
lined with plain two-storied brick houses. "Ah, here is Simpson to
report."

"He's in all right, Mr. Holmes," cried a small street Arab, running up
to us.

"Good, Simpson!" said Holmes, patting him on the head. "Come along,
Watson. This is the house." He sent in his card with a message that he
had come on important business, and a moment later we were face to face
with the man whom we had come to see. In spite of the warm weather he
was crouching over a fire, and the little room was like an oven. The
man sat all twisted and huddled in his chair in a way which gave an
indescribable impression of deformity; but the face which he turned
towards us, though worn and swarthy, must at some time have been
remarkable for its beauty. He looked suspiciously at us now out of
yellow-shot, bilious eyes, and, without speaking or rising, he waved
towards two chairs.

"Mr. Henry Wood, late of India, I believe," said Holmes, affably. "I've
come over this little matter of Colonel Barclay's death."

"What should I know about that?"

"That's what I want to ascertain. You know, I suppose, that unless the
matter is cleared up, Mrs. Barclay, who is an old friend of yours, will
in all probability be tried for murder."

The man gave a violent start.

"I don't know who you are," he cried, "nor how you come to know what you
do know, but will you swear that this is true that you tell me?"

"Why, they are only waiting for her to come to her senses to arrest
her."

"My God! Are you in the police yourself?"

"No."

"What business is it of yours, then?"

"It's every man's business to see justice done."

"You can take my word that she is innocent."

"Then you are guilty."

"No, I am not."

"Who killed Colonel James Barclay, then?"

"It was a just providence that killed him. But, mind you this, that if
I had knocked his brains out, as it was in my heart to do, he would have
had no more than his due from my hands. If his own guilty conscience had
not struck him down it is likely enough that I might have had his blood
upon my soul. You want me to tell the story. Well, I don't know why I
shouldn't, for there's no cause for me to be ashamed of it.

"It was in this way, sir. You see me now with my back like a camel and
my ribs all awry, but there was a time when Corporal Henry Wood was the
smartest man in the 117th foot. We were in India then, in cantonments,
at a place we'll call Bhurtee. Barclay, who died the other day, was
sergeant in the same company as myself, and the belle of the regiment,
ay, and the finest girl that ever had the breath of life between her
lips, was Nancy Devoy, the daughter of the color-sergeant. There were
two men that loved her, and one that she loved, and you'll smile when
you look at this poor thing huddled before the fire, and hear me say
that it was for my good looks that she loved me.

"Well, though I had her heart, her father was set upon her marrying
Barclay. I was a harum-scarum, reckless lad, and he had had an
education, and was already marked for the sword-belt. But the girl held
true to me, and it seemed that I would have had her when the Mutiny
broke out, and all hell was loose in the country.

"We were shut up in Bhurtee, the regiment of us with half a battery of
artillery, a company of Sikhs, and a lot of civilians and women-folk.
There were ten thousand rebels round us, and they were as keen as a set
of terriers round a rat-cage. About the second week of it our water gave
out, and it was a question whether we could communicate with General
Neill's column, which was moving up country. It was our only chance, for
we could not hope to fight our way out with all the women and children,
so I volunteered to go out and to warn General Neill of our danger. My
offer was accepted, and I talked it over with Sergeant Barclay, who was
supposed to know the ground better than any other man, and who drew up
a route by which I might get through the rebel lines. At ten o'clock the
same night I started off upon my journey. There were a thousand lives to
save, but it was of only one that I was thinking when I dropped over the
wall that night.

"My way ran down a dried-up watercourse, which we hoped would screen
me from the enemy's sentries; but as I crept round the corner of it
I walked right into six of them, who were crouching down in the dark
waiting for me. In an instant I was stunned with a blow and bound hand
and foot. But the real blow was to my heart and not to my head, for as
I came to and listened to as much as I could understand of their talk,
I heard enough to tell me that my comrade, the very man who had arranged
the way that I was to take, had betrayed me by means of a native servant
into the hands of the enemy.

"Well, there's no need for me to dwell on that part of it. You know now
what James Barclay was capable of. Bhurtee was relieved by Neill next
day, but the rebels took me away with them in their retreat, and it was
many a long year before ever I saw a white face again. I was tortured
and tried to get away, and was captured and tortured again. You can see
for yourselves the state in which I was left. Some of them that fled
into Nepaul took me with them, and then afterwards I was up past
Darjeeling. The hill-folk up there murdered the rebels who had me, and
I became their slave for a time until I escaped; but instead of going
south I had to go north, until I found myself among the Afghans. There
I wandered about for many a year, and at last came back to the Punjab,
where I lived mostly among the natives and picked up a living by the
conjuring tricks that I had learned. What use was it for me, a wretched
cripple, to go back to England or to make myself known to my old
comrades? Even my wish for revenge would not make me do that. I had
rather that Nancy and my old pals should think of Harry Wood as having
died with a straight back, than see him living and crawling with a stick
like a chimpanzee. They never doubted that I was dead, and I meant that
they never should. I heard that Barclay had married Nancy, and that he
was rising rapidly in the regiment, but even that did not make me speak.

"But when one gets old one has a longing for home. For years I've been
dreaming of the bright green fields and the hedges of England. At last I
determined to see them before I died. I saved enough to bring me across,
and then I came here where the soldiers are, for I know their ways and
how to amuse them and so earn enough to keep me."

"Your narrative is most interesting," said Sherlock Holmes. "I have
already heard of your meeting with Mrs. Barclay, and your mutual
recognition. You then, as I understand, followed her home and saw
through the window an altercation between her husband and her, in which
she doubtless cast his conduct to you in his teeth. Your own feelings
overcame you, and you ran across the lawn and broke in upon them."

"I did, sir, and at the sight of me he looked as I have never seen a man
look before, and over he went with his head on the fender. But he was
dead before he fell. I read death on his face as plain as I can read
that text over the fire. The bare sight of me was like a bullet through
his guilty heart."

"And then?"

"Then Nancy fainted, and I caught up the key of the door from her hand,
intending to unlock it and get help. But as I was doing it it seemed to
me better to leave it alone and get away, for the thing might look black
against me, and any way my secret would be out if I were taken. In my
haste I thrust the key into my pocket, and dropped my stick while I was
chasing Teddy, who had run up the curtain. When I got him into his box,
from which he had slipped, I was off as fast as I could run."

"Who's Teddy?" asked Holmes.

The man leaned over and pulled up the front of a kind of hutch in
the corner. In an instant out there slipped a beautiful reddish-brown
creature, thin and lithe, with the legs of a stoat, a long, thin nose,
and a pair of the finest red eyes that ever I saw in an animal's head.

"It's a mongoose," I cried.

"Well, some call them that, and some call them ichneumon," said the
man. "Snake-catcher is what I call them, and Teddy is amazing quick on
cobras. I have one here without the fangs, and Teddy catches it every
night to please the folk in the canteen.

"Any other point, sir?"

"Well, we may have to apply to you again if Mrs. Barclay should prove to
be in serious trouble."

"In that case, of course, I'd come forward."

"But if not, there is no object in raking up this scandal against a
dead man, foully as he has acted. You have at least the satisfaction
of knowing that for thirty years of his life his conscience bitterly
reproached him for this wicked deed. Ah, there goes Major Murphy on the
other side of the street. Good-by, Wood. I want to learn if anything has
happened since yesterday."

We were in time to overtake the major before he reached the corner.

"Ah, Holmes," he said: "I suppose you have heard that all this fuss has
come to nothing?"

"What then?"

"The inquest is just over. The medical evidence showed conclusively
that death was due to apoplexy. You see it was quite a simple case after
all."

"Oh, remarkably superficial," said Holmes, smiling. "Come, Watson, I
don't think we shall be wanted in Aldershot any more."

"There's one thing," said I, as we walked down to the station. "If the
husband's name was James, and the other was Henry, what was this talk
about David?"

"That one word, my dear Watson, should have told me the whole story had
I been the ideal reasoner which you are so fond of depicting. It was
evidently a term of reproach."

"Of reproach?"

"Yes; David strayed a little occasionally, you know, and on one occasion
in the same direction as Sergeant James Barclay. You remember the small
affair of Uriah and Bathsheba? My biblical knowledge is a trifle rusty,
I fear, but you will find the story in the first or second of Samuel."




Adventure VIII. The Resident Patient


Glancing over the somewhat incoherent series of Memoirs with which I
have endeavored to illustrate a few of the mental peculiarities of my
friend Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I have been struck by the difficulty which I
have experienced in picking out examples which shall in every way answer
my purpose. For in those cases in which Holmes has performed some tour
de force of analytical reasoning, and has demonstrated the value of his
peculiar methods of investigation, the facts themselves have often been
so slight or so commonplace that I could not feel justified in laying
them before the public. On the other hand, it has frequently happened
that he has been concerned in some research where the facts have been of
the most remarkable and dramatic character, but where the share which he
has himself taken in determining their causes has been less pronounced
than I, as his biographer, could wish. The small matter which I have
chronicled under the heading of "A Study in Scarlet," and that other
later one connected with the loss of the Gloria Scott, may serve as
examples of this Scylla and Charybdis which are forever threatening the
historian. It may be that in the business of which I am now about to
write the part which my friend played is not sufficiently accentuated;
and yet the whole train of circumstances is so remarkable that I cannot
bring myself to omit it entirely from this series.

It had been a close, rainy day in October. Our blinds were half-drawn,
and Holmes lay curled upon the sofa, reading and re-reading a letter
which he had received by the morning post. For myself, my term of
service in India had trained me to stand heat better than cold, and
a thermometer of 90 was no hardship. But the paper was uninteresting.
Parliament had risen. Everybody was out of town, and I yearned for the
glades of the New Forest or the shingle of Southsea. A depleted bank
account had caused me to postpone my holiday, and as to my companion,
neither the country nor the sea presented the slightest attraction to
him. He loved to lie in the very centre of five millions of people, with
his filaments stretching out and running through them, responsive to
every little rumor or suspicion of unsolved crime. Appreciation of
Nature found no place among his many gifts, and his only change was
when he turned his mind from the evil-doer of the town to track down his
brother of the country.

Finding that Holmes was too absorbed for conversation, I had tossed
aside the barren paper, and leaning back in my chair, I fell into a
brown study. Suddenly my companion's voice broke in upon my thoughts.

"You are right, Watson," said he. "It does seem a very preposterous way
of settling a dispute."

"Most preposterous!" I exclaimed, and then, suddenly realizing how
he had echoed the inmost thought of my soul, I sat up in my chair and
stared at him in blank amazement.

"What is this, Holmes?" I cried. "This is beyond anything which I could
have imagined."

He laughed heartily at my perplexity.

"You remember," said he, "that some little time ago, when I read you the
passage in one of Poe's sketches, in which a close reasoner follows the
unspoken thought of his companion, you were inclined to treat the
matter as a mere tour de force of the author. On my remarking that I
was constantly in the habit of doing the same thing you expressed
incredulity."

"Oh, no!"

"Perhaps not with your tongue, my dear Watson, but certainly with your
eyebrows. So when I saw you throw down your paper and enter upon a train
of thought, I was very happy to have the opportunity of reading it
off, and eventually of breaking into it, as a proof that I had been in
rapport with you."

But I was still far from satisfied. "In the example which you read to
me," said I, "the reasoner drew his conclusions from the actions of the
man whom he observed. If I remember right, he stumbled over a heap
of stones, looked up at the stars, and so on. But I have been seated
quietly in my chair, and what clues can I have given you?"

"You do yourself an injustice. The features are given to man as the
means by which he shall express his emotions, and yours are faithful
servants."

"Do you mean to say that you read my train of thoughts from my
features?"

"Your features, and especially your eyes. Perhaps you cannot yourself
recall how your reverie commenced?"

"No, I cannot."

"Then I will tell you. After throwing down your paper, which was the
action which drew my attention to you, you sat for half a minute with
a vacant expression. Then your eyes fixed themselves upon your
newly-framed picture of General Gordon, and I saw by the alteration in
your face that a train of thought had been started. But it did not lead
very far. Your eyes turned across to the unframed portrait of Henry Ward
Beecher which stands upon the top of your books. You then glanced up at
the wall, and of course your meaning was obvious. You were thinking
that if the portrait were framed it would just cover that bare space and
correspond with Gordon's picture over there."

"You have followed me wonderfully!" I exclaimed.

"So far I could hardly have gone astray. But now your thoughts went
back to Beecher, and you looked hard across as if you were studying
the character in his features. Then your eyes ceased to pucker, but
you continued to look across, and your face was thoughtful. You were
recalling the incidents of Beecher's career. I was well aware that you
could not do this without thinking of the mission which he undertook
on behalf of the North at the time of the Civil War, for I remember
you expressing your passionate indignation at the way in which he was
received by the more turbulent of our people. You felt so strongly about
it that I knew you could not think of Beecher without thinking of that
also. When a moment later I saw your eyes wander away from the picture,
I suspected that your mind had now turned to the Civil War, and when
I observed that your lips set, your eyes sparkled, and your hands
clinched, I was positive that you were indeed thinking of the gallantry
which was shown by both sides in that desperate struggle. But then,
again, your face grew sadder; you shook your head. You were dwelling
upon the sadness and horror and useless waste of life. Your hand stole
towards your own old wound, and a smile quivered on your lips,
which showed me that the ridiculous side of this method of settling
international questions had forced itself upon your mind. At this point
I agreed with you that it was preposterous, and was glad to find that
all my deductions had been correct."

"Absolutely!" said I. "And now that you have explained it, I confess
that I am as amazed as before."

"It was very superficial, my dear Watson, I assure you. I should not
have intruded it upon your attention had you not shown some incredulity
the other day. But the evening has brought a breeze with it. What do you
say to a ramble through London?"

I was weary of our little sitting-room and gladly acquiesced. For
three hours we strolled about together, watching the ever-changing
kaleidoscope of life as it ebbs and flows through Fleet Street and the
Strand. His characteristic talk, with its keen observance of detail
and subtle power of inference held me amused and enthralled. It was ten
o'clock before we reached Baker Street again. A brougham was waiting at
our door.

"Hum! A doctor's--general practitioner, I perceive," said Holmes. "Not
been long in practice, but has had a good deal to do. Come to consult
us, I fancy! Lucky we came back!"

I was sufficiently conversant with Holmes's methods to be able to follow
his reasoning, and to see that the nature and state of the various
medical instruments in the wicker basket which hung in the lamplight
inside the brougham had given him the data for his swift deduction.
The light in our window above showed that this late visit was indeed
intended for us. With some curiosity as to what could have sent a
brother medico to us at such an hour, I followed Holmes into our
sanctum.

A pale, taper-faced man with sandy whiskers rose up from a chair by the
fire as we entered. His age may not have been more than three or four
and thirty, but his haggard expression and unhealthy hue told of a life
which has sapped his strength and robbed him of his youth. His manner
was nervous and shy, like that of a sensitive gentleman, and the thin
white hand which he laid on the mantelpiece as he rose was that of an
artist rather than of a surgeon. His dress was quiet and sombre--a black
frock-coat, dark trousers, and a touch of color about his necktie.

"Good-evening, doctor," said Holmes, cheerily. "I am glad to see that
you have only been waiting a very few minutes."

"You spoke to my coachman, then?"

"No, it was the candle on the side-table that told me. Pray resume your
seat and let me know how I can serve you."

"My name is Doctor Percy Trevelyan," said our visitor, "and I live at
403 Brook Street."

"Are you not the author of a monograph upon obscure nervous lesions?" I
asked.

His pale cheeks flushed with pleasure at hearing that his work was known
to me.

"I so seldom hear of the work that I thought it was quite dead," said
he. "My publishers gave me a most discouraging account of its sale. You
are yourself, I presume, a medical man?"

"A retired army surgeon."

"My own hobby has always been nervous disease. I should wish to make it
an absolute specialty, but, of course, a man must take what he can get
at first. This, however, is beside the question, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,
and I quite appreciate how valuable your time is. The fact is that a
very singular train of events has occurred recently at my house in Brook
Street, and to-night they came to such a head that I felt it was quite
impossible for me to wait another hour before asking for your advice and
assistance."

Sherlock Holmes sat down and lit his pipe. "You are very welcome
to both," said he. "Pray let me have a detailed account of what the
circumstances are which have disturbed you."

"One or two of them are so trivial," said Dr. Trevelyan, "that really
I am almost ashamed to mention them. But the matter is so inexplicable,
and the recent turn which it has taken is so elaborate, that I shall
lay it all before you, and you shall judge what is essential and what is
not.

"I am compelled, to begin with, to say something of my own college
career. I am a London University man, you know, and I am sure that you
will not think that I am unduly singing my own praises if I say that my
student career was considered by my professors to be a very promising
one. After I had graduated I continued to devote myself to research,
occupying a minor position in King's College Hospital, and I was
fortunate enough to excite considerable interest by my research into the
pathology of catalepsy, and finally to win the Bruce Pinkerton prize and
medal by the monograph on nervous lesions to which your friend has
just alluded. I should not go too far if I were to say that there was a
general impression at that time that a distinguished career lay before
me.

"But the one great stumbling-block lay in my want of capital. As you
will readily understand, a specialist who aims high is compelled to
start in one of a dozen streets in the Cavendish Square quarter, all
of which entail enormous rents and furnishing expenses. Besides this
preliminary outlay, he must be prepared to keep himself for some years,
and to hire a presentable carriage and horse. To do this was quite
beyond my power, and I could only hope that by economy I might in ten
years' time save enough to enable me to put up my plate. Suddenly,
however, an unexpected incident opened up quite a new prospect to me.

"This was a visit from a gentleman of the name of Blessington, who was a
complete stranger to me. He came up to my room one morning, and plunged
into business in an instant.

"'You are the same Percy Trevelyan who has had so distinguished a career
and won a great prize lately?' said he.

"I bowed.

"'Answer me frankly,' he continued, 'for you will find it to your
interest to do so. You have all the cleverness which makes a successful
man. Have you the tact?'

"I could not help smiling at the abruptness of the question.

"'I trust that I have my share,' I said.

"'Any bad habits? Not drawn towards drink, eh?'

"'Really, sir!' I cried.

"'Quite right! That's all right! But I was bound to ask. With all these
qualities, why are you not in practice?'

"I shrugged my shoulders.

"'Come, come!' said he, in his bustling way. 'It's the old story. More
in your brains than in your pocket, eh? What would you say if I were to
start you in Brook Street?'

"I stared at him in astonishment.

"'Oh, it's for my sake, not for yours,' he cried. 'I'll be perfectly
frank with you, and if it suits you it will suit me very well. I have a
few thousands to invest, d'ye see, and I think I'll sink them in you.'

"'But why?' I gasped.

"'Well, it's just like any other speculation, and safer than most.'

"'What am I to do, then?'

"'I'll tell you. I'll take the house, furnish it, pay the maids, and run
the whole place. All you have to do is just to wear out your chair in
the consulting-room. I'll let you have pocket-money and everything. Then
you hand over to me three quarters of what you earn, and you keep the
other quarter for yourself.'

"This was the strange proposal, Mr. Holmes, with which the man
Blessington approached me. I won't weary you with the account of how
we bargained and negotiated. It ended in my moving into the house next
Lady-day, and starting in practice on very much the same conditions as
he had suggested. He came himself to live with me in the character of a
resident patient. His heart was weak, it appears, and he needed constant
medical supervision. He turned the two best rooms of the first floor
into a sitting-room and bedroom for himself. He was a man of singular
habits, shunning company and very seldom going out. His life was
irregular, but in one respect he was regularity itself. Every evening,
at the same hour, he walked into the consulting-room, examined the
books, put down five and three-pence for every guinea that I had earned,
and carried the rest off to the strong-box in his own room.

"I may say with confidence that he never had occasion to regret his
speculation. From the first it was a success. A few good cases and the
reputation which I had won in the hospital brought me rapidly to the
front, and during the last few years I have made him a rich man.

"So much, Mr. Holmes, for my past history and my relations with Mr.
Blessington. It only remains for me now to tell you what has occurred to
bring me here to-night.

"Some weeks ago Mr. Blessington came down to me in, as it seemed to me,
a state of considerable agitation. He spoke of some burglary which, he
said, had been committed in the West End, and he appeared, I remember,
to be quite unnecessarily excited about it, declaring that a day should
not pass before we should add stronger bolts to our windows and doors.
For a week he continued to be in a peculiar state of restlessness,
peering continually out of the windows, and ceasing to take the short
walk which had usually been the prelude to his dinner. From his manner
it struck me that he was in mortal dread of something or somebody, but
when I questioned him upon the point he became so offensive that I was
compelled to drop the subject. Gradually, as time passed, his fears
appeared to die away, and he had renewed his former habits, when a fresh
event reduced him to the pitiable state of prostration in which he now
lies.

"What happened was this. Two days ago I received the letter which I now
read to you. Neither address nor date is attached to it.

"'A Russian nobleman who is now resident in England,' it runs, 'would
be glad to avail himself of the professional assistance of Dr. Percy
Trevelyan. He has been for some years a victim to cataleptic attacks, on
which, as is well known, Dr. Trevelyan is an authority. He proposes to
call at about quarter past six to-morrow evening, if Dr. Trevelyan will
make it convenient to be at home.'

"This letter interested me deeply, because the chief difficulty in the
study of catalepsy is the rareness of the disease. You may believe,
then, that I was in my consulting-room when, at the appointed hour, the
page showed in the patient.

"He was an elderly man, thin, demure, and commonplace--by no means the
conception one forms of a Russian nobleman. I was much more struck by
the appearance of his companion. This was a tall young man, surprisingly
handsome, with a dark, fierce face, and the limbs and chest of a
Hercules. He had his hand under the other's arm as they entered, and
helped him to a chair with a tenderness which one would hardly have
expected from his appearance.

"'You will excuse my coming in, doctor,' said he to me, speaking English
with a slight lisp. 'This is my father, and his health is a matter of
the most overwhelming importance to me.'

"I was touched by this filial anxiety. 'You would, perhaps, care to
remain during the consultation?' said I.

"'Not for the world,' he cried with a gesture of horror. 'It is more
painful to me than I can express. If I were to see my father in one of
these dreadful seizures I am convinced that I should never survive
it. My own nervous system is an exceptionally sensitive one. With your
permission, I will remain in the waiting-room while you go into my
father's case.'

"To this, of course, I assented, and the young man withdrew. The patient
and I then plunged into a discussion of his case, of which I took
exhaustive notes. He was not remarkable for intelligence, and his
answers were frequently obscure, which I attributed to his limited
acquaintance with our language. Suddenly, however, as I sat writing,
he ceased to give any answer at all to my inquiries, and on my turning
towards him I was shocked to see that he was sitting bolt upright in his
chair, staring at me with a perfectly blank and rigid face. He was again
in the grip of his mysterious malady.

"My first feeling, as I have just said, was one of pity and horror.
My second, I fear, was rather one of professional satisfaction. I made
notes of my patient's pulse and temperature, tested the rigidity of his
muscles, and examined his reflexes. There was nothing markedly abnormal
in any of these conditions, which harmonized with my former experiences.
I had obtained good results in such cases by the inhalation of nitrite
of amyl, and the present seemed an admirable opportunity of testing
its virtues. The bottle was downstairs in my laboratory, so leaving my
patient seated in his chair, I ran down to get it. There was some little
delay in finding it--five minutes, let us say--and then I returned.
Imagine my amazement to find the room empty and the patient gone.

"Of course, my first act was to run into the waiting-room. The son had
gone also. The hall door had been closed, but not shut. My page who
admits patients is a new boy and by no means quick. He waits downstairs,
and runs up to show patients out when I ring the consulting-room bell.
He had heard nothing, and the affair remained a complete mystery. Mr.
Blessington came in from his walk shortly afterwards, but I did not say
anything to him upon the subject, for, to tell the truth, I have got in
the way of late of holding as little communication with him as possible.

"Well, I never thought that I should see anything more of the Russian
and his son, so you can imagine my amazement when, at the very same hour
this evening, they both came marching into my consulting-room, just as
they had done before.

"'I feel that I owe you a great many apologies for my abrupt departure
yesterday, doctor,' said my patient.

"'I confess that I was very much surprised at it,' said I.

"'Well, the fact is,' he remarked, 'that when I recover from these
attacks my mind is always very clouded as to all that has gone before. I
woke up in a strange room, as it seemed to me, and made my way out into
the street in a sort of dazed way when you were absent.'

"'And I,' said the son, 'seeing my father pass the door of the
waiting-room, naturally thought that the consultation had come to an
end. It was not until we had reached home that I began to realize the
true state of affairs.'

"'Well,' said I, laughing, 'there is no harm done except that you
puzzled me terribly; so if you, sir, would kindly step into the
waiting-room I shall be happy to continue our consultation which was
brought to so abrupt an ending.'

"'For half an hour or so I discussed that old gentleman's symptoms with
him, and then, having prescribed for him, I saw him go off upon the arm
of his son.

"I have told you that Mr. Blessington generally chose this hour of the
day for his exercise. He came in shortly afterwards and passed upstairs.
An instant later I heard him running down, and he burst into my
consulting-room like a man who is mad with panic.

"'Who has been in my room?' he cried.

"'No one,' said I.

"'It's a lie! He yelled. 'Come up and look!'

"I passed over the grossness of his language, as he seemed half out of
his mind with fear. When I went upstairs with him he pointed to several
footprints upon the light carpet.

"'D'you mean to say those are mine?' he cried.

"They were certainly very much larger than any which he could have made,
and were evidently quite fresh. It rained hard this afternoon, as you
know, and my patients were the only people who called. It must have been
the case, then, that the man in the waiting-room had, for some unknown
reason, while I was busy with the other, ascended to the room of my
resident patient. Nothing had been touched or taken, but there were the
footprints to prove that the intrusion was an undoubted fact.

"Mr. Blessington seemed more excited over the matter than I should have
thought possible, though of course it was enough to disturb anybody's
peace of mind. He actually sat crying in an arm-chair, and I could
hardly get him to speak coherently. It was his suggestion that I should
come round to you, and of course I at once saw the propriety of it,
for certainly the incident is a very singular one, though he appears to
completely overrate its importance. If you would only come back with me
in my brougham, you would at least be able to soothe him, though I
can hardly hope that you will be able to explain this remarkable
occurrence."

Sherlock Holmes had listened to this long narrative with an intentness
which showed me that his interest was keenly aroused. His face was as
impassive as ever, but his lids had drooped more heavily over his eyes,
and his smoke had curled up more thickly from his pipe to emphasize each
curious episode in the doctor's tale. As our visitor concluded, Holmes
sprang up without a word, handed me my hat, picked his own from the
table, and followed Dr. Trevelyan to the door. Within a quarter of an
hour we had been dropped at the door of the physician's residence
in Brook Street, one of those sombre, flat-faced houses which one
associates with a West-End practice. A small page admitted us, and we
began at once to ascend the broad, well-carpeted stair.

But a singular interruption brought us to a standstill. The light at
the top was suddenly whisked out, and from the darkness came a reedy,
quivering voice.

"I have a pistol," it cried. "I give you my word that I'll fire if you
come any nearer."

"This really grows outrageous, Mr. Blessington," cried Dr. Trevelyan.

"Oh, then it is you, doctor," said the voice, with a great heave of
relief. "But those other gentlemen, are they what they pretend to be?"

We were conscious of a long scrutiny out of the darkness.

"Yes, yes, it's all right," said the voice at last. "You can come up,
and I am sorry if my precautions have annoyed you."

He relit the stair gas as he spoke, and we saw before us a
singular-looking man, whose appearance, as well as his voice, testified
to his jangled nerves. He was very fat, but had apparently at some time
been much fatter, so that the skin hung about his face in loose pouches,
like the cheeks of a blood-hound. He was of a sickly color, and his
thin, sandy hair seemed to bristle up with the intensity of his emotion.
In his hand he held a pistol, but he thrust it into his pocket as we
advanced.

"Good-evening, Mr. Holmes," said he. "I am sure I am very much obliged
to you for coming round. No one ever needed your advice more than I do.
I suppose that Dr. Trevelyan has told you of this most unwarrantable
intrusion into my rooms."

"Quite so," said Holmes. "Who are these two men Mr. Blessington, and why
do they wish to molest you?"

"Well, well," said the resident patient, in a nervous fashion, "of
course it is hard to say that. You can hardly expect me to answer that,
Mr. Holmes."

"Do you mean that you don't know?"

"Come in here, if you please. Just have the kindness to step in here."

He led the way into his bedroom, which was large and comfortably
furnished.

"You see that," said he, pointing to a big black box at the end of his
bed. "I have never been a very rich man, Mr. Holmes--never made but
one investment in my life, as Dr. Trevelyan would tell you. But I don't
believe in bankers. I would never trust a banker, Mr. Holmes. Between
ourselves, what little I have is in that box, so you can understand what
it means to me when unknown people force themselves into my rooms."

Holmes looked at Blessington in his questioning way and shook his head.

"I cannot possibly advise you if you try to deceive me," said he.

"But I have told you everything."

Holmes turned on his heel with a gesture of disgust. "Good-night, Dr.
Trevelyan," said he.

"And no advice for me?" cried Blessington, in a breaking voice.

"My advice to you, sir, is to speak the truth."

A minute later we were in the street and walking for home. We had
crossed Oxford Street and were half way down Harley Street before I
could get a word from my companion.

"Sorry to bring you out on such a fool's errand, Watson," he said at
last. "It is an interesting case, too, at the bottom of it."

"I can make little of it," I confessed.

"Well, it is quite evident that there are two men--more, perhaps, but
at least two--who are determined for some reason to get at this fellow
Blessington. I have no doubt in my mind that both on the first and on
the second occasion that young man penetrated to Blessington's room,
while his confederate, by an ingenious device, kept the doctor from
interfering."

"And the catalepsy?"

"A fraudulent imitation, Watson, though I should hardly dare to hint as
much to our specialist. It is a very easy complaint to imitate. I have
done it myself."

"And then?"

"By the purest chance Blessington was out on each occasion. Their reason
for choosing so unusual an hour for a consultation was obviously to
insure that there should be no other patient in the waiting-room. It
just happened, however, that this hour coincided with Blessington's
constitutional, which seems to show that they were not very well
acquainted with his daily routine. Of course, if they had been merely
after plunder they would at least have made some attempt to search for
it. Besides, I can read in a man's eye when it is his own skin that he
is frightened for. It is inconceivable that this fellow could have made
two such vindictive enemies as these appear to be without knowing of it.
I hold it, therefore, to be certain that he does know who these men are,
and that for reasons of his own he suppresses it. It is just possible
that to-morrow may find him in a more communicative mood."

"Is there not one alternative," I suggested, "grotesquely improbable,
no doubt, but still just conceivable? Might the whole story of the
cataleptic Russian and his son be a concoction of Dr. Trevelyan's, who
has, for his own purposes, been in Blessington's rooms?"

I saw in the gaslight that Holmes wore an amused smile at this brilliant
departure of mine.

"My dear fellow," said he, "it was one of the first solutions which
occurred to me, but I was soon able to corroborate the doctor's tale.
This young man has left prints upon the stair-carpet which made it quite
superfluous for me to ask to see those which he had made in the room.
When I tell you that his shoes were square-toed instead of being pointed
like Blessington's, and were quite an inch and a third longer than the
doctor's, you will acknowledge that there can be no doubt as to his
individuality. But we may sleep on it now, for I shall be surprised if
we do not hear something further from Brook Street in the morning."


Sherlock Holmes's prophecy was soon fulfilled, and in a dramatic
fashion. At half-past seven next morning, in the first glimmer of
daylight, I found him standing by my bedside in his dressing-gown.

"There's a brougham waiting for us, Watson," said he.

"What's the matter, then?"

"The Brook Street business."

"Any fresh news?"

"Tragic, but ambiguous," said he, pulling up the blind. "Look at this--a
sheet from a note-book, with 'For God's sake come at once--P. T.,'
scrawled upon it in pencil. Our friend, the doctor, was hard put to
it when he wrote this. Come along, my dear fellow, for it's an urgent
call."

In a quarter of an hour or so we were back at the physician's house. He
came running out to meet us with a face of horror.

"Oh, such a business!" he cried, with his hands to his temples.

"What then?"

"Blessington has committed suicide!"

Holmes whistled.

"Yes, he hanged himself during the night."

We had entered, and the doctor had preceded us into what was evidently
his waiting-room.

"I really hardly know what I am doing," he cried. "The police are
already upstairs. It has shaken me most dreadfully."

"When did you find it out?"

"He has a cup of tea taken in to him early every morning. When the maid
entered, about seven, there the unfortunate fellow was hanging in the
middle of the room. He had tied his cord to the hook on which the heavy
lamp used to hang, and he had jumped off from the top of the very box
that he showed us yesterday."

Holmes stood for a moment in deep thought.

"With your permission," said he at last, "I should like to go upstairs
and look into the matter."

We both ascended, followed by the doctor.

It was a dreadful sight which met us as we entered the bedroom door. I
have spoken of the impression of flabbiness which this man Blessington
conveyed. As he dangled from the hook it was exaggerated and intensified
until he was scarce human in his appearance. The neck was drawn out
like a plucked chicken's, making the rest of him seem the more obese and
unnatural by the contrast. He was clad only in his long night-dress, and
his swollen ankles and ungainly feet protruded starkly from beneath it.
Beside him stood a smart-looking police-inspector, who was taking notes
in a pocket-book.

"Ah, Mr. Holmes," said he, heartily, as my friend entered, "I am
delighted to see you."

"Good-morning, Lanner," answered Holmes; "you won't think me an
intruder, I am sure. Have you heard of the events which led up to this
affair?"

"Yes, I heard something of them."

"Have you formed any opinion?"

"As far as I can see, the man has been driven out of his senses by
fright. The bed has been well slept in, you see. There's his impression
deep enough. It's about five in the morning, you know, that suicides are
most common. That would be about his time for hanging himself. It seems
to have been a very deliberate affair."

"I should say that he has been dead about three hours, judging by the
rigidity of the muscles," said I.

"Noticed anything peculiar about the room?" asked Holmes.

"Found a screw-driver and some screws on the wash-hand stand. Seems to
have smoked heavily during the night, too. Here are four cigar-ends that
I picked out of the fireplace."

"Hum!" said Holmes, "have you got his cigar-holder?"

"No, I have seen none."

"His cigar-case, then?"

"Yes, it was in his coat-pocket."

Holmes opened it and smelled the single cigar which it contained.

"Oh, this is an Havana, and these others are cigars of the peculiar sort
which are imported by the Dutch from their East Indian colonies. They
are usually wrapped in straw, you know, and are thinner for their length
than any other brand." He picked up the four ends and examined them with
his pocket-lens.

"Two of these have been smoked from a holder and two without," said he.
"Two have been cut by a not very sharp knife, and two have had the ends
bitten off by a set of excellent teeth. This is no suicide, Mr. Lanner.
It is a very deeply planned and cold-blooded murder."

"Impossible!" cried the inspector.

"And why?"

"Why should any one murder a man in so clumsy a fashion as by hanging
him?"

"That is what we have to find out."

"How could they get in?"

"Through the front door."

"It was barred in the morning."

"Then it was barred after them."

"How do you know?"

"I saw their traces. Excuse me a moment, and I may be able to give you
some further information about it."

He went over to the door, and turning the lock he examined it in his
methodical way. Then he took out the key, which was on the inside, and
inspected that also. The bed, the carpet, the chairs the mantelpiece,
the dead body, and the rope were each in turn examined, until at last he
professed himself satisfied, and with my aid and that of the inspector
cut down the wretched object and laid it reverently under a sheet.

"How about this rope?" he asked.

"It is cut off this," said Dr. Trevelyan, drawing a large coil from
under the bed. "He was morbidly nervous of fire, and always kept this
beside him, so that he might escape by the window in case the stairs
were burning."

"That must have saved them trouble," said Holmes, thoughtfully. "Yes,
the actual facts are very plain, and I shall be surprised if by the
afternoon I cannot give you the reasons for them as well. I will take
this photograph of Blessington, which I see upon the mantelpiece, as it
may help me in my inquiries."

"But you have told us nothing!" cried the doctor.

"Oh, there can be no doubt as to the sequence of events," said Holmes.
"There were three of them in it: the young man, the old man, and a
third, to whose identity I have no clue. The first two, I need hardly
remark, are the same who masqueraded as the Russian count and his son,
so we can give a very full description of them. They were admitted by
a confederate inside the house. If I might offer you a word of advice,
Inspector, it would be to arrest the page, who, as I understand, has
only recently come into your service, Doctor."

"The young imp cannot be found," said Dr. Trevelyan; "the maid and the
cook have just been searching for him."

Holmes shrugged his shoulders.

"He has played a not unimportant part in this drama," said he. "The
three men having ascended the stairs, which they did on tiptoe, the
elder man first, the younger man second, and the unknown man in the
rear--"

"My dear Holmes!" I ejaculated.

"Oh, there could be no question as to the superimposing of the
footmarks. I had the advantage of learning which was which last night.
They ascended, then, to Mr. Blessington's room, the door of which they
found to be locked. With the help of a wire, however, they forced round
the key. Even without the lens you will perceive, by the scratches on
this ward, where the pressure was applied.

"On entering the room their first proceeding must have been to gag Mr.
Blessington. He may have been asleep, or he may have been so paralyzed
with terror as to have been unable to cry out. These walls are thick,
and it is conceivable that his shriek, if he had time to utter one, was
unheard.

"Having secured him, it is evident to me that a consultation of some
sort was held. Probably it was something in the nature of a judicial
proceeding. It must have lasted for some time, for it was then that
these cigars were smoked. The older man sat in that wicker chair; it
was he who used the cigar-holder. The younger man sat over yonder; he
knocked his ash off against the chest of drawers. The third fellow paced
up and down. Blessington, I think, sat upright in the bed, but of that I
cannot be absolutely certain.

"Well, it ended by their taking Blessington and hanging him. The matter
was so prearranged that it is my belief that they brought with them
some sort of block or pulley which might serve as a gallows. That
screw-driver and those screws were, as I conceive, for fixing it up.
Seeing the hook, however they naturally saved themselves the trouble.
Having finished their work they made off, and the door was barred behind
them by their confederate."

We had all listened with the deepest interest to this sketch of the
night's doings, which Holmes had deduced from signs so subtle and minute
that, even when he had pointed them out to us, we could scarcely follow
him in his reasoning. The inspector hurried away on the instant to make
inquiries about the page, while Holmes and I returned to Baker Street
for breakfast.

"I'll be back by three," said he, when we had finished our meal. "Both
the inspector and the doctor will meet me here at that hour, and I hope
by that time to have cleared up any little obscurity which the case may
still present."


Our visitors arrived at the appointed time, but it was a quarter to
four before my friend put in an appearance. From his expression as he
entered, however, I could see that all had gone well with him.

"Any news, Inspector?"

"We have got the boy, sir."

"Excellent, and I have got the men."

"You have got them!" we cried, all three.

"Well, at least I have got their identity. This so-called Blessington
is, as I expected, well known at headquarters, and so are his
assailants. Their names are Biddle, Hayward, and Moffat."

"The Worthingdon bank gang," cried the inspector.

"Precisely," said Holmes.

"Then Blessington must have been Sutton."

"Exactly," said Holmes.

"Why, that makes it as clear as crystal," said the inspector.

But Trevelyan and I looked at each other in bewilderment.

"You must surely remember the great Worthingdon bank business," said
Holmes. "Five men were in it--these four and a fifth called Cartwright.
Tobin, the care-taker, was murdered, and the thieves got away with seven
thousand pounds. This was in 1875. They were all five arrested, but the
evidence against them was by no means conclusive. This Blessington or
Sutton, who was the worst of the gang, turned informer. On his evidence
Cartwright was hanged and the other three got fifteen years apiece. When
they got out the other day, which was some years before their full term,
they set themselves, as you perceive, to hunt down the traitor and to
avenge the death of their comrade upon him. Twice they tried to get at
him and failed; a third time, you see, it came off. Is there anything
further which I can explain, Dr. Trevelyan?"

"I think you have made it all remarkably clear," said the doctor. "No
doubt the day on which he was perturbed was the day when he had seen of
their release in the newspapers."

"Quite so. His talk about a burglary was the merest blind."

"But why could he not tell you this?"

"Well, my dear sir, knowing the vindictive character of his old
associates, he was trying to hide his own identity from everybody as
long as he could. His secret was a shameful one, and he could not bring
himself to divulge it. However, wretch as he was, he was still living
under the shield of British law, and I have no doubt, Inspector, that
you will see that, though that shield may fail to guard, the sword of
justice is still there to avenge."


Such were the singular circumstances in connection with the Resident
Patient and the Brook Street Doctor. From that night nothing has
been seen of the three murderers by the police, and it is surmised
at Scotland Yard that they were among the passengers of the ill-fated
steamer Norah Creina, which was lost some years ago with all hands
upon the Portuguese coast, some leagues to the north of Oporto. The
proceedings against the page broke down for want of evidence, and the
Brook Street Mystery, as it was called, has never until now been fully
dealt with in any public print.




Adventure IX. The Greek Interpreter


During my long and intimate acquaintance with Mr. Sherlock Holmes I had
never heard him refer to his relations, and hardly ever to his own early
life. This reticence upon his part had increased the somewhat inhuman
effect which he produced upon me, until sometimes I found myself
regarding him as an isolated phenomenon, a brain without a heart, as
deficient in human sympathy as he was pre-eminent in intelligence. His
aversion to women and his disinclination to form new friendships were
both typical of his unemotional character, but not more so than his
complete suppression of every reference to his own people. I had come to
believe that he was an orphan with no relatives living, but one day, to
my very great surprise, he began to talk to me about his brother.

It was after tea on a summer evening, and the conversation, which had
roamed in a desultory, spasmodic fashion from golf clubs to the causes
of the change in the obliquity of the ecliptic, came round at last
to the question of atavism and hereditary aptitudes. The point under
discussion was, how far any singular gift in an individual was due to
his ancestry and how far to his own early training.

"In your own case," said I, "from all that you have told me, it seems
obvious that your faculty of observation and your peculiar facility for
deduction are due to your own systematic training."

"To some extent," he answered, thoughtfully. "My ancestors were country
squires, who appear to have led much the same life as is natural to
their class. But, none the less, my turn that way is in my veins, and
may have come with my grandmother, who was the sister of Vernet, the
French artist. Art in the blood is liable to take the strangest forms."

"But how do you know that it is hereditary?"

"Because my brother Mycroft possesses it in a larger degree than I do."

This was news to me indeed. If there were another man with such singular
powers in England, how was it that neither police nor public had heard
of him? I put the question, with a hint that it was my companion's
modesty which made him acknowledge his brother as his superior. Holmes
laughed at my suggestion.

"My dear Watson," said he, "I cannot agree with those who rank modesty
among the virtues. To the logician all things should be seen exactly as
they are, and to underestimate one's self is as much a departure from
truth as to exaggerate one's own powers. When I say, therefore, that
Mycroft has better powers of observation than I, you may take it that I
am speaking the exact and literal truth."

"Is he your junior?"

"Seven years my senior."

"How comes it that he is unknown?"

"Oh, he is very well known in his own circle."

"Where, then?"

"Well, in the Diogenes Club, for example."

I had never heard of the institution, and my face must have proclaimed
as much, for Sherlock Holmes pulled out his watch.

"The Diogenes Club is the queerest club in London, and Mycroft one of
the queerest men. He's always there from quarter to five to twenty to
eight. It's six now, so if you care for a stroll this beautiful evening
I shall be very happy to introduce you to two curiosities."

Five minutes later we were in the street, walking towards Regent's
Circus.

"You wonder," said my companion, "why it is that Mycroft does not use
his powers for detective work. He is incapable of it."

"But I thought you said--"

"I said that he was my superior in observation and deduction. If the
art of the detective began and ended in reasoning from an arm-chair, my
brother would be the greatest criminal agent that ever lived. But he has
no ambition and no energy. He will not even go out of his way to verify
his own solutions, and would rather be considered wrong than take the
trouble to prove himself right. Again and again I have taken a problem
to him, and have received an explanation which has afterwards proved to
be the correct one. And yet he was absolutely incapable of working out
the practical points which must be gone into before a case could be laid
before a judge or jury."

"It is not his profession, then?"

"By no means. What is to me a means of livelihood is to him the merest
hobby of a dilettante. He has an extraordinary faculty for figures, and
audits the books in some of the government departments. Mycroft lodges
in Pall Mall, and he walks round the corner into Whitehall every morning
and back every evening. From year's end to year's end he takes no other
exercise, and is seen nowhere else, except only in the Diogenes Club,
which is just opposite his rooms."

"I cannot recall the name."

"Very likely not. There are many men in London, you know, who, some from
shyness, some from misanthropy, have no wish for the company of their
fellows. Yet they are not averse to comfortable chairs and the latest
periodicals. It is for the convenience of these that the Diogenes Club
was started, and it now contains the most unsociable and unclubable men
in town. No member is permitted to take the least notice of any
other one. Save in the Stranger's Room, no talking is, under any
circumstances, allowed, and three offences, if brought to the notice of
the committee, render the talker liable to expulsion. My brother was one
of the founders, and I have myself found it a very soothing atmosphere."

We had reached Pall Mall as we talked, and were walking down it from the
St. James's end. Sherlock Holmes stopped at a door some little distance
from the Carlton, and, cautioning me not to speak, he led the way into
the hall. Through the glass paneling I caught a glimpse of a large and
luxurious room, in which a considerable number of men were sitting about
and reading papers, each in his own little nook. Holmes showed me into a
small chamber which looked out into Pall Mall, and then, leaving me for
a minute, he came back with a companion whom I knew could only be his
brother.

Mycroft Holmes was a much larger and stouter man than Sherlock. His body
was absolutely corpulent, but his face, though massive, had preserved
something of the sharpness of expression which was so remarkable in that
of his brother. His eyes, which were of a peculiarly light, watery gray,
seemed to always retain that far-away, introspective look which I had
only observed in Sherlock's when he was exerting his full powers.

"I am glad to meet you, sir," said he, putting out a broad, fat hand
like the flipper of a seal. "I hear of Sherlock everywhere since you
became his chronicler. By the way, Sherlock, I expected to see you round
last week, to consult me over that Manor House case. I thought you might
be a little out of your depth."

"No, I solved it," said my friend, smiling.

"It was Adams, of course."

"Yes, it was Adams."

"I was sure of it from the first." The two sat down together in the
bow-window of the club. "To any one who wishes to study mankind this is
the spot," said Mycroft. "Look at the magnificent types! Look at these
two men who are coming towards us, for example."

"The billiard-marker and the other?"

"Precisely. What do you make of the other?"

The two men had stopped opposite the window. Some chalk marks over the
waistcoat pocket were the only signs of billiards which I could see
in one of them. The other was a very small, dark fellow, with his hat
pushed back and several packages under his arm.

"An old soldier, I perceive," said Sherlock.

"And very recently discharged," remarked the brother.

"Served in India, I see."

"And a non-commissioned officer."

"Royal Artillery, I fancy," said Sherlock.

"And a widower."

"But with a child."

"Children, my dear boy, children."

"Come," said I, laughing, "this is a little too much."

"Surely," answered Holmes, "it is not hard to say that a man with that
bearing, expression of authority, and sunbaked skin, is a soldier, is
more than a private, and is not long from India."

"That he has not left the service long is shown by his still wearing his
ammunition boots, as they are called," observed Mycroft.

"He had not the cavalry stride, yet he wore his hat on one side, as
is shown by the lighter skin of that side of his brow. His weight is
against his being a sapper. He is in the artillery."

"Then, of course, his complete mourning shows that he has lost some one
very dear. The fact that he is doing his own shopping looks as though
it were his wife. He has been buying things for children, you perceive.
There is a rattle, which shows that one of them is very young. The wife
probably died in childbed. The fact that he has a picture-book under his
arm shows that there is another child to be thought of."

I began to understand what my friend meant when he said that his brother
possessed even keener faculties that he did himself. He glanced across
at me and smiled. Mycroft took snuff from a tortoise-shell box, and
brushed away the wandering grains from his coat front with a large, red
silk handkerchief.

"By the way, Sherlock," said he, "I have had something quite after your
own heart--a most singular problem--submitted to my judgment. I really
had not the energy to follow it up save in a very incomplete fashion,
but it gave me a basis for some pleasing speculation. If you would care
to hear the facts--"

"My dear Mycroft, I should be delighted."

The brother scribbled a note upon a leaf of his pocket-book, and,
ringing the bell, he handed it to the waiter.

"I have asked Mr. Melas to step across," said he. "He lodges on the
floor above me, and I have some slight acquaintance with him, which led
him to come to me in his perplexity. Mr. Melas is a Greek by extraction,
as I understand, and he is a remarkable linguist. He earns his living
partly as interpreter in the law courts and partly by acting as guide to
any wealthy Orientals who may visit the Northumberland Avenue hotels. I
think I will leave him to tell his very remarkable experience in his own
fashion."

A few minutes later we were joined by a short, stout man whose olive
face and coal-black hair proclaimed his Southern origin, though his
speech was that of an educated Englishman. He shook hands eagerly
with Sherlock Holmes, and his dark eyes sparkled with pleasure when he
understood that the specialist was anxious to hear his story.

"I do not believe that the police credit me--on my word, I do not," said
he in a wailing voice. "Just because they have never heard of it before,
they think that such a thing cannot be. But I know that I shall never
be easy in my mind until I know what has become of my poor man with the
sticking-plaster upon his face."

"I am all attention," said Sherlock Holmes.

"This is Wednesday evening," said Mr. Melas. "Well then, it was Monday
night--only two days ago, you understand--that all this happened. I am
an interpreter, as perhaps my neighbor there has told you. I interpret
all languages--or nearly all--but as I am a Greek by birth and with a
Grecian name, it is with that particular tongue that I am principally
associated. For many years I have been the chief Greek interpreter in
London, and my name is very well known in the hotels.

"It happens not unfrequently that I am sent for at strange hours by
foreigners who get into difficulties, or by travelers who arrive late
and wish my services. I was not surprised, therefore, on Monday night
when a Mr. Latimer, a very fashionably dressed young man, came up to my
rooms and asked me to accompany him in a cab which was waiting at the
door. A Greek friend had come to see him upon business, he said, and
as he could speak nothing but his own tongue, the services of an
interpreter were indispensable. He gave me to understand that his house
was some little distance off, in Kensington, and he seemed to be in a
great hurry, bustling me rapidly into the cab when we had descended to
the street.

"I say into the cab, but I soon became doubtful as to whether it was not
a carriage in which I found myself. It was certainly more roomy than
the ordinary four-wheeled disgrace to London, and the fittings, though
frayed, were of rich quality. Mr. Latimer seated himself opposite to me
and we started off through Charing Cross and up the Shaftesbury Avenue.
We had come out upon Oxford Street and I had ventured some remark as to
this being a roundabout way to Kensington, when my words were arrested
by the extraordinary conduct of my companion.

"He began by drawing a most formidable-looking bludgeon loaded with lead
from his pocket, and switching it backward and forward several times,
as if to test its weight and strength. Then he placed it without a word
upon the seat beside him. Having done this, he drew up the windows on
each side, and I found to my astonishment that they were covered with
paper so as to prevent my seeing through them.

"'I am sorry to cut off your view, Mr. Melas,' said he. 'The fact is
that I have no intention that you should see what the place is to which
we are driving. It might possibly be inconvenient to me if you could
find your way there again.'

"As you can imagine, I was utterly taken aback by such an address. My
companion was a powerful, broad-shouldered young fellow, and, apart from
the weapon, I should not have had the slightest chance in a struggle
with him.

"'This is very extraordinary conduct, Mr. Latimer,' I stammered. 'You
must be aware that what you are doing is quite illegal.'

"'It is somewhat of a liberty, no doubt,' said he, 'but we'll make it
up to you. I must warn you, however, Mr. Melas, that if at any time
to-night you attempt to raise an alarm or do anything which is against
my interests, you will find it a very serious thing. I beg you to
remember that no one knows where you are, and that, whether you are in
this carriage or in my house, you are equally in my power.'

"His words were quiet, but he had a rasping way of saying them which
was very menacing. I sat in silence wondering what on earth could be
his reason for kidnapping me in this extraordinary fashion. Whatever it
might be, it was perfectly clear that there was no possible use in my
resisting, and that I could only wait to see what might befall.

"For nearly two hours we drove without my having the least clue as to
where we were going. Sometimes the rattle of the stones told of a paved
causeway, and at others our smooth, silent course suggested asphalt;
but, save by this variation in sound, there was nothing at all which
could in the remotest way help me to form a guess as to where we were.
The paper over each window was impenetrable to light, and a blue curtain
was drawn across the glass work in front. It was a quarter-past seven
when we left Pall Mall, and my watch showed me that it was ten minutes
to nine when we at last came to a standstill. My companion let down
the window, and I caught a glimpse of a low, arched doorway with a lamp
burning above it. As I was hurried from the carriage it swung open, and
I found myself inside the house, with a vague impression of a lawn
and trees on each side of me as I entered. Whether these were private
grounds, however, or bona-fide country was more than I could possibly
venture to say.

"There was a colored gas-lamp inside which was turned so low that I
could see little save that the hall was of some size and hung with
pictures. In the dim light I could make out that the person who had
opened the door was a small, mean-looking, middle-aged man with rounded
shoulders. As he turned towards us the glint of the light showed me that
he was wearing glasses.

"'Is this Mr. Melas, Harold?' said he.

"'Yes.'

"'Well done, well done! No ill-will, Mr. Melas, I hope, but we could not
get on without you. If you deal fair with us you'll not regret it,
but if you try any tricks, God help you!' He spoke in a nervous, jerky
fashion, and with little giggling laughs in between, but somehow he
impressed me with fear more than the other.

"'What do you want with me?' I asked.

"'Only to ask a few questions of a Greek gentleman who is visiting us,
and to let us have the answers. But say no more than you are told to
say, or--' here came the nervous giggle again--'you had better never
have been born.'

"As he spoke he opened a door and showed the way into a room which
appeared to be very richly furnished, but again the only light was
afforded by a single lamp half-turned down. The chamber was certainly
large, and the way in which my feet sank into the carpet as I stepped
across it told me of its richness. I caught glimpses of velvet chairs, a
high white marble mantel-piece, and what seemed to be a suit of Japanese
armor at one side of it. There was a chair just under the lamp, and the
elderly man motioned that I should sit in it. The younger had left
us, but he suddenly returned through another door, leading with him
a gentleman clad in some sort of loose dressing-gown who moved slowly
towards us. As he came into the circle of dim light which enables me to
see him more clearly I was thrilled with horror at his appearance. He
was deadly pale and terribly emaciated, with the protruding, brilliant
eyes of a man whose spirit was greater than his strength. But what
shocked me more than any signs of physical weakness was that his face
was grotesquely criss-crossed with sticking-plaster, and that one large
pad of it was fastened over his mouth.

"'Have you the slate, Harold?' cried the older man, as this strange
being fell rather than sat down into a chair. 'Are his hands loose? Now,
then, give him the pencil. You are to ask the questions, Mr. Melas, and
he will write the answers. Ask him first of all whether he is prepared
to sign the papers?'

"The man's eyes flashed fire.

"'Never!' he wrote in Greek upon the slate.

"'On no condition?' I asked, at the bidding of our tyrant.

"'Only if I see her married in my presence by a Greek priest whom I
know.'

"The man giggled in his venomous way.

"'You know what awaits you, then?'

"'I care nothing for myself.'

"These are samples of the questions and answers which made up our
strange half-spoken, half-written conversation. Again and again I had to
ask him whether he would give in and sign the documents. Again and again
I had the same indignant reply. But soon a happy thought came to me. I
took to adding on little sentences of my own to each question, innocent
ones at first, to test whether either of our companions knew anything
of the matter, and then, as I found that they showed no signs I played a
more dangerous game. Our conversation ran something like this:

"'You can do no good by this obstinacy. Who are you?'

"'I care not. I am a stranger in London.'

"'Your fate will be upon your own head. How long have you been here?'

"'Let it be so. Three weeks.'

"'The property can never be yours. What ails you?'

"'It shall not go to villains. They are starving me.'

"'You shall go free if you sign. What house is this?'

"'I will never sign. I do not know.'

"'You are not doing her any service. What is your name?'

"'Let me hear her say so. Kratides.'

"'You shall see her if you sign. Where are you from?'

"'Then I shall never see her. Athens.'

"Another five minutes, Mr. Holmes, and I should have wormed out the
whole story under their very noses. My very next question might have
cleared the matter up, but at that instant the door opened and a woman
stepped into the room. I could not see her clearly enough to know more
than that she was tall and graceful, with black hair, and clad in some
sort of loose white gown.

"'Harold,' said she, speaking English with a broken accent. 'I could not
stay away longer. It is so lonely up there with only--Oh, my God, it is
Paul!'

"These last words were in Greek, and at the same instant the man with
a convulsive effort tore the plaster from his lips, and screaming out
'Sophy! Sophy!' rushed into the woman's arms. Their embrace was but for
an instant, however, for the younger man seized the woman and pushed
her out of the room, while the elder easily overpowered his emaciated
victim, and dragged him away through the other door. For a moment I was
left alone in the room, and I sprang to my feet with some vague idea
that I might in some way get a clue to what this house was in which I
found myself. Fortunately, however, I took no steps, for looking up I
saw that the older man was standing in the door-way with his eyes fixed
upon me.

"'That will do, Mr. Melas,' said he. 'You perceive that we have taken
you into our confidence over some very private business. We should not
have troubled you, only that our friend who speaks Greek and who began
these negotiations has been forced to return to the East. It was
quite necessary for us to find some one to take his place, and we were
fortunate in hearing of your powers.'

"I bowed.

"'There are five sovereigns here,' said he, walking up to me, 'which
will, I hope, be a sufficient fee. But remember,' he added, tapping me
lightly on the chest and giggling, 'if you speak to a human soul about
this--one human soul, mind--well, may God have mercy upon your soul!"

"I cannot tell you the loathing and horror with which this
insignificant-looking man inspired me. I could see him better now as the
lamp-light shone upon him. His features were peaky and sallow, and his
little pointed beard was thready and ill-nourished. He pushed his face
forward as he spoke and his lips and eyelids were continually twitching
like a man with St. Vitus's dance. I could not help thinking that his
strange, catchy little laugh was also a symptom of some nervous malady.
The terror of his face lay in his eyes, however, steel gray, and
glistening coldly with a malignant, inexorable cruelty in their depths.

"'We shall know if you speak of this,' said he. 'We have our own means
of information. Now you will find the carriage waiting, and my friend
will see you on your way.'

"I was hurried through the hall and into the vehicle, again obtaining
that momentary glimpse of trees and a garden. Mr. Latimer followed
closely at my heels, and took his place opposite to me without a word.
In silence we again drove for an interminable distance with the windows
raised, until at last, just after midnight, the carriage pulled up.

"'You will get down here, Mr. Melas,' said my companion. 'I am sorry
to leave you so far from your house, but there is no alternative. Any
attempt upon your part to follow the carriage can only end in injury to
yourself.'

"He opened the door as he spoke, and I had hardly time to spring out
when the coachman lashed the horse and the carriage rattled away. I
looked around me in astonishment. I was on some sort of a heathy common
mottled over with dark clumps of furze-bushes. Far away stretched a
line of houses, with a light here and there in the upper windows. On the
other side I saw the red signal-lamps of a railway.

"The carriage which had brought me was already out of sight. I stood
gazing round and wondering where on earth I might be, when I saw some
one coming towards me in the darkness. As he came up to me I made out
that he was a railway porter.

"'Can you tell me what place this is?' I asked.

"'Wandsworth Common,' said he.

"'Can I get a train into town?'

"'If you walk on a mile or so to Clapham Junction,' said he, 'you'll
just be in time for the last to Victoria.'

"So that was the end of my adventure, Mr. Holmes. I do not know where I
was, nor whom I spoke with, nor anything save what I have told you. But
I know that there is foul play going on, and I want to help that unhappy
man if I can. I told the whole story to Mr. Mycroft Holmes next morning,
and subsequently to the police."

We all sat in silence for some little time after listening to this
extraordinary narrative. Then Sherlock looked across at his brother.

"Any steps?" he asked.

Mycroft picked up the Daily News, which was lying on the side-table.

"'Anybody supplying any information to the whereabouts of a Greek
gentleman named Paul Kratides, from Athens, who is unable to speak
English, will be rewarded. A similar reward paid to any one giving
information about a Greek lady whose first name is Sophy. X 2473.' That
was in all the dailies. No answer."

"How about the Greek Legation?"

"I have inquired. They know nothing."

"A wire to the head of the Athens police, then?"

"Sherlock has all the energy of the family," said Mycroft, turning to
me. "Well, you take the case up by all means, and let me know if you do
any good."

"Certainly," answered my friend, rising from his chair. "I'll let you
know, and Mr. Melas also. In the meantime, Mr. Melas, I should certainly
be on my guard, if I were you, for of course they must know through
these advertisements that you have betrayed them."

As we walked home together, Holmes stopped at a telegraph office and
sent off several wires.

"You see, Watson," he remarked, "our evening has been by no means
wasted. Some of my most interesting cases have come to me in this way
through Mycroft. The problem which we have just listened to, although
it can admit of but one explanation, has still some distinguishing
features."

"You have hopes of solving it?"

"Well, knowing as much as we do, it will be singular indeed if we fail
to discover the rest. You must yourself have formed some theory which
will explain the facts to which we have listened."

"In a vague way, yes."

"What was your idea, then?"

"It seemed to me to be obvious that this Greek girl had been carried off
by the young Englishman named Harold Latimer."

"Carried off from where?"

"Athens, perhaps."

Sherlock Holmes shook his head. "This young man could not talk a word of
Greek. The lady could talk English fairly well. Inference--that she had
been in England some little time, but he had not been in Greece."

"Well, then, we will presume that she had come on a visit to England,
and that this Harold had persuaded her to fly with him."

"That is more probable."

"Then the brother--for that, I fancy, must be the relationship--comes
over from Greece to interfere. He imprudently puts himself into the
power of the young man and his older associate. They seize him and use
violence towards him in order to make him sign some papers to make over
the girl's fortune--of which he may be trustee--to them. This he refuses
to do. In order to negotiate with him they have to get an interpreter,
and they pitch upon this Mr. Melas, having used some other one before.
The girl is not told of the arrival of her brother, and finds it out by
the merest accident."

"Excellent, Watson!" cried Holmes. "I really fancy that you are not far
from the truth. You see that we hold all the cards, and we have only to
fear some sudden act of violence on their part. If they give us time we
must have them."

"But how can we find where this house lies?"

"Well, if our conjecture is correct and the girl's name is or was Sophy
Kratides, we should have no difficulty in tracing her. That must be our
main hope, for the brother is, of course, a complete stranger. It is
clear that some time has elapsed since this Harold established these
relations with the girl--some weeks, at any rate--since the brother in
Greece has had time to hear of it and come across. If they have been
living in the same place during this time, it is probable that we shall
have some answer to Mycroft's advertisement."

We had reached our house in Baker Street while we had been talking.
Holmes ascended the stair first, and as he opened the door of our room
he gave a start of surprise. Looking over his shoulder, I was equally
astonished. His brother Mycroft was sitting smoking in the arm-chair.

"Come in, Sherlock! Come in, sir," said he blandly, smiling at our
surprised faces. "You don't expect such energy from me, do you,
Sherlock? But somehow this case attracts me."

"How did you get here?"

"I passed you in a hansom."

"There has been some new development?"

"I had an answer to my advertisement."

"Ah!"

"Yes, it came within a few minutes of your leaving."

"And to what effect?"

Mycroft Holmes took out a sheet of paper.

"Here it is," said he, "written with a J pen on royal cream paper by a
middle-aged man with a weak constitution. 'Sir,' he says, 'in answer to
your advertisement of to-day's date, I beg to inform you that I know the
young lady in question very well. If you should care to call upon me I
could give you some particulars as to her painful history. She is living
at present at The Myrtles, Beckenham. Yours faithfully, J. Davenport.'

"He writes from Lower Brixton," said Mycroft Holmes. "Do you not think
that we might drive to him now, Sherlock, and learn these particulars?"

"My dear Mycroft, the brother's life is more valuable than the sister's
story. I think we should call at Scotland Yard for Inspector Gregson,
and go straight out to Beckenham. We know that a man is being done to
death, and every hour may be vital."

"Better pick up Mr. Melas on our way," I suggested. "We may need an
interpreter."

"Excellent," said Sherlock Holmes. "Send the boy for a four-wheeler, and
we shall be off at once." He opened the table-drawer as he spoke, and I
noticed that he slipped his revolver into his pocket. "Yes," said he, in
answer to my glance; "I should say from what we have heard, that we are
dealing with a particularly dangerous gang."

It was almost dark before we found ourselves in Pall Mall, at the rooms
of Mr. Melas. A gentleman had just called for him, and he was gone.

"Can you tell me where?" asked Mycroft Holmes.

"I don't know, sir," answered the woman who had opened the door; "I only
know that he drove away with the gentleman in a carriage."

"Did the gentleman give a name?"

"No, sir."

"He wasn't a tall, handsome, dark young man?"

"Oh, no, sir. He was a little gentleman, with glasses, thin in the face,
but very pleasant in his ways, for he was laughing all the time that he
was talking."

"Come along!" cried Sherlock Holmes, abruptly. "This grows serious,"
he observed, as we drove to Scotland Yard. "These men have got hold of
Melas again. He is a man of no physical courage, as they are well
aware from their experience the other night. This villain was able to
terrorize him the instant that he got into his presence. No doubt
they want his professional services, but, having used him, they may be
inclined to punish him for what they will regard as his treachery."

Our hope was that, by taking train, we might get to Beckenham as soon
or sooner than the carriage. On reaching Scotland Yard, however, it was
more than an hour before we could get Inspector Gregson and comply with
the legal formalities which would enable us to enter the house. It was a
quarter to ten before we reached London Bridge, and half past before the
four of us alighted on the Beckenham platform. A drive of half a mile
brought us to The Myrtles--a large, dark house standing back from the
road in its own grounds. Here we dismissed our cab, and made our way up
the drive together.

"The windows are all dark," remarked the inspector. "The house seems
deserted."

"Our birds are flown and the nest empty," said Holmes.

"Why do you say so?"

"A carriage heavily loaded with luggage has passed out during the last
hour."

The inspector laughed. "I saw the wheel-tracks in the light of the
gate-lamp, but where does the luggage come in?"

"You may have observed the same wheel-tracks going the other way. But
the outward-bound ones were very much deeper--so much so that we can
say for a certainty that there was a very considerable weight on the
carriage."

"You get a trifle beyond me there," said the inspector, shrugging his
shoulder. "It will not be an easy door to force, but we will try if we
cannot make some one hear us."

He hammered loudly at the knocker and pulled at the bell, but without
any success. Holmes had slipped away, but he came back in a few minutes.

"I have a window open," said he.

"It is a mercy that you are on the side of the force, and not against
it, Mr. Holmes," remarked the inspector, as he noted the clever way in
which my friend had forced back the catch. "Well, I think that under the
circumstances we may enter without an invitation."

One after the other we made our way into a large apartment, which was
evidently that in which Mr. Melas had found himself. The inspector
had lit his lantern, and by its light we could see the two doors, the
curtain, the lamp, and the suit of Japanese mail as he had described
them. On the table lay two glasses, and empty brandy-bottle, and the
remains of a meal.

"What is that?" asked Holmes, suddenly.

We all stood still and listened. A low moaning sound was coming from
somewhere over our heads. Holmes rushed to the door and out into the
hall. The dismal noise came from upstairs. He dashed up, the inspector
and I at his heels, while his brother Mycroft followed as quickly as his
great bulk would permit.

Three doors faced up upon the second floor, and it was from the central
of these that the sinister sounds were issuing, sinking sometimes into a
dull mumble and rising again into a shrill whine. It was locked, but the
key had been left on the outside. Holmes flung open the door and rushed
in, but he was out again in an instant, with his hand to his throat.

"It's charcoal," he cried. "Give it time. It will clear."

Peering in, we could see that the only light in the room came from a
dull blue flame which flickered from a small brass tripod in the centre.
It threw a livid, unnatural circle upon the floor, while in the shadows
beyond we saw the vague loom of two figures which crouched against the
wall. From the open door there reeked a horrible poisonous exhalation
which set us gasping and coughing. Holmes rushed to the top of the
stairs to draw in the fresh air, and then, dashing into the room, he
threw up the window and hurled the brazen tripod out into the garden.

"We can enter in a minute," he gasped, darting out again. "Where is a
candle? I doubt if we could strike a match in that atmosphere. Hold the
light at the door and we shall get them out, Mycroft, now!"

With a rush we got to the poisoned men and dragged them out into the
well-lit hall. Both of them were blue-lipped and insensible, with
swollen, congested faces and protruding eyes. Indeed, so distorted were
their features that, save for his black beard and stout figure, we might
have failed to recognize in one of them the Greek interpreter who had
parted from us only a few hours before at the Diogenes Club. His hands
and feet were securely strapped together, and he bore over one eye
the marks of a violent blow. The other, who was secured in a similar
fashion, was a tall man in the last stage of emaciation, with several
strips of sticking-plaster arranged in a grotesque pattern over his
face. He had ceased to moan as we laid him down, and a glance showed
me that for him at least our aid had come too late. Mr. Melas, however,
still lived, and in less than an hour, with the aid of ammonia and
brandy I had the satisfaction of seeing him open his eyes, and of
knowing that my hand had drawn him back from that dark valley in which
all paths meet.

It was a simple story which he had to tell, and one which did but
confirm our own deductions. His visitor, on entering his rooms, had
drawn a life-preserver from his sleeve, and had so impressed him with
the fear of instant and inevitable death that he had kidnapped him for
the second time. Indeed, it was almost mesmeric, the effect which this
giggling ruffian had produced upon the unfortunate linguist, for he
could not speak of him save with trembling hands and a blanched cheek.
He had been taken swiftly to Beckenham, and had acted as interpreter in
a second interview, even more dramatic than the first, in which the two
Englishmen had menaced their prisoner with instant death if he did not
comply with their demands. Finally, finding him proof against every
threat, they had hurled him back into his prison, and after
reproaching Melas with his treachery, which appeared from the newspaper
advertisement, they had stunned him with a blow from a stick, and he
remembered nothing more until he found us bending over him.

And this was the singular case of the Grecian Interpreter, the
explanation of which is still involved in some mystery. We were able
to find out, by communicating with the gentleman who had answered the
advertisement, that the unfortunate young lady came of a wealthy Grecian
family, and that she had been on a visit to some friends in England.
While there she had met a young man named Harold Latimer, who had
acquired an ascendancy over her and had eventually persuaded her to fly
with him. Her friends, shocked at the event, had contented themselves
with informing her brother at Athens, and had then washed their hands
of the matter. The brother, on his arrival in England, had imprudently
placed himself in the power of Latimer and of his associate, whose name
was Wilson Kemp--a man of the foulest antecedents. These two, finding
that through his ignorance of the language he was helpless in their
hands, had kept him a prisoner, and had endeavored by cruelty and
starvation to make him sign away his own and his sister's property. They
had kept him in the house without the girl's knowledge, and the plaster
over the face had been for the purpose of making recognition difficult
in case she should ever catch a glimpse of him. Her feminine perception,
however, had instantly seen through the disguise when, on the occasion
of the interpreter's visit, she had seen him for the first time. The
poor girl, however, was herself a prisoner, for there was no one about
the house except the man who acted as coachman, and his wife, both of
whom were tools of the conspirators. Finding that their secret was out,
and that their prisoner was not to be coerced, the two villains with the
girl had fled away at a few hours' notice from the furnished house which
they had hired, having first, as they thought, taken vengeance both upon
the man who had defied and the one who had betrayed them.

Months afterwards a curious newspaper cutting reached us from
Buda-Pesth. It told how two Englishmen who had been traveling with a
woman had met with a tragic end. They had each been stabbed, it seems,
and the Hungarian police were of opinion that they had quarreled and had
inflicted mortal injuries upon each other. Holmes, however, is, I fancy,
of a different way of thinking, and holds to this day that, if one could
find the Grecian girl, one might learn how the wrongs of herself and her
brother came to be avenged.




Adventure X. The Naval Treaty


The July which immediately succeeded my marriage was made memorable
by three cases of interest, in which I had the privilege of being
associated with Sherlock Holmes and of studying his methods. I find them
recorded in my notes under the headings of "The Adventure of the Second
Stain," "The Adventure of the Naval Treaty," and "The Adventure of the
Tired Captain." The first of these, however, deals with interest of such
importance and implicates so many of the first families in the kingdom
that for many years it will be impossible to make it public. No case,
however, in which Holmes was engaged has ever illustrated the value
of his analytical methods so clearly or has impressed those who were
associated with him so deeply. I still retain an almost verbatim report
of the interview in which he demonstrated the true facts of the case
to Monsieur Dubugue of the Paris police, and Fritz von Waldbaum, the
well-known specialist of Dantzig, both of whom had wasted their energies
upon what proved to be side-issues. The new century will have come,
however, before the story can be safely told. Meanwhile I pass on to
the second on my list, which promised also at one time to be of national
importance, and was marked by several incidents which give it a quite
unique character.

During my school-days I had been intimately associated with a lad named
Percy Phelps, who was of much the same age as myself, though he was two
classes ahead of me. He was a very brilliant boy, and carried away every
prize which the school had to offer, finished his exploits by winning
a scholarship which sent him on to continue his triumphant career at
Cambridge. He was, I remember, extremely well connected, and even when
we were all little boys together we knew that his mother's brother
was Lord Holdhurst, the great conservative politician. This gaudy
relationship did him little good at school. On the contrary, it seemed
rather a piquant thing to us to chevy him about the playground and hit
him over the shins with a wicket. But it was another thing when he
came out into the world. I heard vaguely that his abilities and the
influences which he commanded had won him a good position at the Foreign
Office, and then he passed completely out of my mind until the following
letter recalled his existence:


Briarbrae, Woking. My dear Watson,--I have no doubt that you can
remember "Tadpole" Phelps, who was in the fifth form when you were in
the third. It is possible even that you may have heard that through my
uncle's influence I obtained a good appointment at the Foreign Office,
and that I was in a situation of trust and honor until a horrible
misfortune came suddenly to blast my career.

There is no use writing of the details of that dreadful event. In the
event of your acceding to my request it is probable that I shall have
to narrate them to you. I have only just recovered from nine weeks of
brain-fever, and am still exceedingly weak. Do you think that you could
bring your friend Mr. Holmes down to see me? I should like to have his
opinion of the case, though the authorities assure me that nothing more
can be done. Do try to bring him down, and as soon as possible. Every
minute seems an hour while I live in this state of horrible suspense.
Assure him that if I have not asked his advice sooner it was not because
I did not appreciate his talents, but because I have been off my head
ever since the blow fell. Now I am clear again, though I dare not think
of it too much for fear of a relapse. I am still so weak that I have to
write, as you see, by dictating. Do try to bring him.

Your old school-fellow,

Percy Phelps.


There was something that touched me as I read this letter, something
pitiable in the reiterated appeals to bring Holmes. So moved was I
that even had it been a difficult matter I should have tried it, but
of course I knew well that Holmes loved his art, so that he was ever
as ready to bring his aid as his client could be to receive it. My wife
agreed with me that not a moment should be lost in laying the matter
before him, and so within an hour of breakfast-time I found myself back
once more in the old rooms in Baker Street.

Holmes was seated at his side-table clad in his dressing-gown, and
working hard over a chemical investigation. A large curved retort
was boiling furiously in the bluish flame of a Bunsen burner, and the
distilled drops were condensing into a two-litre measure. My friend
hardly glanced up as I entered, and I, seeing that his investigation
must be of importance, seated myself in an arm-chair and waited. He
dipped into this bottle or that, drawing out a few drops of each with
his glass pipette, and finally brought a test-tube containing a solution
over to the table. In his right hand he held a slip of litmus-paper.

"You come at a crisis, Watson," said he. "If this paper remains blue,
all is well. If it turns red, it means a man's life." He dipped it into
the test-tube and it flushed at once into a dull, dirty crimson. "Hum!
I thought as much!" he cried. "I will be at your service in an instant,
Watson. You will find tobacco in the Persian slipper." He turned to his
desk and scribbled off several telegrams, which were handed over to the
page-boy. Then he threw himself down into the chair opposite, and drew
up his knees until his fingers clasped round his long, thin shins.

"A very commonplace little murder," said he. "You've got something
better, I fancy. You are the stormy petrel of crime, Watson. What is
it?"

I handed him the letter, which he read with the most concentrated
attention.

"It does not tell us very much, does it?" he remarked, as he handed it
back to me.

"Hardly anything."

"And yet the writing is of interest."

"But the writing is not his own."

"Precisely. It is a woman's."

"A man's surely," I cried.

"No, a woman's, and a woman of rare character. You see, at the
commencement of an investigation it is something to know that your
client is in close contact with some one who, for good or evil, has an
exceptional nature. My interest is already awakened in the case. If you
are ready we will start at once for Woking, and see this diplomatist who
is in such evil case, and the lady to whom he dictates his letters."

We were fortunate enough to catch an early train at Waterloo, and in
a little under an hour we found ourselves among the fir-woods and
the heather of Woking. Briarbrae proved to be a large detached house
standing in extensive grounds within a few minutes' walk of the station.
On sending in our cards we were shown into an elegantly appointed
drawing-room, where we were joined in a few minutes by a rather stout
man who received us with much hospitality. His age may have been nearer
forty than thirty, but his cheeks were so ruddy and his eyes so merry
that he still conveyed the impression of a plump and mischievous boy.

"I am so glad that you have come," said he, shaking our hands with
effusion. "Percy has been inquiring for you all morning. Ah, poor old
chap, he clings to any straw! His father and his mother asked me to see
you, for the mere mention of the subject is very painful to them."

"We have had no details yet," observed Holmes. "I perceive that you are
not yourself a member of the family."

Our acquaintance looked surprised, and then, glancing down, he began to
laugh.

"Of course you saw the J H monogram on my locket," said he. "For a
moment I thought you had done something clever. Joseph Harrison is my
name, and as Percy is to marry my sister Annie I shall at least be a
relation by marriage. You will find my sister in his room, for she has
nursed him hand-and-foot this two months back. Perhaps we'd better go in
at once, for I know how impatient he is."

The chamber in which we were shown was on the same floor as the
drawing-room. It was furnished partly as a sitting and partly as a
bedroom, with flowers arranged daintily in every nook and corner. A
young man, very pale and worn, was lying upon a sofa near the open
window, through which came the rich scent of the garden and the balmy
summer air. A woman was sitting beside him, who rose as we entered.

"Shall I leave, Percy?" she asked.

He clutched her hand to detain her. "How are you, Watson?" said he,
cordially. "I should never have known you under that moustache, and I
dare say you would not be prepared to swear to me. This I presume is
your celebrated friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"

I introduced him in a few words, and we both sat down. The stout young
man had left us, but his sister still remained with her hand in that of
the invalid. She was a striking-looking woman, a little short and
thick for symmetry, but with a beautiful olive complexion, large, dark,
Italian eyes, and a wealth of deep black hair. Her rich tints made the
white face of her companion the more worn and haggard by the contrast.

"I won't waste your time," said he, raising himself upon the sofa.
"I'll plunge into the matter without further preamble. I was a happy
and successful man, Mr. Holmes, and on the eve of being married, when a
sudden and dreadful misfortune wrecked all my prospects in life.

"I was, as Watson may have told you, in the Foreign Office, and
through the influences of my uncle, Lord Holdhurst, I rose rapidly to
a responsible position. When my uncle became foreign minister in this
administration he gave me several missions of trust, and as I always
brought them to a successful conclusion, he came at last to have the
utmost confidence in my ability and tact.

"Nearly ten weeks ago--to be more accurate, on the 23d of May--he called
me into his private room, and, after complimenting me on the good work
which I had done, he informed me that he had a new commission of trust
for me to execute.

"'This,' said he, taking a gray roll of paper from his bureau, 'is the
original of that secret treaty between England and Italy of which, I
regret to say, some rumors have already got into the public press. It is
of enormous importance that nothing further should leak out. The French
or the Russian embassy would pay an immense sum to learn the contents
of these papers. They should not leave my bureau were it not that it
is absolutely necessary to have them copied. You have a desk in your
office?"

"'Yes, sir.'

"'Then take the treaty and lock it up there. I shall give directions
that you may remain behind when the others go, so that you may copy
it at your leisure without fear of being overlooked. When you have
finished, relock both the original and the draft in the desk, and hand
them over to me personally to-morrow morning.'

"I took the papers and--"

"Excuse me an instant," said Holmes. "Were you alone during this
conversation?"

"Absolutely."

"In a large room?"

"Thirty feet each way."

"In the centre?"

"Yes, about it."

"And speaking low?"

"My uncle's voice is always remarkably low. I hardly spoke at all."

"Thank you," said Holmes, shutting his eyes; "pray go on."

"I did exactly what he indicated, and waited until the other clerks had
departed. One of them in my room, Charles Gorot, had some arrears
of work to make up, so I left him there and went out to dine. When I
returned he was gone. I was anxious to hurry my work, for I knew that
Joseph--the Mr. Harrison whom you saw just now--was in town, and that he
would travel down to Woking by the eleven-o'clock train, and I wanted if
possible to catch it.

"When I came to examine the treaty I saw at once that it was of such
importance that my uncle had been guilty of no exaggeration in what
he had said. Without going into details, I may say that it defined the
position of Great Britain towards the Triple Alliance, and fore-shadowed
the policy which this country would pursue in the event of the
French fleet gaining a complete ascendancy over that of Italy in the
Mediterranean. The questions treated in it were purely naval. At the end
were the signatures of the high dignitaries who had signed it. I glanced
my eyes over it, and then settled down to my task of copying.

"It was a long document, written in the French language, and containing
twenty-six separate articles. I copied as quickly as I could, but at
nine o'clock I had only done nine articles, and it seemed hopeless for
me to attempt to catch my train. I was feeling drowsy and stupid, partly
from my dinner and also from the effects of a long day's work. A cup of
coffee would clear my brain. A commissionnaire remains all night in a
little lodge at the foot of the stairs, and is in the habit of making
coffee at his spirit-lamp for any of the officials who may be working
over time. I rang the bell, therefore, to summon him.

"To my surprise, it was a woman who answered the summons, a large,
coarse-faced, elderly woman, in an apron. She explained that she was the
commissionnaire's wife, who did the charing, and I gave her the order
for the coffee.

"I wrote two more articles and then, feeling more drowsy than ever, I
rose and walked up and down the room to stretch my legs. My coffee had
not yet come, and I wondered what was the cause of the delay could be.
Opening the door, I started down the corridor to find out. There was a
straight passage, dimly lighted, which led from the room in which I
had been working, and was the only exit from it. It ended in a curving
staircase, with the commissionnaire's lodge in the passage at the
bottom. Half way down this staircase is a small landing, with another
passage running into it at right angles. This second one leads by means
of a second small stair to a side door, used by servants, and also as
a short cut by clerks when coming from Charles Street. Here is a rough
chart of the place."

"Thank you. I think that I quite follow you," said Sherlock Holmes.

"It is of the utmost importance that you should notice this point.
I went down the stairs and into the hall, where I found the
commissionnaire fast asleep in his box, with the kettle boiling
furiously upon the spirit-lamp. I took off the kettle and blew out the
lamp, for the water was spurting over the floor. Then I put out my hand
and was about to shake the man, who was still sleeping soundly, when a
bell over his head rang loudly, and he woke with a start.

"'Mr. Phelps, sir!' said he, looking at me in bewilderment.

"'I came down to see if my coffee was ready.'

"'I was boiling the kettle when I fell asleep, sir.' He looked at me and
then up at the still quivering bell with an ever-growing astonishment
upon his face.

"'If you was here, sir, then who rang the bell?' he asked.

"'The bell!' I cried. 'What bell is it?'

"'It's the bell of the room you were working in.'

"A cold hand seemed to close round my heart. Some one, then, was in that
room where my precious treaty lay upon the table. I ran frantically up
the stair and along the passage. There was no one in the corridors, Mr.
Holmes. There was no one in the room. All was exactly as I left it, save
only that the papers which had been committed to my care had been taken
from the desk on which they lay. The copy was there, and the original
was gone."

Holmes sat up in his chair and rubbed his hands. I could see that the
problem was entirely to his heart. "Pray, what did you do then?" he
murmured.

"I recognized in an instant that the thief must have come up the stairs
from the side door. Of course I must have met him if he had come the
other way."

"You were satisfied that he could not have been concealed in the room
all the time, or in the corridor which you have just described as dimly
lighted?"

"It is absolutely impossible. A rat could not conceal himself either in
the room or the corridor. There is no cover at all."

"Thank you. Pray proceed."

"The commissionnaire, seeing by my pale face that something was to be
feared, had followed me upstairs. Now we both rushed along the corridor
and down the steep steps which led to Charles Street. The door at the
bottom was closed, but unlocked. We flung it open and rushed out. I can
distinctly remember that as we did so there came three chimes from a
neighboring clock. It was quarter to ten."

"That is of enormous importance," said Holmes, making a note upon his
shirt-cuff.

"The night was very dark, and a thin, warm rain was falling. There was
no one in Charles Street, but a great traffic was going on, as usual, in
Whitehall, at the extremity. We rushed along the pavement, bare-headed
as we were, and at the far corner we found a policeman standing.

"'A robbery has been committed,' I gasped. 'A document of immense value
has been stolen from the Foreign Office. Has any one passed this way?'

"'I have been standing here for a quarter of an hour, sir,' said he;
'only one person has passed during that time--a woman, tall and elderly,
with a Paisley shawl.'

"'Ah, that is only my wife,' cried the commissionnaire; 'has no one else
passed?'

"'No one.'

"'Then it must be the other way that the thief took,' cried the fellow,
tugging at my sleeve.

"'But I was not satisfied, and the attempts which he made to draw me
away increased my suspicions.

"'Which way did the woman go?' I cried.

"'I don't know, sir. I noticed her pass, but I had no special reason for
watching her. She seemed to be in a hurry.'

"'How long ago was it?'

"'Oh, not very many minutes.'

"'Within the last five?'

"'Well, it could not be more than five.'

"'You're only wasting your time, sir, and every minute now is of
importance,' cried the commissionnaire; 'take my word for it that my old
woman has nothing to do with it, and come down to the other end of the
street. Well, if you won't, I will.' And with that he rushed off in the
other direction.

"But I was after him in an instant and caught him by the sleeve.

"'Where do you live?' said I.

"'16 Ivy Lane, Brixton,' he answered. 'But don't let yourself be drawn
away upon a false scent, Mr. Phelps. Come to the other end of the street
and let us see if we can hear of anything.'

"Nothing was to be lost by following his advice. With the policeman we
both hurried down, but only to find the street full of traffic, many
people coming and going, but all only too eager to get to a place of
safety upon so wet a night. There was no lounger who could tell us who
had passed.

"Then we returned to the office, and searched the stairs and the passage
without result. The corridor which led to the room was laid down with
a kind of creamy linoleum which shows an impression very easily. We
examined it very carefully, but found no outline of any footmark."

"Had it been raining all evening?"

"Since about seven."

"How is it, then, that the woman who came into the room about nine left
no traces with her muddy boots?"

"I am glad you raised the point. It occurred to me at the time.
The charwomen are in the habit of taking off their boots at the
commissionnaire's office, and putting on list slippers."

"That is very clear. There were no marks, then, though the night was a
wet one? The chain of events is certainly one of extraordinary interest.
What did you do next?

"We examined the room also. There is no possibility of a secret door,
and the windows are quite thirty feet from the ground. Both of them
were fastened on the inside. The carpet prevents any possibility of a
trap-door, and the ceiling is of the ordinary whitewashed kind. I will
pledge my life that whoever stole my papers could only have come through
the door."

"How about the fireplace?"

"They use none. There is a stove. The bell-rope hangs from the wire just
to the right of my desk. Whoever rang it must have come right up to the
desk to do it. But why should any criminal wish to ring the bell? It is
a most insoluble mystery."

"Certainly the incident was unusual. What were your next steps? You
examined the room, I presume, to see if the intruder had left any
traces--any cigar-end or dropped glove or hairpin or other trifle?"

"There was nothing of the sort."

"No smell?"

"Well, we never thought of that."

"Ah, a scent of tobacco would have been worth a great deal to us in such
an investigation."

"I never smoke myself, so I think I should have observed it if there had
been any smell of tobacco. There was absolutely no clue of any kind. The
only tangible fact was that the commissionnaire's wife--Mrs. Tangey was
the name--had hurried out of the place. He could give no explanation
save that it was about the time when the woman always went home. The
policeman and I agreed that our best plan would be to seize the woman
before she could get rid of the papers, presuming that she had them.

"The alarm had reached Scotland Yard by this time, and Mr. Forbes, the
detective, came round at once and took up the case with a great deal of
energy. We hired a hansom, and in half an hour we were at the address
which had been given to us. A young woman opened the door, who proved to
be Mrs. Tangey's eldest daughter. Her mother had not come back yet, and
we were shown into the front room to wait.

"About ten minutes later a knock came at the door, and here we made the
one serious mistake for which I blame myself. Instead of opening the
door ourselves, we allowed the girl to do so. We heard her say, 'Mother,
there are two men in the house waiting to see you,' and an instant
afterwards we heard the patter of feet rushing down the passage. Forbes
flung open the door, and we both ran into the back room or kitchen, but
the woman had got there before us. She stared at us with defiant
eyes, and then, suddenly recognizing me, an expression of absolute
astonishment came over her face.

"'Why, if it isn't Mr. Phelps, of the office!' she cried.

"'Come, come, who did you think we were when you ran away from us?'
asked my companion.

"'I thought you were the brokers,' said she, 'we have had some trouble
with a tradesman.'

"'That's not quite good enough,' answered Forbes. 'We have reason to
believe that you have taken a paper of importance from the Foreign
Office, and that you ran in here to dispose of it. You must come back
with us to Scotland Yard to be searched.'

"It was in vain that she protested and resisted. A four-wheeler was
brought, and we all three drove back in it. We had first made an
examination of the kitchen, and especially of the kitchen fire, to see
whether she might have made away with the papers during the instant that
she was alone. There were no signs, however, of any ashes or scraps.
When we reached Scotland Yard she was handed over at once to the female
searcher. I waited in an agony of suspense until she came back with her
report. There were no signs of the papers.

"Then for the first time the horror of my situation came in its full
force. Hitherto I had been acting, and action had numbed thought. I had
been so confident of regaining the treaty at once that I had not dared
to think of what would be the consequence if I failed to do so. But
now there was nothing more to be done, and I had leisure to realize
my position. It was horrible. Watson there would tell you that I was a
nervous, sensitive boy at school. It is my nature. I thought of my uncle
and of his colleagues in the Cabinet, of the shame which I had brought
upon him, upon myself, upon every one connected with me. What though I
was the victim of an extraordinary accident? No allowance is made
for accidents where diplomatic interests are at stake. I was ruined,
shamefully, hopelessly ruined. I don't know what I did. I fancy I must
have made a scene. I have a dim recollection of a group of officials who
crowded round me, endeavoring to soothe me. One of them drove down with
me to Waterloo, and saw me into the Woking train. I believe that he
would have come all the way had it not been that Dr. Ferrier, who lives
near me, was going down by that very train. The doctor most kindly took
charge of me, and it was well he did so, for I had a fit in the station,
and before we reached home I was practically a raving maniac.

"You can imagine the state of things here when they were roused from
their beds by the doctor's ringing and found me in this condition. Poor
Annie here and my mother were broken-hearted. Dr. Ferrier had just heard
enough from the detective at the station to be able to give an idea of
what had happened, and his story did not mend matters. It was evident to
all that I was in for a long illness, so Joseph was bundled out of this
cheery bedroom, and it was turned into a sick-room for me. Here I have
lain, Mr. Holmes, for over nine weeks, unconscious, and raving with
brain-fever. If it had not been for Miss Harrison here and for the
doctor's care I should not be speaking to you now. She has nursed me by
day and a hired nurse has looked after me by night, for in my mad fits
I was capable of anything. Slowly my reason has cleared, but it is only
during the last three days that my memory has quite returned. Sometimes
I wish that it never had. The first thing that I did was to wire to
Mr. Forbes, who had the case in hand. He came out, and assures me that,
though everything has been done, no trace of a clue has been discovered.
The commissionnaire and his wife have been examined in every way without
any light being thrown upon the matter. The suspicions of the police
then rested upon young Gorot, who, as you may remember, stayed over time
in the office that night. His remaining behind and his French name were
really the only two points which could suggest suspicion; but, as a
matter of fact, I did not begin work until he had gone, and his people
are of Huguenot extraction, but as English in sympathy and tradition as
you and I are. Nothing was found to implicate him in any way, and there
the matter dropped. I turn to you, Mr. Holmes, as absolutely my last
hope. If you fail me, then my honor as well as my position are forever
forfeited."

The invalid sank back upon his cushions, tired out by this long recital,
while his nurse poured him out a glass of some stimulating medicine.
Holmes sat silently, with his head thrown back and his eyes closed, in
an attitude which might seem listless to a stranger, but which I knew
betokened the most intense self-absorption.

"You statement has been so explicit," said he at last, "that you have
really left me very few questions to ask. There is one of the very
utmost importance, however. Did you tell any one that you had this
special task to perform?"

"No one."

"Not Miss Harrison here, for example?"

"No. I had not been back to Woking between getting the order and
executing the commission."

"And none of your people had by chance been to see you?"

"None."

"Did any of them know their way about in the office?"

"Oh, yes, all of them had been shown over it."

"Still, of course, if you said nothing to any one about the treaty these
inquiries are irrelevant."

"I said nothing."

"Do you know anything of the commissionnaire?"

"Nothing except that he is an old soldier."

"What regiment?"

"Oh, I have heard--Coldstream Guards."

"Thank you. I have no doubt I can get details from Forbes. The
authorities are excellent at amassing facts, though they do not always
use them to advantage. What a lovely thing a rose is!"

He walked past the couch to the open window, and held up the drooping
stalk of a moss-rose, looking down at the dainty blend of crimson and
green. It was a new phase of his character to me, for I had never before
seen him show any keen interest in natural objects.

"There is nothing in which deduction is so necessary as in religion,"
said he, leaning with his back against the shutters. "It can be built
up as an exact science by the reasoner. Our highest assurance of the
goodness of Providence seems to me to rest in the flowers. All other
things, our powers our desires, our food, are all really necessary for
our existence in the first instance. But this rose is an extra. Its
smell and its color are an embellishment of life, not a condition of it.
It is only goodness which gives extras, and so I say again that we have
much to hope from the flowers."

Percy Phelps and his nurse looked at Holmes during this demonstration
with surprise and a good deal of disappointment written upon their
faces. He had fallen into a reverie, with the moss-rose between his
fingers. It had lasted some minutes before the young lady broke in upon
it.

"Do you see any prospect of solving this mystery, Mr. Holmes?" she
asked, with a touch of asperity in her voice.

"Oh, the mystery!" he answered, coming back with a start to the
realities of life. "Well, it would be absurd to deny that the case is
a very abstruse and complicated one, but I can promise you that I will
look into the matter and let you know any points which may strike me."

"Do you see any clue?"

"You have furnished me with seven, but, of course, I must test them
before I can pronounce upon their value."

"You suspect some one?"

"I suspect myself."

"What!"

"Of coming to conclusions too rapidly."

"Then go to London and test your conclusions."

"Your advice is very excellent, Miss Harrison," said Holmes, rising. "I
think, Watson, we cannot do better. Do not allow yourself to indulge in
false hopes, Mr. Phelps. The affair is a very tangled one."

"I shall be in a fever until I see you again," cried the diplomatist.

"Well, I'll come out by the same train to-morrow, though it's more than
likely that my report will be a negative one."

"God bless you for promising to come," cried our client. "It gives me
fresh life to know that something is being done. By the way, I have had
a letter from Lord Holdhurst."

"Ha! What did he say?"

"He was cold, but not harsh. I dare say my severe illness prevented
him from being that. He repeated that the matter was of the utmost
importance, and added that no steps would be taken about my future--by
which he means, of course, my dismissal--until my health was restored
and I had an opportunity of repairing my misfortune."

"Well, that was reasonable and considerate," said Holmes. "Come, Watson,
for we have a good day's work before us in town."

Mr. Joseph Harrison drove us down to the station, and we were soon
whirling up in a Portsmouth train. Holmes was sunk in profound thought,
and hardly opened his mouth until we had passed Clapham Junction.

"It's a very cheery thing to come into London by any of these lines
which run high, and allow you to look down upon the houses like this."

I thought he was joking, for the view was sordid enough, but he soon
explained himself.

"Look at those big, isolated clumps of building rising up above the
slates, like brick islands in a lead-colored sea."

"The board-schools."

"Light-houses, my boy! Beacons of the future! Capsules with hundreds of
bright little seeds in each, out of which will spring the wise, better
England of the future. I suppose that man Phelps does not drink?"

"I should not think so."

"Nor should I, but we are bound to take every possibility into account.
The poor devil has certainly got himself into very deep water, and it's
a question whether we shall ever be able to get him ashore. What did you
think of Miss Harrison?"

"A girl of strong character."

"Yes, but she is a good sort, or I am mistaken. She and her brother are
the only children of an iron-master somewhere up Northumberland way. He
got engaged to her when traveling last winter, and she came down to
be introduced to his people, with her brother as escort. Then came
the smash, and she stayed on to nurse her lover, while brother Joseph,
finding himself pretty snug, stayed on too. I've been making a few
independent inquiries, you see. But to-day must be a day of inquiries."

"My practice--" I began.

"Oh, if you find your own cases more interesting than mine--" said
Holmes, with some asperity.

"I was going to say that my practice could get along very well for a day
or two, since it is the slackest time in the year."

"Excellent," said he, recovering his good-humor. "Then we'll look into
this matter together. I think that we should begin by seeing Forbes.
He can probably tell us all the details we want until we know from what
side the case is to be approached."

"You said you had a clue?"

"Well, we have several, but we can only test their value by further
inquiry. The most difficult crime to track is the one which is
purposeless. Now this is not purposeless. Who is it who profits by it?
There is the French ambassador, there is the Russian, there is whoever
might sell it to either of these, and there is Lord Holdhurst."

"Lord Holdhurst!"

"Well, it is just conceivable that a statesman might find himself in
a position where he was not sorry to have such a document accidentally
destroyed."

"Not a statesman with the honorable record of Lord Holdhurst?"

"It is a possibility and we cannot afford to disregard it. We shall see
the noble lord to-day and find out if he can tell us anything. Meanwhile
I have already set inquiries on foot."

"Already?"

"Yes, I sent wires from Woking station to every evening paper in London.
This advertisement will appear in each of them."

He handed over a sheet torn from a note-book. On it was scribbled in
pencil: "L10 reward. The number of the cab which dropped a fare at or
about the door of the Foreign Office in Charles Street at quarter to ten
in the evening of May 23d. Apply 221 B, Baker Street."

"You are confident that the thief came in a cab?"

"If not, there is no harm done. But if Mr. Phelps is correct in stating
that there is no hiding-place either in the room or the corridors, then
the person must have come from outside. If he came from outside on so
wet a night, and yet left no trace of damp upon the linoleum, which
was examined within a few minutes of his passing, then it is exceeding
probable that he came in a cab. Yes, I think that we may safely deduce a
cab."

"It sounds plausible."

"That is one of the clues of which I spoke. It may lead us to something.
And then, of course, there is the bell--which is the most distinctive
feature of the case. Why should the bell ring? Was it the thief who did
it out of bravado? Or was it some one who was with the thief who did it
in order to prevent the crime? Or was it an accident? Or was it--?" He
sank back into the state of intense and silent thought from which he
had emerged; but it seemed to me, accustomed as I was to his every mood,
that some new possibility had dawned suddenly upon him.

It was twenty past three when we reached our terminus, and after a hasty
luncheon at the buffet we pushed on at once to Scotland Yard. Holmes
had already wired to Forbes, and we found him waiting to receive us--a
small, foxy man with a sharp but by no means amiable expression. He
was decidedly frigid in his manner to us, especially when he heard the
errand upon which we had come.

"I've heard of your methods before now, Mr. Holmes," said he, tartly.
"You are ready enough to use all the information that the police can lay
at your disposal, and then you try to finish the case yourself and bring
discredit on them."

"On the contrary," said Holmes, "out of my last fifty-three cases my
name has only appeared in four, and the police have had all the credit
in forty-nine. I don't blame you for not knowing this, for you are young
and inexperienced, but if you wish to get on in your new duties you will
work with me and not against me."

"I'd be very glad of a hint or two," said the detective, changing his
manner. "I've certainly had no credit from the case so far."

"What steps have you taken?"

"Tangey, the commissionnaire, has been shadowed. He left the Guards with
a good character and we can find nothing against him. His wife is a bad
lot, though. I fancy she knows more about this than appears."

"Have you shadowed her?"

"We have set one of our women on to her. Mrs. Tangey drinks, and our
woman has been with her twice when she was well on, but she could get
nothing out of her."

"I understand that they have had brokers in the house?"

"Yes, but they were paid off."

"Where did the money come from?"

"That was all right. His pension was due. They have not shown any sign
of being in funds."

"What explanation did she give of having answered the bell when Mr.
Phelps rang for the coffee?"

"She said that her husband was very tired and she wished to relieve him."

"Well, certainly that would agree with his being found a little later
asleep in his chair. There is nothing against them then but the woman's
character. Did you ask her why she hurried away that night? Her haste
attracted the attention of the police constable."

"She was later than usual and wanted to get home."

"Did you point out to her that you and Mr. Phelps, who started at least
twenty minutes after her, got home before her?"

"She explains that by the difference between a 'bus and a hansom."

"Did she make it clear why, on reaching her house, she ran into the back
kitchen?"

"Because she had the money there with which to pay off the brokers."

"She has at least an answer for everything. Did you ask her whether in
leaving she met any one or saw any one loitering about Charles Street?"

"She saw no one but the constable."

"Well, you seem to have cross-examined her pretty thoroughly. What else
have you done?"

"The clerk Gorot has been shadowed all these nine weeks, but without
result. We can show nothing against him."

"Anything else?"

"Well, we have nothing else to go upon--no evidence of any kind."

"Have you formed a theory about how that bell rang?"

"Well, I must confess that it beats me. It was a cool hand, whoever it
was, to go and give the alarm like that."

"Yes, it was a queer thing to do. Many thanks to you for what you have
told me. If I can put the man into your hands you shall hear from me.
Come along, Watson."

"Where are we going to now?" I asked, as we left the office.

"We are now going to interview Lord Holdhurst, the cabinet minister and
future premier of England."

We were fortunate in finding that Lord Holdhurst was still in his
chambers in Downing Street, and on Holmes sending in his card we were
instantly shown up. The statesman received us with that old-fashioned
courtesy for which he is remarkable, and seated us on the two luxuriant
lounges on either side of the fireplace. Standing on the rug between us,
with his slight, tall figure, his sharp features, thoughtful face, and
curling hair prematurely tinged with gray, he seemed to represent that
not too common type, a nobleman who is in truth noble.

"Your name is very familiar to me, Mr. Holmes," said he, smiling. "And,
of course, I cannot pretend to be ignorant of the object of your visit.
There has only been one occurrence in these offices which could call for
your attention. In whose interest are you acting, may I ask?"

"In that of Mr. Percy Phelps," answered Holmes.

"Ah, my unfortunate nephew! You can understand that our kinship makes
it the more impossible for me to screen him in any way. I fear that the
incident must have a very prejudicial effect upon his career."

"But if the document is found?"

"Ah, that, of course, would be different."

"I had one or two questions which I wished to ask you, Lord Holdhurst."

"I shall be happy to give you any information in my power."

"Was it in this room that you gave your instructions as to the copying
of the document?"

"It was."

"Then you could hardly have been overheard?"

"It is out of the question."

"Did you ever mention to any one that it was your intention to give any
one the treaty to be copied?"

"Never."

"You are certain of that?"

"Absolutely."

"Well, since you never said so, and Mr. Phelps never said so, and nobody
else knew anything of the matter, then the thief's presence in the room
was purely accidental. He saw his chance and he took it."

The statesman smiled. "You take me out of my province there," said he.

Holmes considered for a moment. "There is another very important
point which I wish to discuss with you," said he. "You feared, as I
understand, that very grave results might follow from the details of
this treaty becoming known."

A shadow passed over the expressive face of the statesman. "Very grave
results indeed."

"And have they occurred?"

"Not yet."

"If the treaty had reached, let us say, the French or Russian Foreign
Office, you would expect to hear of it?"

"I should," said Lord Holdhurst, with a wry face.

"Since nearly ten weeks have elapsed, then, and nothing has been heard,
it is not unfair to suppose that for some reason the treaty has not
reached them."

Lord Holdhurst shrugged his shoulders.

"We can hardly suppose, Mr. Holmes, that the thief took the treaty in
order to frame it and hang it up."

"Perhaps he is waiting for a better price."

"If he waits a little longer he will get no price at all. The treaty
will cease to be secret in a few months."

"That is most important," said Holmes. "Of course, it is a possible
supposition that the thief has had a sudden illness--"

"An attack of brain-fever, for example?" asked the statesman, flashing a
swift glance at him.

"I did not say so," said Holmes, imperturbably. "And now, Lord
Holdhurst, we have already taken up too much of your valuable time, and
we shall wish you good-day."

"Every success to your investigation, be the criminal who it may,"
answered the nobleman, as he bowed us out the door.

"He's a fine fellow," said Holmes, as we came out into Whitehall. "But
he has a struggle to keep up his position. He is far from rich and has
many calls. You noticed, of course, that his boots had been resoled.
Now, Watson, I won't detain you from your legitimate work any longer.
I shall do nothing more to-day, unless I have an answer to my cab
advertisement. But I should be extremely obliged to you if you would
come down with me to Woking to-morrow, by the same train which we took
yesterday."


I met him accordingly next morning and we traveled down to Woking
together. He had had no answer to his advertisement, he said, and no
fresh light had been thrown upon the case. He had, when he so willed
it, the utter immobility of countenance of a red Indian, and I could
not gather from his appearance whether he was satisfied or not with
the position of the case. His conversation, I remember, was about the
Bertillon system of measurements, and he expressed his enthusiastic
admiration of the French savant.

We found our client still under the charge of his devoted nurse, but
looking considerably better than before. He rose from the sofa and
greeted us without difficulty when we entered.

"Any news?" he asked, eagerly.

"My report, as I expected, is a negative one," said Holmes. "I have seen
Forbes, and I have seen your uncle, and I have set one or two trains of
inquiry upon foot which may lead to something."

"You have not lost heart, then?"

"By no means."

"God bless you for saying that!" cried Miss Harrison. "If we keep our
courage and our patience the truth must come out."

"We have more to tell you than you have for us," said Phelps, reseating
himself upon the couch.

"I hoped you might have something."

"Yes, we have had an adventure during the night, and one which might
have proved to be a serious one." His expression grew very grave as he
spoke, and a look of something akin to fear sprang up in his eyes. "Do
you know," said he, "that I begin to believe that I am the unconscious
centre of some monstrous conspiracy, and that my life is aimed at as
well as my honor?"

"Ah!" cried Holmes.

"It sounds incredible, for I have not, as far as I know, an enemy in
the world. Yet from last night's experience I can come to no other
conclusion."

"Pray let me hear it."

"You must know that last night was the very first night that I have ever
slept without a nurse in the room. I was so much better that I thought
I could dispense with one. I had a night-light burning, however. Well,
about two in the morning I had sunk into a light sleep when I was
suddenly aroused by a slight noise. It was like the sound which a mouse
makes when it is gnawing a plank, and I lay listening to it for some
time under the impression that it must come from that cause. Then it
grew louder, and suddenly there came from the window a sharp metallic
snick. I sat up in amazement. There could be no doubt what the sounds
were now. The first ones had been caused by some one forcing an
instrument through the slit between the sashes, and the second by the
catch being pressed back.

"There was a pause then for about ten minutes, as if the person were
waiting to see whether the noise had awakened me. Then I heard a gentle
creaking as the window was very slowly opened. I could stand it no
longer, for my nerves are not what they used to be. I sprang out of bed
and flung open the shutters. A man was crouching at the window. I could
see little of him, for he was gone like a flash. He was wrapped in some
sort of cloak which came across the lower part of his face. One thing
only I am sure of, and that is that he had some weapon in his hand. It
looked to me like a long knife. I distinctly saw the gleam of it as he
turned to run."

"This is most interesting," said Holmes. "Pray what did you do then?"

"I should have followed him through the open window if I had been
stronger. As it was, I rang the bell and roused the house. It took me
some little time, for the bell rings in the kitchen and the servants all
sleep upstairs. I shouted, however, and that brought Joseph down, and he
roused the others. Joseph and the groom found marks on the bed outside
the window, but the weather has been so dry lately that they found it
hopeless to follow the trail across the grass. There's a place, however,
on the wooden fence which skirts the road which shows signs, they tell
me, as if some one had got over, and had snapped the top of the rail in
doing so. I have said nothing to the local police yet, for I thought I
had best have your opinion first."

This tale of our client's appeared to have an extraordinary effect upon
Sherlock Holmes. He rose from his chair and paced about the room in
uncontrollable excitement.

"Misfortunes never come single," said Phelps, smiling, though it was
evident that his adventure had somewhat shaken him.

"You have certainly had your share," said Holmes. "Do you think you
could walk round the house with me?"

"Oh, yes, I should like a little sunshine. Joseph will come, too."

"And I also," said Miss Harrison.

"I am afraid not," said Holmes, shaking his head. "I think I must ask
you to remain sitting exactly where you are."

The young lady resumed her seat with an air of displeasure. Her brother,
however, had joined us and we set off all four together. We passed round
the lawn to the outside of the young diplomatist's window. There were,
as he had said, marks upon the bed, but they were hopelessly blurred and
vague. Holmes stopped over them for an instant, and then rose shrugging
his shoulders.

"I don't think any one could make much of this," said he. "Let us go
round the house and see why this particular room was chosen by the
burglar. I should have thought those larger windows of the drawing-room
and dining-room would have had more attractions for him."

"They are more visible from the road," suggested Mr. Joseph Harrison.

"Ah, yes, of course. There is a door here which he might have attempted.
What is it for?"

"It is the side entrance for trades-people. Of course it is locked at
night."

"Have you ever had an alarm like this before?"

"Never," said our client.

"Do you keep plate in the house, or anything to attract burglars?"

"Nothing of value."

Holmes strolled round the house with his hands in his pockets and a
negligent air which was unusual with him.

"By the way," said he to Joseph Harrison, "you found some place, I
understand, where the fellow scaled the fence. Let us have a look at
that!"

The plump young man led us to a spot where the top of one of the wooden
rails had been cracked. A small fragment of the wood was hanging down.
Holmes pulled it off and examined it critically.

"Do you think that was done last night? It looks rather old, does it
not?"

"Well, possibly so."

"There are no marks of any one jumping down upon the other side. No, I
fancy we shall get no help here. Let us go back to the bedroom and talk
the matter over."

Percy Phelps was walking very slowly, leaning upon the arm of his future
brother-in-law. Holmes walked swiftly across the lawn, and we were at
the open window of the bedroom long before the others came up.

"Miss Harrison," said Holmes, speaking with the utmost intensity of
manner, "you must stay where you are all day. Let nothing prevent you
from staying where you are all day. It is of the utmost importance."

"Certainly, if you wish it, Mr. Holmes," said the girl in astonishment.

"When you go to bed lock the door of this room on the outside and keep
the key. Promise to do this."

"But Percy?"

"He will come to London with us."

"And am I to remain here?"

"It is for his sake. You can serve him. Quick! Promise!"

She gave a quick nod of assent just as the other two came up.

"Why do you sit moping there, Annie?" cried her brother. "Come out into
the sunshine!"

"No, thank you, Joseph. I have a slight headache and this room is
deliciously cool and soothing."

"What do you propose now, Mr. Holmes?" asked our client.

"Well, in investigating this minor affair we must not lose sight of our
main inquiry. It would be a very great help to me if you would come up
to London with us."

"At once?"

"Well, as soon as you conveniently can. Say in an hour."

"I feel quite strong enough, if I can really be of any help."

"The greatest possible."

"Perhaps you would like me to stay there to-night?"

"I was just going to propose it."

"Then, if my friend of the night comes to revisit me, he will find the
bird flown. We are all in your hands, Mr. Holmes, and you must tell us
exactly what you would like done. Perhaps you would prefer that Joseph
came with us so as to look after me?"

"Oh, no; my friend Watson is a medical man, you know, and he'll look
after you. We'll have our lunch here, if you will permit us, and then we
shall all three set off for town together."

It was arranged as he suggested, though Miss Harrison excused herself
from leaving the bedroom, in accordance with Holmes's suggestion. What
the object of my friend's manoeuvres was I could not conceive, unless it
were to keep the lady away from Phelps, who, rejoiced by his
returning health and by the prospect of action, lunched with us in the
dining-room. Holmes had a still more startling surprise for us, however,
for, after accompanying us down to the station and seeing us into
our carriage, he calmly announced that he had no intention of leaving
Woking.

"There are one or two small points which I should desire to clear up
before I go," said he. "Your absence, Mr. Phelps, will in some ways
rather assist me. Watson, when you reach London you would oblige me by
driving at once to Baker Street with our friend here, and remaining
with him until I see you again. It is fortunate that you are old
school-fellows, as you must have much to talk over. Mr. Phelps can
have the spare bedroom to-night, and I will be with you in time for
breakfast, for there is a train which will take me into Waterloo at
eight."

"But how about our investigation in London?" asked Phelps, ruefully.

"We can do that to-morrow. I think that just at present I can be of more
immediate use here."

"You might tell them at Briarbrae that I hope to be back to-morrow
night," cried Phelps, as we began to move from the platform.

"I hardly expect to go back to Briarbrae," answered Holmes, and waved
his hand to us cheerily as we shot out from the station.

Phelps and I talked it over on our journey, but neither of us could
devise a satisfactory reason for this new development.

"I suppose he wants to find out some clue as to the burglary last night,
if a burglar it was. For myself, I don't believe it was an ordinary
thief."

"What is your own idea, then?"

"Upon my word, you may put it down to my weak nerves or not, but I
believe there is some deep political intrigue going on around me, and
that for some reason that passes my understanding my life is aimed at
by the conspirators. It sounds high-flown and absurd, but consider the
facts! Why should a thief try to break in at a bedroom window, where
there could be no hope of any plunder, and why should he come with a
long knife in his hand?"

"You are sure it was not a house-breaker's jimmy?"

"Oh, no, it was a knife. I saw the flash of the blade quite distinctly."

"But why on earth should you be pursued with such animosity?"

"Ah, that is the question."

"Well, if Holmes takes the same view, that would account for his action,
would it not? Presuming that your theory is correct, if he can lay his
hands upon the man who threatened you last night he will have gone a
long way towards finding who took the naval treaty. It is absurd to
suppose that you have two enemies, one of whom robs you, while the other
threatens your life."

"But Holmes said that he was not going to Briarbrae."

"I have known him for some time," said I, "but I never knew him do
anything yet without a very good reason," and with that our conversation
drifted off on to other topics.

But it was a weary day for me. Phelps was still weak after his long
illness, and his misfortune made him querulous and nervous. In vain
I endeavored to interest him in Afghanistan, in India, in social
questions, in anything which might take his mind out of the groove.
He would always come back to his lost treaty, wondering, guessing,
speculating, as to what Holmes was doing, what steps Lord Holdhurst was
taking, what news we should have in the morning. As the evening wore on
his excitement became quite painful.

"You have implicit faith in Holmes?" he asked.

"I have seen him do some remarkable things."

"But he never brought light into anything quite so dark as this?"

"Oh, yes; I have known him solve questions which presented fewer clues
than yours."

"But not where such large interests are at stake?"

"I don't know that. To my certain knowledge he has acted on behalf of
three of the reigning houses of Europe in very vital matters."

"But you know him well, Watson. He is such an inscrutable fellow that I
never quite know what to make of him. Do you think he is hopeful? Do you
think he expects to make a success of it?"

"He has said nothing."

"That is a bad sign."

"On the contrary, I have noticed that when he is off the trail he
generally says so. It is when he is on a scent and is not quite
absolutely sure yet that it is the right one that he is most taciturn.
Now, my dear fellow, we can't help matters by making ourselves nervous
about them, so let me implore you to go to bed and so be fresh for
whatever may await us to-morrow."

I was able at last to persuade my companion to take my advice, though I
knew from his excited manner that there was not much hope of sleep for
him. Indeed, his mood was infectious, for I lay tossing half the night
myself, brooding over this strange problem, and inventing a hundred
theories, each of which was more impossible than the last. Why had
Holmes remained at Woking? Why had he asked Miss Harrison to remain
in the sick-room all day? Why had he been so careful not to inform the
people at Briarbrae that he intended to remain near them? I cudgelled
my brains until I fell asleep in the endeavor to find some explanation
which would cover all these facts.

It was seven o'clock when I awoke, and I set off at once for Phelps's
room, to find him haggard and spent after a sleepless night. His first
question was whether Holmes had arrived yet.

"He'll be here when he promised," said I, "and not an instant sooner or
later."

And my words were true, for shortly after eight a hansom dashed up to
the door and our friend got out of it. Standing in the window we saw
that his left hand was swathed in a bandage and that his face was very
grim and pale. He entered the house, but it was some little time before
he came upstairs.

"He looks like a beaten man," cried Phelps.

I was forced to confess that he was right. "After all," said I, "the
clue of the matter lies probably here in town."

Phelps gave a groan.

"I don't know how it is," said he, "but I had hoped for so much from his
return. But surely his hand was not tied up like that yesterday. What
can be the matter?"

"You are not wounded, Holmes?" I asked, as my friend entered the room.

"Tut, it is only a scratch through my own clumsiness," he answered,
nodding his good-mornings to us. "This case of yours, Mr. Phelps, is
certainly one of the darkest which I have ever investigated."

"I feared that you would find it beyond you."

"It has been a most remarkable experience."

"That bandage tells of adventures," said I. "Won't you tell us what has
happened?"

"After breakfast, my dear Watson. Remember that I have breathed thirty
miles of Surrey air this morning. I suppose that there has been no
answer from my cabman advertisement? Well, well, we cannot expect to
score every time."

The table was all laid, and just as I was about to ring Mrs. Hudson
entered with the tea and coffee. A few minutes later she brought in
three covers, and we all drew up to the table, Holmes ravenous, I
curious, and Phelps in the gloomiest state of depression.

"Mrs. Hudson has risen to the occasion," said Holmes, uncovering a dish
of curried chicken. "Her cuisine is a little limited, but she has
as good an idea of breakfast as a Scotch-woman. What have you here,
Watson?"

"Ham and eggs," I answered.

"Good! What are you going to take, Mr. Phelps--curried fowl or eggs, or
will you help yourself?"

"Thank you. I can eat nothing," said Phelps.

"Oh, come! Try the dish before you."

"Thank you, I would really rather not."

"Well, then," said Holmes, with a mischievous twinkle, "I suppose that
you have no objection to helping me?"

Phelps raised the cover, and as he did so he uttered a scream, and sat
there staring with a face as white as the plate upon which he looked.
Across the centre of it was lying a little cylinder of blue-gray paper.
He caught it up, devoured it with his eyes, and then danced madly about
the room, pressing it to his bosom and shrieking out in his delight.
Then he fell back into an arm-chair so limp and exhausted with his own
emotions that we had to pour brandy down his throat to keep him from
fainting.

"There! there!" said Holmes, soothing, patting him upon the shoulder.
"It was too bad to spring it on you like this, but Watson here will tell
you that I never can resist a touch of the dramatic."

Phelps seized his hand and kissed it. "God bless you!" he cried. "You
have saved my honor."

"Well, my own was at stake, you know," said Holmes. "I assure you it is
just as hateful to me to fail in a case as it can be to you to blunder
over a commission."

Phelps thrust away the precious document into the innermost pocket of
his coat.

"I have not the heart to interrupt your breakfast any further, and yet I
am dying to know how you got it and where it was."

Sherlock Holmes swallowed a cup of coffee, and turned his attention to
the ham and eggs. Then he rose, lit his pipe, and settled himself down
into his chair.

"I'll tell you what I did first, and how I came to do it afterwards,"
said he. "After leaving you at the station I went for a charming walk
through some admirable Surrey scenery to a pretty little village called
Ripley, where I had my tea at an inn, and took the precaution of filling
my flask and of putting a paper of sandwiches in my pocket. There I
remained until evening, when I set off for Woking again, and found
myself in the high-road outside Briarbrae just after sunset.

"Well, I waited until the road was clear--it is never a very frequented
one at any time, I fancy--and then I clambered over the fence into the
grounds."

"Surely the gate was open!" ejaculated Phelps.

"Yes, but I have a peculiar taste in these matters. I chose the place
where the three fir-trees stand, and behind their screen I got over
without the least chance of any one in the house being able to see me.
I crouched down among the bushes on the other side, and crawled from one
to the other--witness the disreputable state of my trouser knees--until
I had reached the clump of rhododendrons just opposite to your bedroom
window. There I squatted down and awaited developments.

"The blind was not down in your room, and I could see Miss Harrison
sitting there reading by the table. It was quarter-past ten when she
closed her book, fastened the shutters, and retired.

"I heard her shut the door, and felt quite sure that she had turned the
key in the lock."

"The key!" ejaculated Phelps.

"Yes; I had given Miss Harrison instructions to lock the door on the
outside and take the key with her when she went to bed. She carried out
every one of my injunctions to the letter, and certainly without her
cooperation you would not have that paper in you coat-pocket. She
departed then and the lights went out, and I was left squatting in the
rhododendron-bush.

"The night was fine, but still it was a very weary vigil. Of course it
has the sort of excitement about it that the sportsman feels when he
lies beside the water-course and waits for the big game. It was very
long, though--almost as long, Watson, as when you and I waited in that
deadly room when we looked into the little problem of the Speckled Band.
There was a church-clock down at Woking which struck the quarters, and I
thought more than once that it had stopped. At last however about two
in the morning, I suddenly heard the gentle sound of a bolt being pushed
back and the creaking of a key. A moment later the servants' door was
opened, and Mr. Joseph Harrison stepped out into the moonlight."

"Joseph!" ejaculated Phelps.

"He was bare-headed, but he had a black coat thrown over his shoulder so
that he could conceal his face in an instant if there were any alarm. He
walked on tiptoe under the shadow of the wall, and when he reached the
window he worked a long-bladed knife through the sash and pushed back
the catch. Then he flung open the window, and putting his knife through
the crack in the shutters, he thrust the bar up and swung them open.

"From where I lay I had a perfect view of the inside of the room and of
every one of his movements. He lit the two candles which stood upon the
mantelpiece, and then he proceeded to turn back the corner of the carpet
in the neighborhood of the door. Presently he stopped and picked out a
square piece of board, such as is usually left to enable plumbers to get
at the joints of the gas-pipes. This one covered, as a matter of
fact, the T joint which gives off the pipe which supplies the kitchen
underneath. Out of this hiding-place he drew that little cylinder
of paper, pushed down the board, rearranged the carpet, blew out the
candles, and walked straight into my arms as I stood waiting for him
outside the window.

"Well, he has rather more viciousness than I gave him credit for, has
Master Joseph. He flew at me with his knife, and I had to grasp him
twice, and got a cut over the knuckles, before I had the upper hand of
him. He looked murder out of the only eye he could see with when we had
finished, but he listened to reason and gave up the papers. Having
got them I let my man go, but I wired full particulars to Forbes this
morning. If he is quick enough to catch his bird, well and good. But
if, as I shrewdly suspect, he finds the nest empty before he gets there,
why, all the better for the government. I fancy that Lord Holdhurst for
one, and Mr. Percy Phelps for another, would very much rather that the
affair never got as far as a police-court.

"My God!" gasped our client. "Do you tell me that during these long ten
weeks of agony the stolen papers were within the very room with me all
the time?"

"So it was."

"And Joseph! Joseph a villain and a thief!"

"Hum! I am afraid Joseph's character is a rather deeper and more
dangerous one than one might judge from his appearance. From what I
have heard from him this morning, I gather that he has lost heavily in
dabbling with stocks, and that he is ready to do anything on earth to
better his fortunes. Being an absolutely selfish man, when a chance
presented itself he did not allow either his sister's happiness or your
reputation to hold his hand."

Percy Phelps sank back in his chair. "My head whirls," said he. "Your
words have dazed me."

"The principal difficulty in your case," remarked Holmes, in his
didactic fashion, "lay in the fact of there being too much evidence.
What was vital was overlaid and hidden by what was irrelevant. Of all
the facts which were presented to us we had to pick just those which we
deemed to be essential, and then piece them together in their order, so
as to reconstruct this very remarkable chain of events. I had already
begun to suspect Joseph, from the fact that you had intended to travel
home with him that night, and that therefore it was a likely enough
thing that he should call for you, knowing the Foreign Office well, upon
his way. When I heard that some one had been so anxious to get into the
bedroom, in which no one but Joseph could have concealed anything--you
told us in your narrative how you had turned Joseph out when you arrived
with the doctor--my suspicions all changed to certainties, especially as
the attempt was made on the first night upon which the nurse was absent,
showing that the intruder was well acquainted with the ways of the
house."

"How blind I have been!"

"The facts of the case, as far as I have worked them out, are these:
this Joseph Harrison entered the office through the Charles Street door,
and knowing his way he walked straight into your room the instant after
you left it. Finding no one there he promptly rang the bell, and at
the instant that he did so his eyes caught the paper upon the table.
A glance showed him that chance had put in his way a State document of
immense value, and in an instant he had thrust it into his pocket and
was gone. A few minutes elapsed, as you remember, before the sleepy
commissionnaire drew your attention to the bell, and those were just
enough to give the thief time to make his escape.

"He made his way to Woking by the first train, and having examined his
booty and assured himself that it really was of immense value, he
had concealed it in what he thought was a very safe place, with the
intention of taking it out again in a day or two, and carrying it to the
French embassy, or wherever he thought that a long price was to be
had. Then came your sudden return. He, without a moment's warning, was
bundled out of his room, and from that time onward there were always at
least two of you there to prevent him from regaining his treasure. The
situation to him must have been a maddening one. But at last he thought
he saw his chance. He tried to steal in, but was baffled by your
wakefulness. You remember that you did not take your usual draught that
night."

"I remember."

"I fancy that he had taken steps to make that draught efficacious,
and that he quite relied upon your being unconscious. Of course, I
understood that he would repeat the attempt whenever it could be done
with safety. Your leaving the room gave him the chance he wanted. I kept
Miss Harrison in it all day so that he might not anticipate us. Then,
having given him the idea that the coast was clear, I kept guard as
I have described. I already knew that the papers were probably in the
room, but I had no desire to rip up all the planking and skirting in
search of them. I let him take them, therefore, from the hiding-place,
and so saved myself an infinity of trouble. Is there any other point
which I can make clear?"

"Why did he try the window on the first occasion," I asked, "when he
might have entered by the door?"

"In reaching the door he would have to pass seven bedrooms. On the other
hand, he could get out on to the lawn with ease. Anything else?"

"You do not think," asked Phelps, "that he had any murderous intention?
The knife was only meant as a tool."

"It may be so," answered Holmes, shrugging his shoulders. "I can only
say for certain that Mr. Joseph Harrison is a gentleman to whose mercy I
should be extremely unwilling to trust."




Adventure XI. The Final Problem


It is with a heavy heart that I take up my pen to write these the last
words in which I shall ever record the singular gifts by which my friend
Mr. Sherlock Holmes was distinguished. In an incoherent and, as I deeply
feel, an entirely inadequate fashion, I have endeavored to give some
account of my strange experiences in his company from the chance which
first brought us together at the period of the "Study in Scarlet," up
to the time of his interference in the matter of the "Naval Treaty"--an
interference which had the unquestionable effect of preventing a serious
international complication. It was my intention to have stopped there,
and to have said nothing of that event which has created a void in my
life which the lapse of two years has done little to fill. My hand
has been forced, however, by the recent letters in which Colonel James
Moriarty defends the memory of his brother, and I have no choice but to
lay the facts before the public exactly as they occurred. I alone know
the absolute truth of the matter, and I am satisfied that the time has
come when no good purpose is to be served by its suppression. As far as
I know, there have been only three accounts in the public press: that
in the Journal de Geneve on May 6th, 1891, the Reuter's despatch in the
English papers on May 7th, and finally the recent letter to which I have
alluded. Of these the first and second were extremely condensed, while
the last is, as I shall now show, an absolute perversion of the facts.
It lies with me to tell for the first time what really took place
between Professor Moriarty and Mr. Sherlock Holmes.

It may be remembered that after my marriage, and my subsequent start in
private practice, the very intimate relations which had existed between
Holmes and myself became to some extent modified. He still came to me
from time to time when he desired a companion in his investigation, but
these occasions grew more and more seldom, until I find that in the year
1890 there were only three cases of which I retain any record. During
the winter of that year and the early spring of 1891, I saw in the
papers that he had been engaged by the French government upon a matter
of supreme importance, and I received two notes from Holmes, dated from
Narbonne and from Nimes, from which I gathered that his stay in France
was likely to be a long one. It was with some surprise, therefore, that
I saw him walk into my consulting-room upon the evening of April 24th.
It struck me that he was looking even paler and thinner than usual.

"Yes, I have been using myself up rather too freely," he remarked, in
answer to my look rather than to my words; "I have been a little pressed
of late. Have you any objection to my closing your shutters?"

The only light in the room came from the lamp upon the table at which I
had been reading. Holmes edged his way round the wall and flinging the
shutters together, he bolted them securely.

"You are afraid of something?" I asked.

"Well, I am."

"Of what?"

"Of air-guns."

"My dear Holmes, what do you mean?"

"I think that you know me well enough, Watson, to understand that I am
by no means a nervous man. At the same time, it is stupidity rather than
courage to refuse to recognize danger when it is close upon you. Might
I trouble you for a match?" He drew in the smoke of his cigarette as if
the soothing influence was grateful to him.

"I must apologize for calling so late," said he, "and I must further beg
you to be so unconventional as to allow me to leave your house presently
by scrambling over your back garden wall."

"But what does it all mean?" I asked.

He held out his hand, and I saw in the light of the lamp that two of his
knuckles were burst and bleeding.

"It is not an airy nothing, you see," said he, smiling. "On the
contrary, it is solid enough for a man to break his hand over. Is Mrs.
Watson in?"

"She is away upon a visit."

"Indeed! You are alone?"

"Quite."

"Then it makes it the easier for me to propose that you should come away
with me for a week to the Continent."

"Where?"

"Oh, anywhere. It's all the same to me."

There was something very strange in all this. It was not Holmes's nature
to take an aimless holiday, and something about his pale, worn face told
me that his nerves were at their highest tension. He saw the question in
my eyes, and, putting his finger-tips together and his elbows upon his
knees, he explained the situation.

"You have probably never heard of Professor Moriarty?" said he.

"Never."

"Aye, there's the genius and the wonder of the thing!" he cried. "The
man pervades London, and no one has heard of him. That's what puts
him on a pinnacle in the records of crime. I tell you, Watson, in all
seriousness, that if I could beat that man, if I could free society
of him, I should feel that my own career had reached its summit, and
I should be prepared to turn to some more placid line in life. Between
ourselves, the recent cases in which I have been of assistance to the
royal family of Scandinavia, and to the French republic, have left me in
such a position that I could continue to live in the quiet fashion
which is most congenial to me, and to concentrate my attention upon my
chemical researches. But I could not rest, Watson, I could not sit quiet
in my chair, if I thought that such a man as Professor Moriarty were
walking the streets of London unchallenged."

"What has he done, then?"

"His career has been an extraordinary one. He is a man of good birth and
excellent education, endowed by nature with a phenomenal mathematical
faculty. At the age of twenty-one he wrote a treatise upon the Binomial
Theorem, which has had a European vogue. On the strength of it he won
the Mathematical Chair at one of our smaller universities, and had, to
all appearances, a most brilliant career before him. But the man had
hereditary tendencies of the most diabolical kind. A criminal strain
ran in his blood, which, instead of being modified, was increased and
rendered infinitely more dangerous by his extraordinary mental powers.
Dark rumors gathered round him in the university town, and eventually he
was compelled to resign his chair and to come down to London, where he
set up as an army coach. So much is known to the world, but what I am
telling you now is what I have myself discovered.

"As you are aware, Watson, there is no one who knows the higher criminal
world of London so well as I do. For years past I have continually been
conscious of some power behind the malefactor, some deep organizing
power which forever stands in the way of the law, and throws its shield
over the wrong-doer. Again and again in cases of the most varying
sorts--forgery cases, robberies, murders--I have felt the presence of
this force, and I have deduced its action in many of those undiscovered
crimes in which I have not been personally consulted. For years I have
endeavored to break through the veil which shrouded it, and at last
the time came when I seized my thread and followed it, until it led
me, after a thousand cunning windings, to ex-Professor Moriarty of
mathematical celebrity.

"He is the Napoleon of crime, Watson. He is the organizer of half that
is evil and of nearly all that is undetected in this great city. He is a
genius, a philosopher, an abstract thinker. He has a brain of the first
order. He sits motionless, like a spider in the center of its web, but
that web has a thousand radiations, and he knows well every quiver of
each of them. He does little himself. He only plans. But his agents are
numerous and splendidly organized. Is there a crime to be done, a
paper to be abstracted, we will say, a house to be rifled, a man to be
removed--the word is passed to the Professor, the matter is organized
and carried out. The agent may be caught. In that case money is found
for his bail or his defence. But the central power which uses the agent
is never caught--never so much as suspected. This was the organization
which I deduced, Watson, and which I devoted my whole energy to exposing
and breaking up.

"But the Professor was fenced round with safeguards so cunningly devised
that, do what I would, it seemed impossible to get evidence which would
convict in a court of law. You know my powers, my dear Watson, and yet
at the end of three months I was forced to confess that I had at last
met an antagonist who was my intellectual equal. My horror at his crimes
was lost in my admiration at his skill. But at last he made a trip--only
a little, little trip--but it was more than he could afford when I was
so close upon him. I had my chance, and, starting from that point, I
have woven my net round him until now it is all ready to close. In three
days--that is to say, on Monday next--matters will be ripe, and the
Professor, with all the principal members of his gang, will be in the
hands of the police. Then will come the greatest criminal trial of the
century, the clearing up of over forty mysteries, and the rope for all
of them; but if we move at all prematurely, you understand, they may
slip out of our hands even at the last moment.

"Now, if I could have done this without the knowledge of Professor
Moriarty, all would have been well. But he was too wily for that. He saw
every step which I took to draw my toils round him. Again and again
he strove to break away, but I as often headed him off. I tell you,
my friend, that if a detailed account of that silent contest could
be written, it would take its place as the most brilliant bit of
thrust-and-parry work in the history of detection. Never have I risen to
such a height, and never have I been so hard pressed by an opponent. He
cut deep, and yet I just undercut him. This morning the last steps were
taken, and three days only were wanted to complete the business. I was
sitting in my room thinking the matter over, when the door opened and
Professor Moriarty stood before me.

"My nerves are fairly proof, Watson, but I must confess to a start when
I saw the very man who had been so much in my thoughts standing there on
my threshhold. His appearance was quite familiar to me. He is extremely
tall and thin, his forehead domes out in a white curve, and his two
eyes are deeply sunken in his head. He is clean-shaven, pale, and
ascetic-looking, retaining something of the professor in his features.
His shoulders are rounded from much study, and his face protrudes
forward, and is forever slowly oscillating from side to side in a
curiously reptilian fashion. He peered at me with great curiosity in his
puckered eyes.

"'You have less frontal development than I should have expected,' said
he, at last. 'It is a dangerous habit to finger loaded firearms in the
pocket of one's dressing-gown.'

"The fact is that upon his entrance I had instantly recognized the
extreme personal danger in which I lay. The only conceivable escape for
him lay in silencing my tongue. In an instant I had slipped the revolver
from the drawer into my pocket, and was covering him through the cloth.
At his remark I drew the weapon out and laid it cocked upon the table.
He still smiled and blinked, but there was something about his eyes
which made me feel very glad that I had it there.

"'You evidently don't know me,' said he.

"'On the contrary,' I answered, 'I think it is fairly evident that I do.
Pray take a chair. I can spare you five minutes if you have anything to
say.'

"'All that I have to say has already crossed your mind,' said he.

"'Then possibly my answer has crossed yours,' I replied.

"'You stand fast?'

"'Absolutely.'

"He clapped his hand into his pocket, and I raised the pistol from
the table. But he merely drew out a memorandum-book in which he had
scribbled some dates.

"'You crossed my path on the 4th of January,' said he. 'On the 23d you
incommoded me; by the middle of February I was seriously inconvenienced
by you; at the end of March I was absolutely hampered in my plans; and
now, at the close of April, I find myself placed in such a position
through your continual persecution that I am in positive danger of
losing my liberty. The situation is becoming an impossible one.'

"'Have you any suggestion to make?' I asked.

"'You must drop it, Mr. Holmes,' said he, swaying his face about. 'You
really must, you know.'

"'After Monday,' said I.

"'Tut, tut,' said he. 'I am quite sure that a man of your intelligence
will see that there can be but one outcome to this affair. It is
necessary that you should withdraw. You have worked things in such a
fashion that we have only one resource left. It has been an intellectual
treat to me to see the way in which you have grappled with this affair,
and I say, unaffectedly, that it would be a grief to me to be forced
to take any extreme measure. You smile, sir, but I assure you that it
really would.'

"'Danger is part of my trade,' I remarked.

"'That is not danger,' said he. 'It is inevitable destruction. You stand
in the way not merely of an individual, but of a mighty organization,
the full extent of which you, with all your cleverness, have been unable
to realize. You must stand clear, Mr. Holmes, or be trodden under foot.'

"'I am afraid,' said I, rising, 'that in the pleasure of this
conversation I am neglecting business of importance which awaits me
elsewhere.'

"He rose also and looked at me in silence, shaking his head sadly.

"'Well, well,' said he, at last. 'It seems a pity, but I have done
what I could. I know every move of your game. You can do nothing before
Monday. It has been a duel between you and me, Mr. Holmes. You hope to
place me in the dock. I tell you that I will never stand in the dock.
You hope to beat me. I tell you that you will never beat me. If you are
clever enough to bring destruction upon me, rest assured that I shall do
as much to you.'

"'You have paid me several compliments, Mr. Moriarty,' said I. 'Let me
pay you one in return when I say that if I were assured of the former
eventuality I would, in the interests of the public, cheerfully accept
the latter.'

"'I can promise you the one, but not the other,' he snarled, and so
turned his rounded back upon me, and went peering and blinking out of
the room.

"That was my singular interview with Professor Moriarty. I confess that
it left an unpleasant effect upon my mind. His soft, precise fashion
of speech leaves a conviction of sincerity which a mere bully could
not produce. Of course, you will say: 'Why not take police precautions
against him?' the reason is that I am well convinced that it is from his
agents the blow will fall. I have the best proofs that it would be so."

"You have already been assaulted?"

"My dear Watson, Professor Moriarty is not a man who lets the grass grow
under his feet. I went out about mid-day to transact some business in
Oxford Street. As I passed the corner which leads from Bentinck Street
on to the Welbeck Street crossing a two-horse van furiously driven
whizzed round and was on me like a flash. I sprang for the foot-path
and saved myself by the fraction of a second. The van dashed round by
Marylebone Lane and was gone in an instant. I kept to the pavement after
that, Watson, but as I walked down Vere Street a brick came down from
the roof of one of the houses, and was shattered to fragments at my
feet. I called the police and had the place examined. There were slates
and bricks piled up on the roof preparatory to some repairs, and they
would have me believe that the wind had toppled over one of these. Of
course I knew better, but I could prove nothing. I took a cab after that
and reached my brother's rooms in Pall Mall, where I spent the day. Now
I have come round to you, and on my way I was attacked by a rough with a
bludgeon. I knocked him down, and the police have him in custody; but
I can tell you with the most absolute confidence that no possible
connection will ever be traced between the gentleman upon whose front
teeth I have barked my knuckles and the retiring mathematical coach, who
is, I dare say, working out problems upon a black-board ten miles away.
You will not wonder, Watson, that my first act on entering your rooms
was to close your shutters, and that I have been compelled to ask your
permission to leave the house by some less conspicuous exit than the
front door."

I had often admired my friend's courage, but never more than now, as he
sat quietly checking off a series of incidents which must have combined
to make up a day of horror.

"You will spend the night here?" I said.

"No, my friend, you might find me a dangerous guest. I have my plans
laid, and all will be well. Matters have gone so far now that they can
move without my help as far as the arrest goes, though my presence is
necessary for a conviction. It is obvious, therefore, that I cannot do
better than get away for the few days which remain before the police are
at liberty to act. It would be a great pleasure to me, therefore, if you
could come on to the Continent with me."

"The practice is quiet," said I, "and I have an accommodating neighbor.
I should be glad to come."

"And to start to-morrow morning?"

"If necessary."

"Oh yes, it is most necessary. Then these are your instructions, and I
beg, my dear Watson, that you will obey them to the letter, for you are
now playing a double-handed game with me against the cleverest rogue and
the most powerful syndicate of criminals in Europe. Now listen! You
will dispatch whatever luggage you intend to take by a trusty messenger
unaddressed to Victoria to-night. In the morning you will send for a
hansom, desiring your man to take neither the first nor the second which
may present itself. Into this hansom you will jump, and you will drive
to the Strand end of the Lowther Arcade, handing the address to the
cabman upon a slip of paper, with a request that he will not throw it
away. Have your fare ready, and the instant that your cab stops,
dash through the Arcade, timing yourself to reach the other side at a
quarter-past nine. You will find a small brougham waiting close to the
curb, driven by a fellow with a heavy black cloak tipped at the collar
with red. Into this you will step, and you will reach Victoria in time
for the Continental express."

"Where shall I meet you?"

"At the station. The second first-class carriage from the front will be
reserved for us."

"The carriage is our rendezvous, then?"

"Yes."

It was in vain that I asked Holmes to remain for the evening. It was
evident to me that he thought he might bring trouble to the roof he was
under, and that that was the motive which impelled him to go. With a few
hurried words as to our plans for the morrow he rose and came out with
me into the garden, clambering over the wall which leads into Mortimer
Street, and immediately whistling for a hansom, in which I heard him
drive away.

In the morning I obeyed Holmes's injunctions to the letter. A hansom was
procured with such precaution as would prevent its being one which was
placed ready for us, and I drove immediately after breakfast to the
Lowther Arcade, through which I hurried at the top of my speed. A
brougham was waiting with a very massive driver wrapped in a dark cloak,
who, the instant that I had stepped in, whipped up the horse and rattled
off to Victoria Station. On my alighting there he turned the carriage,
and dashed away again without so much as a look in my direction.

So far all had gone admirably. My luggage was waiting for me, and I had
no difficulty in finding the carriage which Holmes had indicated, the
less so as it was the only one in the train which was marked "Engaged."
My only source of anxiety now was the non-appearance of Holmes. The
station clock marked only seven minutes from the time when we were
due to start. In vain I searched among the groups of travellers and
leave-takers for the lithe figure of my friend. There was no sign of
him. I spent a few minutes in assisting a venerable Italian priest, who
was endeavoring to make a porter understand, in his broken English,
that his luggage was to be booked through to Paris. Then, having taken
another look round, I returned to my carriage, where I found that the
porter, in spite of the ticket, had given me my decrepit Italian friend
as a traveling companion. It was useless for me to explain to him that
his presence was an intrusion, for my Italian was even more limited than
his English, so I shrugged my shoulders resignedly, and continued to
look out anxiously for my friend. A chill of fear had come over me, as I
thought that his absence might mean that some blow had fallen during the
night. Already the doors had all been shut and the whistle blown, when--

"My dear Watson," said a voice, "you have not even condescended to say
good-morning."

I turned in uncontrollable astonishment. The aged ecclesiastic had
turned his face towards me. For an instant the wrinkles were smoothed
away, the nose drew away from the chin, the lower lip ceased to protrude
and the mouth to mumble, the dull eyes regained their fire, the drooping
figure expanded. The next the whole frame collapsed again, and Holmes
had gone as quickly as he had come.

"Good heavens!" I cried; "how you startled me!"

"Every precaution is still necessary," he whispered. "I have reason to
think that they are hot upon our trail. Ah, there is Moriarty himself."

The train had already begun to move as Holmes spoke. Glancing back, I
saw a tall man pushing his way furiously through the crowd, and waving
his hand as if he desired to have the train stopped. It was too late,
however, for we were rapidly gathering momentum, and an instant later
had shot clear of the station.

"With all our precautions, you see that we have cut it rather fine,"
said Holmes, laughing. He rose, and throwing off the black cassock and
hat which had formed his disguise, he packed them away in a hand-bag.

"Have you seen the morning paper, Watson?"

"No."

"You haven't' seen about Baker Street, then?"

"Baker Street?"

"They set fire to our rooms last night. No great harm was done."

"Good heavens, Holmes! this is intolerable."

"They must have lost my track completely after their bludgeon-man was
arrested. Otherwise they could not have imagined that I had returned
to my rooms. They have evidently taken the precaution of watching you,
however, and that is what has brought Moriarty to Victoria. You could
not have made any slip in coming?"

"I did exactly what you advised."

"Did you find your brougham?"

"Yes, it was waiting."

"Did you recognize your coachman?"

"No."

"It was my brother Mycroft. It is an advantage to get about in such a
case without taking a mercenary into your confidence. But we must plan
what we are to do about Moriarty now."

"As this is an express, and as the boat runs in connection with it, I
should think we have shaken him off very effectively."

"My dear Watson, you evidently did not realize my meaning when I said
that this man may be taken as being quite on the same intellectual plane
as myself. You do not imagine that if I were the pursuer I should allow
myself to be baffled by so slight an obstacle. Why, then, should you
think so meanly of him?"

"What will he do?"

"What I should do?"

"What would you do, then?"

"Engage a special."

"But it must be late."

"By no means. This train stops at Canterbury; and there is always at
least a quarter of an hour's delay at the boat. He will catch us there."

"One would think that we were the criminals. Let us have him arrested on
his arrival."

"It would be to ruin the work of three months. We should get the big
fish, but the smaller would dart right and left out of the net. On
Monday we should have them all. No, an arrest is inadmissible."

"What then?"

"We shall get out at Canterbury."

"And then?"

"Well, then we must make a cross-country journey to Newhaven, and so
over to Dieppe. Moriarty will again do what I should do. He will get on
to Paris, mark down our luggage, and wait for two days at the depot.
In the meantime we shall treat ourselves to a couple of carpet-bags,
encourage the manufactures of the countries through which we travel, and
make our way at our leisure into Switzerland, via Luxembourg and Basle."

At Canterbury, therefore, we alighted, only to find that we should have
to wait an hour before we could get a train to Newhaven.

I was still looking rather ruefully after the rapidly disappearing
luggage-van which contained my wardrobe, when Holmes pulled my sleeve
and pointed up the line.

"Already, you see," said he.

Far away, from among the Kentish woods there rose a thin spray of smoke.
A minute later a carriage and engine could be seen flying along the open
curve which leads to the station. We had hardly time to take our place
behind a pile of luggage when it passed with a rattle and a roar,
beating a blast of hot air into our faces.

"There he goes," said Holmes, as we watched the carriage swing and
rock over the points. "There are limits, you see, to our friend's
intelligence. It would have been a coup-de-maitre had he deduced what I
would deduce and acted accordingly."

"And what would he have done had he overtaken us?"

"There cannot be the least doubt that he would have made a murderous
attack upon me. It is, however, a game at which two may play. The
question now is whether we should take a premature lunch here, or run
our chance of starving before we reach the buffet at Newhaven."


We made our way to Brussels that night and spent two days there, moving
on upon the third day as far as Strasburg. On the Monday morning Holmes
had telegraphed to the London police, and in the evening we found a
reply waiting for us at our hotel. Holmes tore it open, and then with a
bitter curse hurled it into the grate.

"I might have known it!" he groaned. "He has escaped!"

"Moriarty?"

"They have secured the whole gang with the exception of him. He has
given them the slip. Of course, when I had left the country there was no
one to cope with him. But I did think that I had put the game in their
hands. I think that you had better return to England, Watson."

"Why?"

"Because you will find me a dangerous companion now. This man's
occupation is gone. He is lost if he returns to London. If I read his
character right he will devote his whole energies to revenging himself
upon me. He said as much in our short interview, and I fancy that he
meant it. I should certainly recommend you to return to your practice."

It was hardly an appeal to be successful with one who was an
old campaigner as well as an old friend. We sat in the Strasburg
salle-à-manger arguing the question for half an hour, but the same night
we had resumed our journey and were well on our way to Geneva.

For a charming week we wandered up the Valley of the Rhone, and then,
branching off at Leuk, we made our way over the Gemmi Pass, still deep
in snow, and so, by way of Interlaken, to Meiringen. It was a lovely
trip, the dainty green of the spring below, the virgin white of the
winter above; but it was clear to me that never for one instant did
Holmes forget the shadow which lay across him. In the homely Alpine
villages or in the lonely mountain passes, I could tell by his quick
glancing eyes and his sharp scrutiny of every face that passed us,
that he was well convinced that, walk where we would, we could not walk
ourselves clear of the danger which was dogging our footsteps.

Once, I remember, as we passed over the Gemmi, and walked along
the border of the melancholy Daubensee, a large rock which had been
dislodged from the ridge upon our right clattered down and roared into
the lake behind us. In an instant Holmes had raced up on to the ridge,
and, standing upon a lofty pinnacle, craned his neck in every direction.
It was in vain that our guide assured him that a fall of stones was a
common chance in the spring-time at that spot. He said nothing, but
he smiled at me with the air of a man who sees the fulfillment of that
which he had expected.

And yet for all his watchfulness he was never depressed. On the
contrary, I can never recollect having seen him in such exuberant
spirits. Again and again he recurred to the fact that if he could
be assured that society was freed from Professor Moriarty he would
cheerfully bring his own career to a conclusion.

"I think that I may go so far as to say, Watson, that I have not lived
wholly in vain," he remarked. "If my record were closed to-night I could
still survey it with equanimity. The air of London is the sweeter for my
presence. In over a thousand cases I am not aware that I have ever used
my powers upon the wrong side. Of late I have been tempted to look into
the problems furnished by nature rather than those more superficial ones
for which our artificial state of society is responsible. Your memoirs
will draw to an end, Watson, upon the day that I crown my career by
the capture or extinction of the most dangerous and capable criminal in
Europe."

I shall be brief, and yet exact, in the little which remains for me to
tell. It is not a subject on which I would willingly dwell, and yet I am
conscious that a duty devolves upon me to omit no detail.

It was on the 3d of May that we reached the little village of Meiringen,
where we put up at the Englischer Hof, then kept by Peter Steiler the
elder. Our landlord was an intelligent man, and spoke excellent English,
having served for three years as waiter at the Grosvenor Hotel in
London. At his advice, on the afternoon of the 4th we set off together,
with the intention of crossing the hills and spending the night at the
hamlet of Rosenlaui. We had strict injunctions, however, on no account
to pass the falls of Reichenbach, which are about half-way up the hill,
without making a small detour to see them.

It is indeed, a fearful place. The torrent, swollen by the melting snow,
plunges into a tremendous abyss, from which the spray rolls up like the
smoke from a burning house. The shaft into which the river hurls itself
is an immense chasm, lined by glistening coal-black rock, and narrowing
into a creaming, boiling pit of incalculable depth, which brims over and
shoots the stream onward over its jagged lip. The long sweep of green
water roaring forever down, and the thick flickering curtain of spray
hissing forever upward, turn a man giddy with their constant whirl and
clamor. We stood near the edge peering down at the gleam of the breaking
water far below us against the black rocks, and listening to the
half-human shout which came booming up with the spray out of the abyss.

The path has been cut half-way round the fall to afford a complete view,
but it ends abruptly, and the traveler has to return as he came. We had
turned to do so, when we saw a Swiss lad come running along it with
a letter in his hand. It bore the mark of the hotel which we had just
left, and was addressed to me by the landlord. It appeared that within a
very few minutes of our leaving, an English lady had arrived who was in
the last stage of consumption. She had wintered at Davos Platz, and was
journeying now to join her friends at Lucerne, when a sudden hemorrhage
had overtaken her. It was thought that she could hardly live a few
hours, but it would be a great consolation to her to see an English
doctor, and, if I would only return, etc. The good Steiler assured me
in a postscript that he would himself look upon my compliance as a very
great favor, since the lady absolutely refused to see a Swiss physician,
and he could not but feel that he was incurring a great responsibility.

The appeal was one which could not be ignored. It was impossible to
refuse the request of a fellow-countrywoman dying in a strange land. Yet
I had my scruples about leaving Holmes. It was finally agreed, however,
that he should retain the young Swiss messenger with him as guide and
companion while I returned to Meiringen. My friend would stay some
little time at the fall, he said, and would then walk slowly over the
hill to Rosenlaui, where I was to rejoin him in the evening. As I turned
away I saw Holmes, with his back against a rock and his arms folded,
gazing down at the rush of the waters. It was the last that I was ever
destined to see of him in this world.

When I was near the bottom of the descent I looked back. It was
impossible, from that position, to see the fall, but I could see the
curving path which winds over the shoulder of the hill and leads to it.
Along this a man was, I remember, walking very rapidly.

I could see his black figure clearly outlined against the green behind
him. I noted him, and the energy with which he walked but he passed from
my mind again as I hurried on upon my errand.

It may have been a little over an hour before I reached Meiringen. Old
Steiler was standing at the porch of his hotel.

"Well," said I, as I came hurrying up, "I trust that she is no worse?"

A look of surprise passed over his face, and at the first quiver of his
eyebrows my heart turned to lead in my breast.

"You did not write this?" I said, pulling the letter from my pocket.
"There is no sick Englishwoman in the hotel?"

"Certainly not!" he cried. "But it has the hotel mark upon it! Ha, it
must have been written by that tall Englishman who came in after you had
gone. He said--"

But I waited for none of the landlord's explanations. In a tingle of
fear I was already running down the village street, and making for the
path which I had so lately descended. It had taken me an hour to come
down. For all my efforts two more had passed before I found myself at
the fall of Reichenbach once more. There was Holmes's Alpine-stock still
leaning against the rock by which I had left him. But there was no sign
of him, and it was in vain that I shouted. My only answer was my own
voice reverberating in a rolling echo from the cliffs around me.

It was the sight of that Alpine-stock which turned me cold and sick.
He had not gone to Rosenlaui, then. He had remained on that three-foot
path, with sheer wall on one side and sheer drop on the other, until his
enemy had overtaken him. The young Swiss had gone too. He had probably
been in the pay of Moriarty, and had left the two men together. And then
what had happened? Who was to tell us what had happened then?

I stood for a minute or two to collect myself, for I was dazed with the
horror of the thing. Then I began to think of Holmes's own methods and
to try to practise them in reading this tragedy. It was, alas, only too
easy to do. During our conversation we had not gone to the end of the
path, and the Alpine-stock marked the place where we had stood. The
blackish soil is kept forever soft by the incessant drift of spray,
and a bird would leave its tread upon it. Two lines of footmarks were
clearly marked along the farther end of the path, both leading away from
me. There were none returning. A few yards from the end the soil was
all ploughed up into a patch of mud, and the branches and ferns which
fringed the chasm were torn and bedraggled. I lay upon my face and
peered over with the spray spouting up all around me. It had darkened
since I left, and now I could only see here and there the glistening of
moisture upon the black walls, and far away down at the end of the shaft
the gleam of the broken water. I shouted; but only the same half-human
cry of the fall was borne back to my ears.

But it was destined that I should after all have a last word of greeting
from my friend and comrade. I have said that his Alpine-stock had been
left leaning against a rock which jutted on to the path. From the top of
this bowlder the gleam of something bright caught my eye, and, raising
my hand, I found that it came from the silver cigarette-case which he
used to carry. As I took it up a small square of paper upon which it
had lain fluttered down on to the ground. Unfolding it, I found that it
consisted of three pages torn from his note-book and addressed to me. It
was characteristic of the man that the direction was a precise, and the
writing as firm and clear, as though it had been written in his study.

My dear Watson [it said], I write these few lines through the courtesy
of Mr. Moriarty, who awaits my convenience for the final discussion of
those questions which lie between us. He has been giving me a sketch
of the methods by which he avoided the English police and kept himself
informed of our movements. They certainly confirm the very high opinion
which I had formed of his abilities. I am pleased to think that I shall
be able to free society from any further effects of his presence, though
I fear that it is at a cost which will give pain to my friends, and
especially, my dear Watson, to you. I have already explained to you,
however, that my career had in any case reached its crisis, and that
no possible conclusion to it could be more congenial to me than this.
Indeed, if I may make a full confession to you, I was quite convinced
that the letter from Meiringen was a hoax, and I allowed you to depart
on that errand under the persuasion that some development of this sort
would follow. Tell Inspector Patterson that the papers which he needs
to convict the gang are in pigeonhole M., done up in a blue envelope
and inscribed "Moriarty." I made every disposition of my property before
leaving England, and handed it to my brother Mycroft. Pray give my
greetings to Mrs. Watson, and believe me to be, my dear fellow,

Very sincerely yours,

Sherlock Holmes


A few words may suffice to tell the little that remains. An examination
by experts leaves little doubt that a personal contest between the two
men ended, as it could hardly fail to end in such a situation, in their
reeling over, locked in each other's arms. Any attempt at recovering the
bodies was absolutely hopeless, and there, deep down in that dreadful
caldron of swirling water and seething foam, will lie for all time the
most dangerous criminal and the foremost champion of the law of their
generation. The Swiss youth was never found again, and there can be no
doubt that he was one of the numerous agents whom Moriarty kept in his
employ. As to the gang, it will be within the memory of the public
how completely the evidence which Holmes had accumulated exposed their
organization, and how heavily the hand of the dead man weighed
upon them. Of their terrible chief few details came out during the
proceedings, and if I have now been compelled to make a clear statement
of his career it is due to those injudicious champions who have
endeavored to clear his memory by attacks upon him whom I shall ever
regard as the best and the wisest man whom I have ever known.







Chapter I. Of Cornet Joseph Clarke of the Ironsides

It may be, my dear grandchildren, that at one time or another I
have told you nearly all the incidents which have occurred during my
adventurous life. To your father and to your mother, at least, I know
that none of them are unfamiliar. Yet when I consider that time wears
on, and that a grey head is apt to contain a failing memory, I am
prompted to use these long winter evenings in putting it all before
you from the beginning, that you may have it as one clear story in your
minds, and pass it on as such to those who come after you. For now that
the house of Brunswick is firmly established upon the throne and that
peace prevails in the land, it will become less easy for you every
year to understand how men felt when Englishmen were in arms against
Englishmen, and when he who should have been the shield and the
protector of his subjects had no thought but to force upon them what
they most abhorred and detested.

My story is one which you may well treasure up in your memories, and
tell again to others, for it is not likely that in this whole county of
Hampshire, or even perhaps in all England, there is another left alive
who is so well able to speak from his own knowledge of these events,
or who has played a more forward part in them. All that I know I shall
endeavour soberly and in due order to put before you. I shall try to
make these dead men quicken into life for your behoof, and to call back
out of the mists of the past those scenes which were brisk enough in
the acting, though they read so dully and so heavily in the pages of the
worthy men who have set themselves to record them. Perchance my words,
too, might, in the ears of strangers, seem to be but an old man's
gossip. To you, however, who know that these eyes which are looking at
you looked also at the things which I describe, and that this hand has
struck in for a good cause, it will, I know, be different. Bear in mind
as you listen that it was your quarrel as well as our own in which
we fought, and that if now you grow up to be free men in a free land,
privileged to think or to pray as your consciences shall direct, you may
thank God that you are reaping the harvest which your fathers sowed in
blood and suffering when the Stuarts were on the throne.

I was born then in the year 1664, at Havant, which is a flourishing
village a few miles from Portsmouth off the main London road, and there
it was that I spent the greater part of my youth. It is now as it was
then, a pleasant, healthy spot, with a hundred or more brick cottages
scattered along in a single irregular street, each with its little
garden in front, and maybe a fruit tree or two at the back. In the
middle of the village stood the old church with the square tower, and
the great sun-dial like a wrinkle upon its grey weather-blotched face.
On the outskirts the Presbyterians had their chapel; but when the Act of
Uniformity was passed, their good minister, Master Breckinridge, whose
discourses had often crowded his rude benches while the comfortable pews
of the church were empty, was cast into gaol, and his flock dispersed.
As to the Independents, of whom my father was one, they also were under
the ban of the law, but they attended conventicle at Emsworth, whither
we would trudge, rain or shine, on every Sabbath morning. These meetings
were broken up more than once, but the congregation was composed of such
harmless folk, so well beloved and respected by their neighbours, that
the peace officers came after a time to ignore them, and to let them
worship in their own fashion. There were Papists, too, amongst us, who
were compelled to go as far as Portsmouth for their Mass. Thus, you see,
small as was our village, we were a fair miniature of the whole country,
for we had our sects and our factions, which were all the more bitter
for being confined in so narrow a compass.

My father, Joseph Clarke, was better known over the countryside by the
name of Ironside Joe, for he had served in his youth in the Yaxley
troop of Oliver Cromwell's famous regiment of horse, and had preached
so lustily and fought so stoutly that old Noll himself called him out
of the ranks after the fight at Dunbar, and raised him to a cornetcy.
It chanced, however, that having some little time later fallen into an
argument with one of his troopers concerning the mystery of the Trinity,
the man, who was a half-crazy zealot, smote my father across the face, a
favour which he returned by a thrust from his broadsword, which sent his
adversary to test in person the truth of his beliefs. In most armies
it would have been conceded that my father was within his rights
in punishing promptly so rank an act of mutiny, but the soldiers of
Cromwell had so high a notion of their own importance and privileges,
that they resented this summary justice upon their companion. A
court-martial sat upon my father, and it is likely that he would have
been offered up as a sacrifice to appease the angry soldiery, had not
the Lord Protector interfered, and limited the punishment to dismissal
from the army. Cornet Clarke was accordingly stripped of his buff
coat and steel cap, and wandered down to Havant, where he settled into
business as a leather merchant and tanner, thereby depriving Parliament
of as trusty a soldier as ever drew blade in its service. Finding
that he prospered in trade, he took as wife Mary Shepstone, a young
Churchwoman, and I, Micah Clarke, was the first pledge of their union.

My father, as I remember him first, was tall and straight, with a great
spread of shoulder and a mighty chest. His face was craggy and stern,
with large harsh features, shaggy over-hanging brows, high-bridged
fleshy nose, and a full-lipped mouth which tightened and set when he
was angry. His grey eyes were piercing and soldier-like, yet I have seen
them lighten up into a kindly and merry twinkle. His voice was the most
tremendous and awe-inspiring that I have ever listened to. I can well
believe what I have heard, that when he chanted the Hundredth Psalm as
he rode down among the blue bonnets at Dunbar, the sound of him rose
above the blare of trumpets and the crash of guns, like the deep roll of
a breaking wave. Yet though he possessed every quality which was
needed to raise him to distinction as an officer, he had thrown off his
military habits when he returned to civil life. As he prospered and grew
rich he might well have worn a sword, but instead he would ever bear a
small copy of the Scriptures bound to his girdle, where other men hung
their weapons. He was sober and measured in his speech, and it was
seldom, even in the bosom of his own family, that he would speak of the
scenes which he had taken part in, or of the great men, Fleetwood and
Harrison, Blake and Ireton, Desborough and Lambert, some of whom had
been simple troopers like himself when the troubles broke out. He was
frugal in his eating, backward in drinking, and allowed himself no
pleasures save three pipes a day of Oronooko tobacco, which he kept ever
in a brown jar by the great wooden chair on the left-hand side of the
mantelshelf.

Yet for all his self-restraint the old leaven would at times begin to
work in him, and bring on fits of what his enemies would call fanaticism
and his friends piety, though it must be confessed that this piety
was prone to take a fierce and fiery shape. As I look back, one or two
instances of that stand out so hard and clear in my recollection that
they might be scenes which I had seen of late in the playhouse, instead
of memories of my childhood more than threescore years ago, when the
second Charles was on the throne.

The first of these occurred when I was so young that I can remember
neither what went before nor what immediately after it. It stuck in my
infant mind when other things slipped through it. We were all in the
house one sultry summer evening, when there came a rattle of kettledrums
and a clatter of hoofs, which brought my mother and my father to the
door, she with me in her arms that I might have the better view. It was
a regiment of horse on their way from Chichester to Portsmouth, with
colours flying and band playing, making the bravest show that ever my
youthful eyes had rested upon. With what wonder and admiration did I
gaze at the sleek prancing steeds, the steel morions, the plumed hats
of the officers, the scarfs and bandoliers. Never, I thought, had such
a gallant company assembled, and I clapped my hands and cried out in my
delight. My father smiled gravely, and took me from my mother's arms.
'Nay, lad,' he said, 'thou art a soldier's son, and should have more
judgment than to commend such a rabble as this. Canst thou not, child as
thou art, see that their arms are ill-found, their stirrup-irons rusted,
and their ranks without order or cohesion? Neither have they thrown out
a troop in advance, as should even in times of peace be done, and their
rear is straggling from here to Bedhampton. Yea,' he continued, suddenly
shaking his long arm at the troopers, and calling out to them, 'ye are
corn ripe for the sickle and waiting only for the reapers!' Several of
them reined up at this sudden out-flame. 'Hit the crop-eared rascal over
the pate, Jack!' cried one to another, wheeling his horse round; but
there was that in my father's face which caused him to fall back into
the ranks again with his purpose unfulfilled. The regiment jingled on
down the road, and my mother laid her thin hands upon my father's arm,
and lulled with her pretty coaxing ways the sleeping devil which had
stirred within him.

On another occasion which I can remember, about my seventh or eighth
year, his wrath burst out with more dangerous effect. I was playing
about him as he worked in the tanning-yard one spring afternoon, when
in through the open doorway strutted two stately gentlemen, with
gold facings to their coats and smart cockades at the side of their
three-cornered hats. They were, as I afterwards understood, officers of
the fleet who were passing through Havant, and seeing us at work in the
yard, designed to ask us some question as to their route. The younger of
the pair accosted my father and began his speech by a great clatter of
words which were all High Dutch to me, though I now see that they were a
string of such oaths as are common in the mouth of a sailor; though why
the very men who are in most danger of appearing before the Almighty
should go out of their way to insult Him, hath ever been a mystery to
me. My father in a rough stern voice bade him speak with more reverence
of sacred things, on which the pair of them gave tongue together,
swearing tenfold worse than before, and calling my father a canting
rogue and a smug-faced Presbytery Jack. What more they might have said I
know not, for my father picked up the great roller wherewith he smoothed
the leather, and dashing at them he brought it down on the side of one
of their heads with such a swashing blow, that had it not been for his
stiff hat the man would never have uttered oath again. As it was, he
dropped like a log upon the stones of the yard, while his companion
whipped out his rapier and made a vicious thrust; but my father, who was
as active as he was strong, sprung aside, and bringing his cudgel down
upon the outstretched arm of the officer, cracked it like the stem of
a tobacco-pipe. This affair made no little stir, for it occurred at
the time when those arch-liars, Oates, Bedloe, and Carstairs, were
disturbing the public mind by their rumours of plots, and a rising of
some sort was expected throughout the country. Within a few days all
Hampshire was ringing with an account of the malcontent tanner of
Havant, who had broken the head and the arm of two of his Majesty's
servants. An inquiry showed, however, that there was no treasonable
meaning in the matter, and the officers having confessed that the first
words came from them, the Justices contented themselves with imposing a
fine upon my father, and binding him over to keep the peace for a period
of six months.

I tell you these incidents that you may have an idea of the fierce and
earnest religion which filled not only your own ancestor, but most of
those men who were trained in the parliamentary armies. In many ways
they were more like those fanatic Saracens, who believe in conversion by
the sword, than the followers of a Christian creed. Yet they have this
great merit, that their own lives were for the most part clean and
commendable, for they rigidly adhered themselves to those laws which
they would gladly have forced at the sword's point upon others. It is
true that among so many there were some whose piety was a shell for
their ambition, and others who practised in secret what they denounced
in public, but no cause however good is free from such hypocritical
parasites. That the greater part of the saints, as they termed
themselves, were men of sober and God-fearing lives, may be shown by the
fact that, after the disbanding of the army of the Commonwealth, the old
soldiers flocked into trade throughout the country, and made their mark
wherever they went by their industry and worth. There is many a wealthy
business house now in England which can trace its rise to the thrift and
honesty of some simple pikeman of Ireton or Cromwell.

But that I may help you to understand the character of your
great-grandfather, I shall give an incident which shows how fervent and
real were the emotions which prompted the violent moods which I have
described. I was about twelve at the time, my brothers Hosea and Ephraim
were respectively nine and seven, while little Ruth could scarce have
been more than four. It chanced that a few days before a wandering
preacher of the Independents had put up at our house, and his religious
ministrations had left my father moody and excitable. One night I had
gone to bed as usual, and was sound asleep with my two brothers beside
me, when we were roused and ordered to come downstairs. Huddling on our
clothes we followed him into the kitchen, where my mother was sitting
pale and scared with Ruth upon her knee.

'Gather round me, my children,' he said, in a deep reverent voice, 'that
we may all appear before the throne together. The kingdom of the Lord is
at hand-oh, be ye ready to receive Him! This very night, my loved ones,
ye shall see Him in His splendour, with the angels and the archangels in
their might and their glory. At the third hour shall He come-that very
third hour which is now drawing upon us.'

'Dear Joe,' said my mother, in soothing tones, 'thou art scaring thyself
and the children to no avail. If the Son of Man be indeed coming, what
matters it whether we be abed or afoot?'

'Peace, woman,' he answered sternly; 'has He not said that He will come
like a thief in the night, and that it is for us to await Him? Join
with me, then, in prayerful outpourings that we may be found as those in
bridal array. Let us offer up thanks that He has graciously vouchsafed
to warn us through the words of His servant. Oh, great Lord, look down
upon this small flock and lead it to the sheep fold! Mix not the
little wheat with the great world of chaff. Oh, merciful Father! look
graciously upon my wife, and forgive her the sin of Erastianism, she
being but a woman and little fitted to cast off the bonds of antichrist
wherein she was born. And these too, my little ones, Micah and Hosea,
Ephraim and Ruth, all named after Thy faithful servants of old, oh let
them stand upon Thy right hand this night!' Thus he prayed on in a wild
rush of burning, pleading words, writhing prostrate upon the floor
in the vehemence of his supplication, while we, poor trembling mites,
huddled round our mother's skirts and gazed with terror at the contorted
figure seen by the dim light of the simple oil lamp. On a sudden the
clang of the new church clock told that the hour had come. My father
sprang from the floor, and rushing to the casement, stared up with wild
expectant eyes at the starry heavens. Whether he conjured up some vision
in his excited brain, or whether the rush of feeling on finding that his
expectations were in vain, was too much for him, it is certain that
he threw his long arms upwards, uttered a hoarse scream, and tumbled
backwards with foaming lips and twitching limbs upon the ground. For an
hour or more my poor mother and I did what we could to soothe him, while
the children whimpered in a corner, until at last he staggered slowly to
his feet, and in brief broken words ordered us to our rooms. From that
time I have never heard him allude to the matter, nor did he ever give
us any reason why he should so confidently have expected the second
coming upon that particular night. I have learned since, however,
that the preacher who visited us was what was called in those days a
fifth-monarchy man, and that this particular sect was very liable to
these premonitions. I have no doubt that something which he had said had
put the thought into my father's head, and that the fiery nature of the
man had done the rest.

So much for your great-grandfather, Ironside Joe. I have preferred to
put these passages before you, for on the principle that actions speak
louder than words, I find that in describing a man's character it is
better to give examples of his ways than to speak in broad and general
terms. Had I said that he was fierce in ins religion and subject to
strange fits of piety, the words might have made little impression
upon you; but when I tell you of his attack upon the officers in the
tanning-yard, and his summoning us down in the dead of the night to
await the second coming, you can judge for yourselves the lengths to
which his belief would carry him. For the rest, he was an excellent man
of business, fair and even generous in his dealings, respected by all
and loved by few, for his nature was too self-contained to admit of much
affection. To us he was a stern and rigid father, punishing us heavily
for whatever he regarded as amiss in our conduct. He bad a store of such
proverbs as 'Give a child its will and a whelp its fill, and neither
will strive,' or 'Children are certain cares and uncertain comforts,'
wherewith he would temper my mother's more kindly impulses. He could not
bear that we should play trick-track upon the green, or dance with the
other children upon the Saturday night.

As to my mother, dear soul, it was her calm, peaceful influence which
kept my father within bounds, and softened his austere rule. Seldom
indeed, even in his darkest moods, did the touch of her gentle hand and
the sound of her voice fail to soothe his fiery spirit. She came of a
Church stock, and held to her religion with a quiet grip which was proof
against every attempt to turn her from it. I imagine that at one time
her husband had argued much with her upon Arminianism and the sin of
simony, but finding his exhortations useless, he had abandoned the
subject save on very rare occasions. In spite of her Episcopacy,
however, she remained a staunch Whig, and never allowed her loyalty to
the throne to cloud her judgment as to the doings of the monarch who sat
upon it.

Women were good housekeepers fitly years ago, but she was conspicuous
among the best. To see her spotless cuffs and snowy kirtle one would
scarce credit how hard she laboured. It was only the well ordered house
and the dustless rooms which proclaimed her constant industry. She
made salves and eyewaters, powders and confects, cordials and persico,
orangeflower water and cherry brandy, each in its due season, and all of
the best. She was wise, too, in herbs and simples. The villagers and the
farm labourers would rather any day have her advice upon their ailments
than that of Dr. Jackson of Purbrook, who never mixed a draught under
a silver crown. Over the whole countryside there was no woman more
deservedly respected and more esteemed both by those above her and by
those beneath.

Such were my parents as I remember them in my childhood. As to myself, I
shall let my story explain the growth of my own nature. My brothers and
my sister were all brownfaced, sturdy little country children, with no
very marked traits save a love of mischief controlled by the fear of
their father. These, with Martha the serving-maid, formed our whole
household during those boyish years when the pliant soul of the child
is hardening into the settled character of the man. How these influences
affected me I shall leave for a future sitting, and if I weary you by
recording them, you must remember that I am telling these things rather
for your profit than for your amusement; that it may assist you in your
journey through life to know how another has picked out the path before
you.



Chapter II. Of my going to school and of my coming thence.


With the home influences which I have described, it may be readily
imagined that my young mind turned very much upon the subject of
religion, the more so as my father and mother took different views upon
it. The old Puritan soldier held that the bible alone contained all
things essential to salvation, and that though it might be advisable
that those who were gifted with wisdom or eloquence should expound the
Scriptures to their brethren, it was by no means necessary, but rather
hurtful and degrading, that any organised body of ministers or of
bishops should claim special prerogatives, or take the place of
mediators between the creature and the Creator. For the wealthy
dignitaries of the Church, rolling in their carriages to their
cathedrals, in order to preach the doctrines of their Master, who wore
His sandals out in tramping over the countryside, he professed the most
bitter contempt; nor was he more lenient to those poorer members of the
clergy who winked at the vices of their patrons that they might secure
a seat at their table, and who would sit through a long evening of
profanity rather than bid good-bye to the cheesecakes and the wine
flask. That such men represented religious truth was abhorrent to
his mind, nor would he even give his adhesion to that form of church
government dear to the Presbyterians, where a general council of the
ministers directed the affairs of their church. Every man was, in his
opinion, equal in the eyes of the Almighty, and none had a right to
claim any precedence over his neighbour in matters of religion. The book
was written for all, and all were equally able to read it, provided that
their minds were enlightened by the Holy Spirit.

My mother, on the other hand, held that the very essence of a church
was that it should have a hierarchy and a graduated government within
itself, with the king at the apex, the archbishops beneath him, the
bishops under their control, and so down through the ministry to the
common folk. Such was, in her opinion, the Church as established in the
beginning, and no religion without these characteristics could lay any
claim to being the true one. Ritual was to her of as great importance
as morality, and if every tradesman and farmer were allowed to invent
prayers, and change the service as the fancy seized him, it would be
impossible to preserve the purity of the Christian creed. She agreed
that religion was based upon the Bible, but the Bible was a book which
contained much that was obscure, and unless that obscurity were
cleared away by a duly elected and consecrated servant of God, a
lineal descendant of the Disciples, all human wisdom might not serve to
interpret it aright. That was my mother's position, and neither argument
nor entreaty could move her from it. The only question of belief on
which my two parents were equally ardent was their mutual dislike
and distrust of the Roman Catholic forms of worship, and in this the
Churchwoman was every whit as decided as the fanatical Independent.

It may seem strange to you in these days of tolerance, that the
adherents of this venerable creed should have met with such universal
ill-will from successive generations of Englishmen. We recognise now
that there are no more useful or loyal citizens in the state than our
Catholic brethren, and Mr. Alexander Pope or any other leading Papist is
no more looked down upon for his religion than was Mr. William Penn
for his Quakerism in the reign of King James. We can scarce credit how
noblemen like Lord Stafford, ecclesiastics like Archbishop Plunkett,
and commoners like Langhorne and Pickering, were dragged to death on
the testimony of the vilest of the vile, without a voice being raised in
their behalf; or how it could be considered a patriotic act on the part
of an English Protestant to carry a flail loaded with lead beneath his
cloak as a menace against his harmless neighbours who differed from
him on points of doctrine. It was a long madness which has now happily
passed off, or at least shows itself in a milder and rarer form.

Foolish as it appears to us, there were some solid reasons to account
for it. You have read doubtless how, a century before I was born, the
great kingdom of Spain waxed and prospered. Her ships covered every
sea. Her troops were victorious wherever they appeared. In letters, in
learning, in all the arts of war and peace they were the foremost nation
in Europe. You have heard also of the ill-blood which existed between
this great nation and ourselves; how our adventurers harried their
possessions across the Atlantic, while they retorted by burning such
of our seamen as they could catch by their devilish Inquisition, and by
threatening our coasts both from Cadiz and from their provinces in the
Netherlands. At last so hot became the quarrel that the other nations
stood off, as I have seen the folk clear a space for the sword-players
at Hockley-in-the-Hole, so that the Spanish giant and tough little
England were left face to face to fight the matter out. Throughout all
that business it was as the emissary of the Pope, and as the avenger of
the dishonoured Roman Church, that King Philip professed to come. It
is true that Lord Howard and many another gentleman of the old religion
fought stoutly against the Dons, but the people could never forget that
the reformed faith had been the flag under which they had conquered, and
that the blessing of the Pontiff had rested with their opponents. Then
came the cruel and foolish attempt of Mary to force upon them a creed
for which they had no sympathy, and at the heels of it another great
Roman Catholic power menaced our liberty from the Continent. The growing
strength of France promoted a corresponding distrust of Papistry in
England, which reached a head when, at about the time of which I write,
Louis XIV. threatened us with invasion at the very moment when, by
the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, he showed his intolerant spirit
towards the faith which we held dear. The narrow Protestantism of
England was less a religious sentiment than a patriotic reply to
the aggressive bigotry of her enemies. Our Catholic countrymen were
unpopular, not so much because they believed in Transubstantiation, as
because they were unjustly suspected of sympathising with the Emperor or
with the King of France. Now that our military successes have secured us
against all fear of attack, we have happily lost that bitter religious
hatred but for which Oates and Dangerfield would have lied in vain.

In the days when I was young, special causes had inflamed this dislike
and made it all the more bitter because there was a spice of fear
mingled with it. As long as the Catholics were only an obscure faction
they might be ignored, but when, towards the close of the reign of the
second Charles, it appeared to be absolutely certain that a Catholic
dynasty was about to fill the throne, and that Catholicism was to be the
court religion and the stepping-stone to preferment, it was felt that
a day of vengeance might be at hand for those who had trampled upon
it when it was defenceless. There was alarm and uneasiness amongst all
classes. The Church of England, which depends upon the monarch as an
arch depends upon the keystone; the nobility, whose estates and coffers
had been enriched by the plunder of the abbeys; the mob, whose ideas of
Papistry were mixed up with thumbscrews and Fox's Martyrology, were all
equally disturbed. Nor was the prospect a hopeful one for their cause.
Charles was a very lukewarm Protestant, and indeed showed upon his
deathbed that he was no Protestant at all. There was no longer any
chance of his having legitimate offspring. The Duke of York, his younger
brother, was therefore heir to the throne, and he was known to be an
austere and narrow Papist, while his spouse, Mary of Modena, was
as bigoted as himself. Should they have children, there could be
no question but that they would be brought up in the faith of their
parents, and that a line of Catholic monarchs would occupy the throne
of England. To the Church, as represented by my mother, and to
Nonconformity, in the person of my father, this was an equally
intolerable prospect.

I have been telling you all this old history because you will find, as
I go on, that this state of things caused in the end such a seething and
fermenting throughout the nation that even I, a simple village lad, was
dragged into the whirl and had my whole life influenced by it. If I did
not make the course of events clear to you, you would hardly understand
the influences which had such an effect upon my whole history. In the
meantime, I wish you to remember that when King James II. ascended the
throne he did so amid a sullen silence on the part of a large class of
his subjects, and that both my father and my mother were among those who
were zealous for a Protestant succession.

My childhood was, as I have already said, a gloomy one. Now and again
when there chanced to be a fair at Portsdown Hill, or when a passing
raree showman set up his booth in the village, my dear mother would
slip a penny or two from her housekeeping money into my hand, and with
a warning finger upon her lip would send me off to see the sights. These
treats were, however, rare events, and made such a mark upon my mind,
that when I was sixteen years of age I could have checked off upon my
fingers all that I had ever seen. There was William Harker the strong
man, who lifted Farmer Alcott's roan mare; and there was Tubby Lawson
the dwarf, who could fit himself into a pickle jar--these two I well
remember from the wonder wherewith they struck my youthful soul. Then
there was the show of the playing dolls, and that of the enchanted
island and Mynheer Munster from the Lowlands, who could turn himself
round upon a tight-rope while playing most sweetly upon a virginal.
Last, but far the best in my estimation, was the grand play at the
Portsdown Fair, entitled 'The true and ancient story of Maudlin, the
merchant's daughter of Bristol, and of her lover Antonio. How they were
cast away on the shores of Barbary, where the mermaids are seen floating
upon the sea and singing in the rocks, foretelling their danger.' This
little piece gave me keener pleasure than ever in after years I received
from the grandest comedies of Mr. Congreve and of Mr. Dryden, though
acted by Kynaston, Betterton, and the whole strength of the King's own
company. At Chichester once I remember that I paid a penny to see the
left shoe of the youngest sister of Potiphar's wife, but as it looked
much like any other old shoe, and was just about the size to have fitted
the show-woman, I have often feared that my penny fell into the hands of
rogues.

There were other shows, however, which I might see for nothing, and yet
were more real and every whit as interesting as any for which I
paid. Now and again upon a holiday I was permitted to walk down to
Portsmouth--once I was even taken in front of my father upon his pad
nag, and there I wandered with him through the streets with wondering
eyes, marvelling over the strange sights around me. The walls and the
moats, the gates and the sentinels, the long High Street with the great
government buildings, and the constant rattle of drums and blare of
trumpets; they made my little heart beat quicker beneath my sagathy
stuff jacket. Here was the house in which some thirty years before the
proud Duke of Buckingham had been struck down by the assassin's dagger.
There, too, was the Governor's dwelling, and I remember that even as I
looked he came riding up to it, red-faced and choleric, with a nose such
as a Governor should have, and his breast all slashed with gold. 'Is he
not a fine man?' I said, looking up at my father. He laughed and drew
his hat down over his brows. 'It is the first time that I have seen Sir
Ralph Lingard's face,' said he, 'but I saw his back at Preston fight.
Ah, lad, proud as he looks, if he did but see old Noll coming in through
the door he would not think it beneath him to climb out through the
window!' The clank of steel or the sight of a buff-coat would always
serve to stir up the old Roundhead bitterness in my father's breast.

But there were other sights in Portsmouth besides the red-coats and
their Governor. The yard was the second in the kingdom, after Chatham,
and there was ever some new war-ship ready upon the slips. Then there
was a squadron of King's ships, and sometimes the whole fleet at
Spithead, when the streets would be full of sailors, with their faces as
brown as mahogany and pigtails as stiff and hard as their cutlasses. To
watch their rolling gait, and to hear their strange, quaint talk,
and their tales of the Dutch wars, was a rare treat to me; and I have
sometimes when I was alone fastened myself on to a group of them, and
passed the day in wandering from tavern to tavern. It chanced one day,
however, that one of them insisted upon my sharing his glass of Canary
wine, and afterwards out of roguishness persuaded me to take a second,
with the result that I was sent home speechless in the carrier's cart,
and was never again allowed to go into Portsmouth alone. My father was
less shocked at the incident than I should have expected, and reminded
my mother that Noah had been overtaken in a similar manner. He also
narrated how a certain field-chaplain Grant, of Desborough's regiment,
having after a hot and dusty day drunk sundry flagons of mum, had
thereafter sung certain ungodly songs, and danced in a manner unbecoming
to his sacred profession. Also, how he had afterwards explained that
such backslidings were not to be regarded us faults of the individual,
but rather as actual obsessions of the evil one, who contrived in this
manner to give scandal to the faithful, and selected the most godly for
his evil purpose. This ingenious defence of the field-chaplain was the
saving of my back, for my father, who was a believer in Solomon's axiom,
had a stout ash stick and a strong arm for whatever seemed to him to be
a falling away from the true path.

From the day that I first learned my letters from the horn-book at my
mother's knee I was always hungry to increase my knowledge, and never a
piece of print came in my way that I did not eagerly master. My father
pushed the sectarian hatred of learning to such a length that he was
averse to having any worldly books within his doors. (Note A, Appendix)
I was dependent therefore for my supply upon one or two of my friends in
the village, who lent me a volume at a time from their small libraries.
These I would carry inside my shirt, and would only dare to produce when
I could slip away into the fields, and lie hid among the long grass, or
at night when the rushlight was still burning, and my father's snoring
assured me that there was no danger of his detecting me. In this way
I worked up from Don Bellianis of Greece and the 'Seven Champions,'
through Tarleton's 'Jests' and other such books, until I could take
pleasure in the poetry of Waller and of Herrick, or in the plays of
Massinger and Shakespeare. How sweet were the hours when I could lay
aside all thought of freewill and of predestination, to lie with my
heels in the air among the scented clover, and listen to old Chaucer
telling the sweet story of Grisel the patient, or to weep for the chaste
Desdemona, and mourn over the untimely end of her gallant spouse. There
were times as I rose up with my mind full of the noble poetry, and
glanced over the fair slope of the countryside, with the gleaming sea
beyond it, and the purple outline of the Isle of Wight upon the horizon;
when it would be borne in upon me that the Being who created all this,
and who gave man the power of pouring out these beautiful thoughts, was
not the possession of one sect or another, or of this nation or that,
but was the kindly Father of every one of the little children whom
He had let loose on this fair playground. It grieved me then, and it
grieves me now, that a man of such sincerity and lofty purpose as your
great grandfather should have been so tied down by iron doctrines, and
should imagine his Creator to be so niggard of His mercy as to withhold
it from nine-and-ninety in the hundred. Well, a man is as he is trained,
and if my father bore a narrow mind upon his broad shoulders, he has at
least the credit that he was ready to do and to suffer all things
for what he conceived to be the truth. If you, my dears, have more
enlightened views, take heed that they bring you to lead a more
enlightened life.

When I was fourteen years of age, a yellow-haired, brown-faced lad, I
was packed off to a small private school at Petersfield, and there I
remained for a year, returning home for the last Saturday in each month.
I took with me only a scanty outfit of schoolbooks, with Lilly's 'Latin
Grammar,' and Rosse's 'View of all the Religions in the World from the
Creation down to our own Times,' which was shoved into my hands by my
good mother as a parting present. With this small stock of letters I
might have fared badly, had it not happened that my master, Mr. Thomas
Chillingfoot, had himself a good library, and took a pleasure in
lending his books to any of his scholars who showed a desire to improve
themselves. Under this good old man's care I not only picked up some
smattering of Latin and Greek, but I found means to read good English
translations of many of the classics, and to acquire a knowledge of the
history of my own and other countries. I was rapidly growing in mind as
well as in body, when my school career was cut short by no less an event
than my summary and ignominious expulsion. How this unlooked-for ending
to my studies came about I must now set before you.

Petersfield had always been a great stronghold of the Church, having
hardly a Nonconformist within its bounds. The reason of this was that
most of the house property was owned by zealous Churchmen, who refused
to allow any one who differed from the Established Church to settle
there. The Vicar, whose name was Pinfold, possessed in this manner great
power in the town, and as he was a man with a high inflamed countenance
and a pompous manner, he inspired no little awe among the quiet
inhabitants. I can see him now with his beaked nose, his rounded
waistcoat, and his bandy legs, which looked as if they had given way
beneath the load of learning which they were compelled to carry. Walking
slowly with right hand stiffly extended, tapping the pavement at every
step with his metal-headed stick, he would pause as each person passed
him, and wait to see that he was given the salute which he thought due
to his dignity. This courtesy he never dreamed of returning, save in
the case of some of his richer parishioners; but if by chance it were
omitted, he would hurry after the culprit, and, shaking his stick in his
face, insist upon his doffing his cap to him. We youngsters, if we met
him on our walks, would scuttle by him like a brood of chickens passing
an old turkey cock, and even our worthy master showed a disposition to
turn down a side-street when the portly figure of the Vicar was seen
rolling in our direction. This proud priest made a point of knowing the
history of every one within his parish, and having learnt that I was the
son of an Independent, he spoke severely to Mr. Chillingfoot upon the
indiscretion which he had shown in admitting me to his school. Indeed,
nothing but my mother's good name for orthodoxy prevented him from
insisting upon my dismissal.

At the other end of the village there was a large day-school. A constant
feud prevailed between the scholars who attended it and the lads who
studied under our master. No one could tell how the war broke out, but
for many years there had been a standing quarrel between the two, which
resulted in skirmishes, sallies, and ambuscades, with now and then a
pitched battle. No great harm was done in these encounters, for the
weapons were usually snowballs in winter and pine-cones or clods of
earth in the summer. Even when the contest got closer and we came to
fisticuffs, a few bruises and a little blood was the worst that could
come of it. Our opponents were more numerous than we, but we had the
advantage of being always together and of having a secure asylum upon
which to retreat, while they, living in scattered houses all over the
parish, had no common rallying-point. A stream, crossed by two bridges,
ran through the centre of the town, and this was the boundary which
separated our territories from those of our enemies. The boy who crossed
the bridge found himself in hostile country.

It chanced that in the first conflict which occurred after my arrival at
the school I distinguished myself by singling out the most redoubtable
of our foemen, and smiting him such a blow that he was knocked helpless
and was carried off by our party as a prisoner. This feat of arms
established my good name as a warrior, so I came at last to be regarded
as the leader of our forces, and to be looked up to by bigger boys than
myself. This promotion tickled my fancy so much, that I set to work to
prove that I deserved it by devising fresh and ingenious schemes for the
defeat of our enemies.

One winter's evening news reached us that our rivals were about to make
a raid upon us under cover of night, and that they proposed coming by
the little used plank bridge, so as to escape our notice. This bridge
lay almost out of the town, and consisted of a single broad piece of
wood without a rail, erected for the good of the town clerk, who lived,
just opposite to it. We proposed to hide ourselves amongst the bushes on
our side of the stream, and make an unexpected attack upon the invaders
as they crossed. As we started, however, I bethought me of an ingenious
stratagem which I had read of as being practised in the German wars, and
having expounded it to the great delight of my companions, we took Mr.
Chillingfoot's saw, and set off for the seat of action.

On reaching the bridge all was quiet and still. It was quite dark and
very cold, for Christmas was approaching. There were no signs of our
opponents. We exchanged a few whispers as to who should do the daring
deed, but as the others shrank from it, and as I was too proud to
propose what I dare not execute, I gripped the saw, and sitting
astraddle upon the plank set to work upon the very centre of it.

My purpose was to weaken it in such a way that, though it would bear the
weight of one, it would collapse when the main body of our foemen were
upon it, and so precipitate them into the ice-cold stream. The water was
but a couple of feet deep at the place, so that there was nothing for
them but a fright and a ducking. So cool a reception ought to deter
them from ever invading us again, and confirm my reputation as a daring
leader. Reuben Lockarby, my lieutenant, son of old John Lockarby of the
Wheatsheaf, marshalled our forces behind the hedgerow, whilst I sawed
vigorously at the plank until I had nearly severed it across. I had no
compunction about the destruction of the bridge, for I knew enough of
carpentry to see that a skilful joiner could in an hour's work make
it stronger than ever by putting a prop beneath the point where I had
divided it. When at last I felt by the yielding of the plank that I had
done enough, and that the least strain would snap it, I crawled quietly
off, and taking up my position with my schoolfellows, awaited the coming
of the enemy.

I had scarce concealed myself when we heard the steps of some one
approaching down the footpath which led to the bridge. We crouched
behind the cover, convinced that the sound must come from some scout
whom our foemen had sent on in front--a big boy evidently, for his step
was heavy and slow, with a clinking noise mingling with it, of which we
could make nothing. Nearer came the sound and nearer, until a shadowy
figure loomed out of the darkness upon the other side, and after pausing
and peering for a moment, came straight for the bridge. It was only as
he was setting foot upon the plank and beginning gingerly to pick his
way across it, that we discerned the outlines of the familiar form, and
realised the dreadful truth that the stranger whom we had taken for the
advance guard of our enemy was in truth none other than Vicar Pinfold,
and that it was the rhythmic pat of his stick which we heard mingling
with his footfalls. Fascinated by the sight, we lay bereft of all power
to warn him--a line of staring eyeballs. One step, two steps, three
steps did the haughty Churchman take, when there was a rending crack,
and he vanished with a mighty splash into the swift-flowing stream. He
must have fallen upon his back, for we could see the curved outline
of his portly figure standing out above the surface as he struggled
desperately to regain his feet. At last he managed to get erect, and
came spluttering for the bank with such a mixture of godly ejaculations
and of profane oaths that, even in our terror, we could not keep from
laughter. Rising from under his feet like a covey of wild-fowl, we
scurried off across the fields and so back to the school, where, as you
may imagine, we said nothing to our good master of what had occurred.

The matter was too serious, however, to be hushed up. The sudden chill
set up some manner of disturbance in the bottle of sack which the Vicar
had just been drinking with the town clerk, and an attack of gout set in
which laid him on his back for a fortnight. Meanwhile an examination of
the bridge had shown that it had been sawn across, and an inquiry traced
the matter to Mr. Chillingfoot's boarders. To save a wholesale expulsion
of the school from the town, I was forced to acknowledge myself as both
the inventor and perpetrator of the deed. Chillingfoot was entirely in
the power of the Vicar, so he was forced to read me a long homily
in public--which he balanced by an affectionate leave-taking in
private--and to expel me solemnly from the school. I never saw my old
master again, for he died not many years afterwards; but I hear that his
second son William is still carrying on the business, which is larger
and more prosperous than of old. His eldest son turned Quaker and went
out to Penn's settlement, where he is reported to have been slain by the
savages.

This adventure shocked my dear mother, but it found great favour in the
eyes of my father, who laughed until the whole village resounded
with his stentorian merriment. It reminded him, he said, of a similar
stratagem executed at Market Drayton by that God-fearing soldier Colonel
Pride, whereby a captain and three troopers of Lunsford's own regiment
of horse had been drowned, and many others precipitated into a river, to
the great glory of the true Church and to the satisfaction of the
chosen people. Even of the Church folk many were secretly glad at the
misfortune which had overtaken the Vicar, for his pretensions and his
pride had made him hated throughout the district.

By this time I had grown into a sturdy, broad-shouldered lad, and every
month added to my strength and my stature. When I was sixteen I could
carry a bag of wheat or a cask of beer against any man in the village,
and I could throw the fifteen-pound putting-stone to a distance of
thirty-six feet, which was four feet further than could Ted Dawson, the
blacksmith. Once when my father was unable to carry a bale of skins out
of the yard, I whipped it up and bare it away upon my shoulders. The
old man would often look gravely at me from under his heavy thatched
eyebrows, and shake his grizzled head as he sat in his arm-chair puffing
his pipe. 'You grow too big for the nest, lad,' he would say. 'I doubt
some of these days you'll find your wings and away!' In my heart I
longed that the time would come, for I was weary of the quiet life of
the village, and was anxious to see the great world of which I had heard
and read so much. I could not look southward without my spirit stirring
within me as my eyes fell upon those dark waves, the white crests of
which are like a fluttering signal ever waving to an English youth and
beckoning him to some unknown but glorious goal.



Chapter III. Of Two Friends of my Youth


I fear, my children, that you will think that the prologue is over long
for the play; but the foundations must be laid before the building is
erected, and a statement of this sort is a sorry and a barren thing
unless you have a knowledge of the folk concerned. Be patient, then,
while I speak to you of the old friends of my youth, some of whom you
may hear more of hereafter, while others remained behind in the country
hamlet, and yet left traces of our early intercourse upon my character
which might still be discerned there.

Foremost for good amongst all whom I knew was Zachary Palmer, the
village carpenter, a man whose aged and labour-warped body contained the
simplest and purest of spirits. Yet his simplicity was by no means the
result of ignorance, for from the teachings of Plato to those of Hobbes
there were few systems ever thought out by man which he had not studied
and weighed. Books were far dearer in my boyhood than they are now,
and carpenters were less well paid, but old Palmer had neither wife nor
child, and spent little on food or raiment. Thus it came about that on
the shelf over his bed he had a more choice collection of books--few as
they were in number--than the squire or the parson, and these books he
had read until he not only understood them himself, but could impart
them to others.

This white-bearded and venerable village philosopher would sit by his
cabin door upon a summer evening, and was never so pleased as when
some of the young fellows would slip away from their bowls and their
quoit-playing in order to lie in the grass at his feet, and ask him
questions about the great men of old, their words and their deeds. But
of all the youths I and Reuben Lockarby, the innkeeper's son, were his
two favourites, for we would come the earliest and stop the latest to
hear the old man talk. No father could have loved his children better
than he did us, and he would spare no pains to get at our callow
thoughts, and to throw light upon whatever perplexed or troubled us.
Like all growing things, we had run our heads against the problem of
the universe. We had peeped and pryed with our boyish eyes into those
profound depths in which the keenest-sighted of the human race had seen
no bottom. Yet when we looked around us in our own village world, and
saw the bitterness and rancour which pervaded every sect, we could not
but think that a tree which bore such fruit must have something amiss
with it. This was one of the thoughts unspoken to our parents which
we carried to good old Zachary, and on which he had much to say which
cheered and comforted us.

'These janglings and wranglings,' said he, 'are but on the surface,
and spring from the infinite variety of the human mind, which will ever
adapt a creed to suit its own turn of thought. It is the solid core that
underlies every Christian creed which is of importance. Could you
but live among the Romans or the Greeks, in the days before this new
doctrine was preached, you would then know the change that it has
wrought in the world. How this or that text should be construed is a
matter of no moment, however warm men may get over it. What is of the
very greatest moment is, that every man should have a good and solid
reason for living a simple, cleanly life. This the Christian creed has
given us.'

'I would not have you be virtuous out of fear,' he said upon another
occasion. 'The experience of a long life has taught me, however, that
sin is always punished in this world, whatever may come in the next.
There is always some penalty in health, in comfort, or in peace of
mind to be paid for every wrong. It is with nations as it is with
individuals. A book of history is a book of sermons. See how the
luxurious Babylonians were destroyed by the frugal Persians, and how
these same Persians when they learned the vices of prosperity were put
to the sword by the Greeks. Read on and mark how the sensual Greeks were
trodden down by the more robust and hardier Romans, and finally how the
Romans, having lost their manly virtues, were subdued by the nations
of the north. Vice and destruction came ever hand in hand. Thus did
Providence use each in turn as a scourge wherewith to chastise the
follies of the other. These things do not come by chance. They are part
of a great system which is at work in your own lives. The longer you
live the more you will see that sin and sadness are never far apart, and
that no true prosperity can exist away from virtue.'

A very different teacher was the sea-dog Solomon Sprent, who lived in
the second last cottage on the left-hand side of the main street of the
village. He was one of the old tarpaulin breed, who had fought under
the red cross ensign against Frenchman, Don, Dutchman, and Moor, until a
round shot carried off his foot and put an end to his battles for ever.
In person he was thin, and hard, and brown, as lithe and active as a
cat, with a short body and very long arms, each ending in a great hand
which was ever half closed as though shutting on a rope. From head to
foot he was covered with the most marvellous tattooings, done in blue,
red, and green, beginning with the Creation upon his neck and winding up
with the Ascension upon his left ankle. Never have I seen such a walking
work of art. He was wont to say that had he been owned and his body cast
up upon some savage land, the natives might have learned the whole of
the blessed gospel from a contemplation of his carcass. Yet with sorrow
I must say that the seaman's religion appeared to have all worked into
his skin, so that very little was left for inner use. It had broken out
upon the surface, like the spotted fever, but his system was clear of
it elsewhere. He could swear in eleven languages and three-and-twenty
dialects, nor did he ever let his great powers rust for want of
practice. He would swear when he was happy or when he was sad, when he
was angry or when he was loving, but this swearing was so mere a trick
of speech, without malice or bitterness, that even my father could
hardly deal harshly with the sinner. As time passed, however, the old
man grew more sober and more thoughtful, until in his latter days he
went back to the simple beliefs of his childhood, and learned to fight
the devil with the same steady courage with which he had faced the
enemies of his country.

Old Solomon was a never-failing source of amusement and of interest to
my friend Lockarby and myself. On gala days he would have us in to dine
with him, when he would regale us with lobscouse and salmagundi, or
perhaps with an outland dish, a pillaw or olla podrida, or fish broiled
after the fashion of the Azores, for he had a famous trick of cooking,
and could produce the delicacies of all nations. And all the time that
we were with him he would tell us the most marvellous stories of Rupert,
under whom he served; how he would shout from the poop to his squadron
to wheel to the right, or to charge, or to halt, as the case might be,
as if he were still with his regiment of horse. Of Blake, too, he had
many stories to tell. But even the name of Blake was not so dear to our
old sailor as was that of Sir Christopher Mings. Solomon had at one time
been his coxswain, and could talk by the hour of those gallant deeds
which had distinguished him from the day that he entered the navy as a
cabin boy until he fell upon his own quarter-deck, a full admiral of the
red, and was borne by his weeping ship's company to his grave in Chatham
churchyard. 'If so be as there's a jasper sea up aloft,' said the old
seaman, 'I'll wager that Sir Christopher will see that the English flag
has proper respect paid to it upon it, and that we are not fooled by
foreigners. I've served under him in this world, and I ask nothing
better than to be his coxswain in the next--if so be as he should chance
to have a vacancy for such.' These remembrances would always end in the
brewing of an extra bowl of punch, and the drinking of a solemn bumper
to the memory of the departed hero.

Stirring as were Solomon Sprent's accounts of his old commanders, their
effect upon us was not so great as when, about his second or third
glass, the floodgates of his memory would be opened, and he would pour
out long tales of the lands which he had visited, and the peoples which
he had seen. Leaning forward in our seats with our chins resting upon
our hands, we two youngsters would sit for hours, with our eyes fixed
upon the old adventurer, drinking in his words, while he, pleased at the
interest which he excited, would puff slowly at his pipe and reel off
story after story of what he had seen or done. In those days, my dears,
there was no Defoe to tell us the wonders of the world, no _Spectator_
to lie upon our breakfast table, no Gulliver to satisfy our love of
adventure by telling us of such adventures as never were. Not once in
a month did a common newsletter fall into our hands. Personal hazards,
therefore, were of more value then than they are now, and the talk of a
man like old Solomon was a library in itself. To us it was all real. His
husky tones and ill-chosen words were as the voice of an angel, and our
eager minds filled in the details and supplied all that was wanting in
his narratives. In one evening we have engaged a Sallee rover off the
Pillars of Hercules; we have coasted down the shores of the African
continent, and seen the great breakers of the Spanish Main foaming upon
the yellow sand; we have passed the black ivory merchants with their
human cargoes; we have faced the terrible storms which blow ever around
the Cape de Boa Esperanza; and finally, we have sailed away out over the
great ocean beyond, amid the palm-clad coral islands, with the knowledge
that the realms of Prester John lie somewhere behind the golden haze
which shimmers upon the horizon. After such a flight as that we would
feel, as we came back to the Hampshire village and the dull realities
of country life, like wild birds who had been snared by the fowler and
clapped into narrow cages. Then it was that the words of my father, 'You
will find your wings some day and fly away,' would come back to me, and
set up such a restlessness as all the wise words of Zachary Palmer could
not allay.


Chapter IV. Of the Strange Fish that we Caught at Spithead

One evening in the month of May 1685, about the end of the first week
of the month, my friend Reuben Lockarby and I borrowed Ned Marley's
pleasure boat, and went a-fishing out of Langston Bay. At that time I
was close on one-and-twenty years of age, while my companion was one
year younger. A great intimacy had sprung up between us, founded on
mutual esteem, for he being a little undergrown man was proud of my
strength and stature, while my melancholy and somewhat heavy spirit took
a pleasure in the energy and joviality which never deserted him, and
in the wit which gleamed as bright and as innocent as summer lightning
through all that he said. In person he was short and broad, round-faced,
ruddy-cheeked, and in truth a little inclined to be fat, though he would
never confess to more than a pleasing plumpness, which was held, he
said, to be the acme of manly beauty amongst the ancients. The stern
test of common danger and mutual hardship entitle me to say that no
man could have desired a stauncher or more trusty comrade. As he was
destined to be with me in the sequel, it was but fitting that he should
have been at my side on that May evening which was the starting-point of
our adventures.

We pulled out beyond the Warner Sands to a place half-way between them
and the Nab, where we usually found bass in plenty. There we cast the
heavy stone which served us as an anchor overboard, and proceeded to
set our lines. The sun sinking slowly behind a fog-bank had slashed the
whole western sky with scarlet streaks, against which the wooded slopes
of the Isle of Wight stood out vaporous and purple. A fresh breeze was
blowing from the south-east, flecking the long green waves with crests
of foam, and filling our eyes and lips with the smack of the salt spray.
Over near St. Helen's Point a King's ship was making her way down the
channel, while a single large brig was tacking about a quarter of a mile
or less from where we lay. So near were we that we could catch a glimpse
of the figures upon her deck as she heeled over to the breeze, and could
bear the creaking of her yards and the flapping of her weather-stained
canvas as she prepared to go about.

'Look ye, Micah,' said my companion, looking up from his fishing-line.
'That is a most weak-minded ship--a ship which will make no way in the
world. See how she hangs in the wind, neither keeping on her course nor
tacking. She is a trimmer of the seas--the Lord Halifax of the ocean.'

'Why, there is something amiss with her,' I replied, staring across with
hand-shaded eyes. 'She yaws about as though there were no one at the
helm. Her main-yard goes aback! Now it is forward again! The folk on her
deck seem to me to be either fighting or dancing. Up with the anchor,
Reuben, and let us pull to her.'

'Up with the anchor and let us get out of her way,' he answered, still
gazing at the stranger. 'Why will you ever run that meddlesome head of
yours into danger's way? She flies Dutch colours, but who can say whence
she really comes? A pretty thing if we were snapped up by a buccaneer
and sold in the Plantations!'

'A buccaneer in the Solent!' cried I derisively. 'We shall be seeing the
black flag in Emsworth Creek next. But hark! What is that?'

The crack of a musket sounded from aboard the brig. Then came a moment's
silence and another musket shot rang out, followed by a chorus of shouts
and cries. Simultaneously the yards swung round into position, the sails
caught the breeze once more, and the vessel darted away on a course
which would take her past Bembridge Point out to the English Channel. As
she flew along her helm was put hard down, a puff of smoke shot out
from her quarter, and a cannon ball came hopping and splashing over
the waves, passing within a hundred yards of where we lay. With this
farewell greeting she came up into the wind again and continued her
course to the southward.

'Heart o' grace!' ejaculated Reuben in loose lipped astonishment. 'The
murdering villains!'

'I would to the Lord that King's ship would snap them up!' cried I
savagely, for the attack was so unprovoked that it stirred my bile.
'What could the rogues have meant? They are surely drunk or mad!'

'Pull at the anchor, man, pull at the anchor!' my companion shouted,
springing up from the seat. 'I understand it! Pull at the anchor!'

'What then?' I asked, helping him to haul the great stone up, hand over
hand, until it came dripping over the side.

'They were not firing at us, lad. They were aiming at some one in the
water between us and them. Pull, Micah! Put your back into it! Some poor
fellow may he drowning.'

'Why, I declare!' said I, looking over my shoulder as I rowed, 'there
is his head upon the crest of a wave. Easy, or we shall be over him! Two
more strokes and be ready to seize him! Keep up, friend! There's help at
hand!'

'Take help to those who need help' said a voice out of the sea. 'Zounds,
man, keep a guard on your oar! I fear a pat from it very much more than
I do the water.'

These words were delivered in so calm and self-possessed a tone that all
concern for the swimmer was set at rest. Drawing in our oars we faced
round to have a look at him. The drift of the boat had brought us so
close that he could have grasped the gunwale had he been so minded.

'Sapperment!' he cried in a peevish voice; 'to think of my brother Nonus
serving me such a trick! What would our blessed mother have said could
she have seen it? My whole kit gone, to say nothing of my venture in
the voyage! And now I have kicked off a pair of new jack boots that
cost sixteen rix-dollars at Vanseddar's at Amsterdam. I can't swim in
jack-boots, nor can I walk without them.'

'Won't you come in out of the wet, sir?' asked Reuben, who could scarce
keep serious at the stranger's appearance and address. A pair of long
arms shot out of the water, and in a moment, with a lithe, snake-like
motion, the man wound himself into the boat and coiled his great length
upon the stern-sheets. Very lanky he was and very thin, with a craggy
hard face, clean-shaven and sunburned, with a thousand little wrinkles
intersecting it in every direction. He had lost his hat, and his short
wiry hair, slightly flecked with grey, stood up in a bristle all over
his head. It was hard to guess at his age, but he could scarce have been
under his fiftieth year, though the ease with which he had boarded our
boat proved that his strength and energy were unimpaired. Of all his
characteristics, however, nothing attracted my attention so much as his
eyes, which were almost covered by their drooping lids, and yet looked
out through the thin slits which remained with marvellous brightness and
keenness. A passing glance might give the idea that he was languid and
half asleep, but a closer one would reveal those glittering, shifting
lines of light, and warn the prudent man not to trust too much to his
first impressions.

'I could swim to Portsmouth,' he remarked, rummaging in the pockets of
his sodden jacket; 'I could swim well-nigh anywhere. I once swam from
Gran on the Danube to Buda, while a hundred thousand Janissaries
danced with rage on the nether bank. I did, by the keys of St. Peter!
Wessenburg's Pandours would tell you whether Decimus Saxon could
swim. Take my advice, young men, and always carry your tobacco in a
water-tight metal box.'

As he spoke he drew a flat box from his pocket, and several wooden
tubes, which he screwed together to form a long pipe. This he stuffed
with tobacco, and having lit it by means of a flint and steel with a
piece of touch-paper from the inside of his box, he curled his legs
under him in Eastern fashion, and settled down to enjoy a smoke. There
was something so peculiar about the whole incident, and so preposterous
about the man's appearance and actions, that we both broke into a roar
of laughter, which lasted until for very exhaustion we were compelled
to stop. He neither joined in our merriment nor expressed offence at
it, but continued to suck away at his long wooden tube with a perfectly
stolid and impassive face, save that the half-covered eyes glinted
rapidly backwards and forwards from one to the other of us.

'You will excuse our laughter, sir,' I said at last; 'my friend and I
are unused to such adventures, and are merry at the happy ending of it.
May we ask whom it is that we have picked up?'

'Decimus Saxon is my name,' the stranger answered; 'I am the tenth child
of a worthy father, as the Latin implies. There are but nine betwixt me
and an inheritance. Who knows? Small-pox might do it, or the plague!'

'We heard a shot aboard of the brig,' said Reuben.

'That was my brother Nonus shooting at me,' the stranger observed,
shaking his head sadly.

'But there was a second shot.'

'Ah, that was me shooting at my brother Nonus.'

'Good lack!' I cried. 'I trust that thou hast done him no hurt.'

'But a flesh wound, at the most,' he answered. 'I thought it best to
come away, however, lest the affair grow into a quarrel. I am sure that
it was he who trained the nine-pounder on me when I was in the water.
It came near enough to part my hair. He was always a good shot with a
falconet or a mortar-piece. He could not have been hurt, however, to get
down from the poop to the main-deck in the time.'

There was a pause after this, while the stranger drew a long knife from
his belt, and cleaned out his pipe with it. Reuben and I took up our
oars, and having pulled up our tangled fishing-lines, which had been
streaming behind the boat, we proceeded to pull in towards the land.

'The question now is,' said the stranger, 'where we are to go to?'

'We are going down Langston Bay,' I answered.

'Oh, we are, are we?' he cried, in a mocking voice; 'you are sure of it
eh? You are certain we are not going to France? We have a mast and sail
there, I see, and water in the beaker. All we want are a few fish,
which I hear are plentiful in these waters, and we might make a push for
Barfleur.'

'We are going down Langston Bay,' I repeated coldly.

'You see might is right upon the waters,' he explained, with a smile
which broke his whole face up into crinkles. 'I am an old soldier, a
tough fighting man, and you are two raw lads. I have a knife, and you
are unarmed. D'ye see the line of argument? The question now is, Where
are we to go?'

I faced round upon him with the oar in my hand. 'You boasted that you
could swim to Portsmouth,' said I, 'and so you shall. Into the water
with you, you sea-viper, or I'll push you in as sure as my name is Micah
Clarke.'

'Throw your knife down, or I'll drive the boat hook through you,' cried
Reuben, pushing it forward to within a few inches of the man's throat.

'Sink me, but this is most commendable!' he said, sheathing his weapon,
and laughing softly to himself. 'I love to draw spirit out of the young
fellows. I am the steel, d'ye see, which knocks the valour out of your
flint. A notable simile, and one in every way worthy of that most witty
of mankind, Samuel Butler. This,' he continued, tapping a protuberance
which I had remarked over his chest, 'is not a natural deformity, but is
a copy of that inestimable "Hudibras," which combines the light touch
of Horace with the broader mirth of Catullus. Heh! what think you of the
criticism?'

'Give up that knife,' said I sternly.

'Certainly,' he replied, handing it over to me with a polite bow. 'Is
there any other reasonable matter in which I can oblige ye? I will
give up anything to do ye pleasure-save only my good name and soldierly
repute, or this same copy of "Hudibras," which, together with a Latin
treatise upon the usages of war, written by a Fleming and printed in
Liege in the Lowlands, I do ever bear in my bosom.'

I sat down beside him with the knife in my hand. 'You pull both oars,'
I said to Reuben; 'I'll keep guard over the fellow and see that he plays
us no trick. I believe that you are right, and that he is nothing better
than a pirate. He shall be given over to the justices when we get to
Havant.'

I thought that our passenger's coolness deserted him for a moment, and
that a look of annoyance passed over his face.

'Wait a bit!' he said; 'your name, I gather is Clarke, and your home is
Havant. Are you a kinsman of Joseph Clarke, the old Roundhead of that
town?'

'He is my father,' I answered.

'Hark to that, now!' he cried, with a throb of laughter; 'I have a
trick of falling on my feet. Look at this, lad! Look at this!' He drew
a packet of letters from his inside pocket, wrapped in a bit of tarred
cloth, and opening it he picked one out and placed it upon my knee.
'Read!' said he, pointing at it with his long thin finger.

It was inscribed in large plain characters, 'To Joseph Clarke, leather
merchant of Havant, by the hand of Master Decimus Saxon, part-owner of
the ship _Providence_, from Amsterdam to Portsmouth.' At each side it
was sealed with a massive red seal, and was additionally secured with a
broad band of silk.

'I have three-and-twenty of them to deliver in the neighbourhood,' he
remarked. 'That shows what folk think of Decimus Saxon. Three-and-twenty
lives and liberties are in my hands. Ah, lad, invoices and bills of
lading are not done up in that fashion. It is not a cargo of Flemish
skins that is coming for the old man. The skins have good English hearts
in them; ay, and English swords in their fists to strike out for freedom
and for conscience. I risk my life in carrying this letter to your
father; and you, his son, threaten to hand me over to the justices! For
shame! For shame! I blush for you!'

'I don't know what you are hinting at,' I answered. 'You must speak
plainer if I am to understand you.'

'Can we trust him?' he asked, jerking his head in the direction of
Reuben.

'As myself.'

'How very charming!' said he, with something between a smile and
a sneer. 'David and Jonathan--or, to be more classical and less
scriptural, Damon and Pythias--eh?' These papers, then, are from the
faithful abroad, the exiles in Holland, ye understand, who are thinking
of making a move and of coming over to see King James in his own country
with their swords strapped on their thighs. The letters are to those
from whom they expect sympathy, and notify when and where they will make
a landing. Now, my dear lad, you will perceive that instead of my being
in your power, you are so completely in mine that it needs but a word
from me to destroy your whole family. Decimus Saxon is staunch, though,
and that word shall never be spoken.'

'If all this be true,' said I, 'and if your mission is indeed as you
have said, why did you even now propose to make for France?'

'Aptly asked, and yet the answer is clear enough,' he replied; 'sweet
and ingenuous as are your faces, I could not read upon them that ye
would prove to be Whigs and friends of the good old cause. Ye might have
taken me to where excisemen or others would have wanted to pry and peep,
and so endangered my commission. Better a voyage to France in an open
boat than that.'

'I will take you to my father,' said I, after a few moments' thought.
'You can deliver your letter and make good your story to him. If you
are indeed a true man, you will meet with a warm welcome; but should you
prove, as I shrewdly suspect, to be a rogue, you need expect no mercy.'

'Bless the youngster! he speaks like the Lord High Chancellor of
England! What is it the old man says?

          "He could not ope
           His mouth, but out there fell a trope."

But it should be a threat, which is the ware in which you are fond of
dealing.

          "He could not let
           A minute pass without a threat."

How's that, eh? Waller himself could not have capped the couplet
neater.'

All this time Reuben had been swinging away at his oars, and we had made
our way into Langston Bay, down the sheltered waters of which we were
rapidly shooting. Sitting in the sheets, I turned over in my mind
all that this waif had said. I had glanced over his shoulder at the
addresses of some of the letters--Steadman of Basingstoke, Wintle
of Alresford, Fortescue of Bognor, all well-known leaders of the
Dissenters. If they were what he represented them to be, it was no
exaggeration to say that he held the fortunes and fates of these men
entirely in his hands. Government would be only too glad to have a valid
reason for striking hard at the men whom they feared. On the whole it
was well to tread carefully in the matter, so I restored our prisoner's
knife to him, and treated him with increased consideration. It was
well-nigh dark when we beached the boat, and entirely so before we
reached Havant, which was fortunate, as the bootless and hatless state
of our dripping companion could not have failed to set tongues wagging,
and perhaps to excite the inquiries of the authorities. As it was, we
scarce met a soul before reaching my father's door.



Chapter V. Of the Man with the Drooping Lids

My mother and my father were sitting in their high-backed chairs on
either side of the empty fireplace when we arrived, he smoking his
evening pipe of Oronooko, and she working at her embroidery. The moment
that I opened the door the man whom I had brought stepped briskly in,
and bowing to the old people began to make glib excuses for the lateness
of his visit, and to explain the manner in which we had picked him up. I
could not help smiling at the utter amazement expressed upon my mother's
face as she gazed at him, for the loss of his jack-boots exposed a pair
of interminable spindle-shanks which were in ludicrous contrast to the
baggy low country knee-breeches which surmounted them. His tunic was
made of coarse sad-coloured kersey stuff with flat new gilded brass
buttons, beneath which was a whitish callamanca vest edged with silver.
Round the neck of his coat was a broad white collar after the Dutch
fashion, out of which his long scraggy throat shot upwards with his
round head and bristle of hair balanced upon the top of it, like the
turnip on a stick at which we used to throw at the fairs. In this guise
he stood blinking and winking in the glare of light, and pattering out
his excuses with as many bows and scrapes as Sir Peter Witling in the
play. I was in the act of following him into the room, when Reuben
plucked at my sleeve to detain me.

'Nay, I won't come in with you, Micah,' said he; 'there's mischief
likely to come of all this. My father may grumble over his beer jugs,
but he's a Churchman and a Tantivy for all that. I'd best keep out of
it.'

'You are right,' I answered. 'There is no need for you to meddle in the
business. Be mum as to all that you have heard.'

'Mum as a mouse,' said he, and pressing my hand turned away into the
darkness. When I returned to the sitting-room I found that my mother had
hurried into the kitchen, where the crackling of sticks showed that she
was busy in building a fire. Decimus Saxon was seated at the edge of
the iron-bound oak chest at the side of my father, and was watching him
keenly with his little twinkling eyes, while the old man was fixing
his horn glasses and breaking the seals of the packet which his strange
visitor had just handed to him.

I saw that when my father looked at the signature at the end of the
long, closely written letter he gave a whiff of surprise and sat
motionless for a moment or so staring at it. Then he turned to the
commencement and read it very carefully through, after which he turned
it over and read it again. Clearly it brought no unwelcome news, for his
eyes sparkled with joy when he looked up from his reading, and more than
once he laughed aloud. Finally he asked the man Saxon how it had come
into his possession, and whether he was aware of the contents.

'Why, as to that,' said the messenger, 'it was handed to me by no less
a person than Dicky Rumbold himself, and in the presence of others whom
it's not for me to name. As to the contents, your own sense will tell
you that I would scarce risk my neck by bearing a message without I
knew what the message was. I am no chicken at the trade, sir. Cartels,
_pronunciamientos_, challenges, flags of truce, and proposals for
waffenstillstands, as the Deutschers call it--they've all gone through
my hands, and never one, gone awry.'

'Indeed!' quoth my father. 'You are yourself one of the faithful?'

'I trust that I am one of those who are on the narrow and thorny track,'
said he, speaking through his nose, as was the habit of the extreme
sectaries.

'A track upon which no prelate can guide us,' said my father.

'Where man is nought and the Lord is all,' rejoined Saxon.

'Good! good!' cried my father. 'Micah, you shall take this worthy man
to my room, and see that he hath dry linen, and my second-best suit of
Utrecht velvet. It may serve until his own are dried. My boots, too,
may perchance be useful--my riding ones of untanned leather. A hat with
silver braiding hangs above them in the cupboard. See that he lacks for
nothing which the house can furnish. Supper will be ready when he hath
changed his attire. I beg that you will go at once, good Master Saxon,
lest you take a chill.'

'There is but one thing that we have omitted,' said our visitor,
solemnly rising up from his chair and clasping his long nervous hands
together. 'Let us delay no longer to send up a word of praise to the
Almighty for His manifold blessings, and for the mercy wherewith He
plucked me and my letters out of the deep, even as Jonah was saved from
the violence of the wicked ones who hurled him overboard, and it may be
fired falconets at him, though we are not so informed in Holy Writ. Let
us pray, my friends!' Then in a high-toned chanting voice he offered up
a long prayer of thanksgiving, winding up with a petition for grace and
enlightenment for the house and all its inmates. Having concluded by a
sonorous amen, he at last suffered himself to be led upstairs; while
my mother, who had slipped in and listened with much edification to his
words, hurried away to prepare him a bumper of green usquebaugh with ten
drops of Daffy's Elixir therein, which was her sovereign recipe against
the effects of a soaking. There was no event in life, from a christening
to a marriage, but had some appropriate food or drink in my mother's
vocabulary, and no ailment for which she had not some pleasant cure in
her well-stocked cupboards.

Master Decimus Saxon in my father's black Utrecht velvet and untanned
riding boots looked a very different man to the bedraggled castaway who
had crawled like a conger eel into our fishing-boat. It seemed as if he
had cast off his manner with his raiment, for he behaved to my mother
during supper with an air of demure gallantry which sat upon him better
than the pert and flippant carriage which he had shown towards us in the
boat. Truth to say, if he was now more reserved, there was a very good
reason for it, for he played such havoc amongst the eatables that there
was little time for talk. At last, after passing from the round of cold
beef to a capon pasty, and topping up with a two-pound perch, washed
down by a great jug of ale, he smiled upon us all and told us that his
fleshly necessities were satisfied for the nonce. 'It is my rule,' he
remarked, 'to obey the wise precept which advises a man to rise from
table feeling that he could yet eat as much as he has partaken of.'

'I gather from your words, sir, that you have yourself seen hard
service,' my father remarked when the board had been cleared and my
mother had retired for the night.

'I am an old fighting man,' our visitor answered, screwing his pipe
together, 'a lean old dog of the hold-fast breed. This body of mine
bears the mark of many a cut and slash received for the most part in
the service of the Protestant faith, though some few were caught for the
sake of Christendom in general when warring against the Turk. There is
blood of mine, sir, Spotted all over the map of Europe. Some of it, I
confess, was spilled in no public cause, but for the protection of mine
own honour in the private duello or holmgang, as it was called among the
nations of the north. It is necessary that a cavaliero of fortune, being
for the greater part a stranger in a strange land, should be somewhat
nice in matters of the sort, since he stands, as it were, as the
representative of his country, whose good name should be more dear to
him than his own.'

'Your weapon on such occasions was, I suppose, the sword?' my father
asked, shifting uneasily in his seat, as he would do when his old
instincts were waking up.

'Broadsword, rapier, Toledo, spontoon, battle-axe, pike or half-pike,
morgenstiern, and halbert. I speak with all due modesty, but with
backsword, sword and dagger, sword and buckler, single falchion, case of
falchions, or any other such exercise, I will hold mine own against any
man that ever wore neat's leather, save only my elder brother Quartus.'

'By my faith,' said my father with his eyes shining, 'were I twenty
years younger I should have at you! My backsword play hath been thought
well of by stout men of war. God forgive me that my heart should still
turn to such vanities.'

'I have heard godly men speak well of it,' remarked Saxon. 'Master
Richard Rumbold himself spake of your deeds of arms to the Duke of
Argyle. Was there not a Scotsman, one Storr or Stour?'

'Ay, ay! Storr of Drumlithie. I cut him nigh to the saddle-bow in a
skirmish on the eve of Dunbar. So Dicky Rumbold had not forgotten it,
eh? He was a hard one both at praying and at fighting. We have ridden
knee to knee in the field, and we have sought truth together in the
chamber. So, Dick will be in harness once again! He could not be still
if a blow were to be struck for the trampled faith. If the tide of war
set in this direction, I too--who knows? who knows?'

'And here is a stout man-at-arms,' said Saxon, passing his hand down my
arm.' He hath thew and sinew, and can use proud words too upon occasion,
as I have good cause to know, even in our short acquaintance. Might it
not be that he too should strike in this quarrel?'

'We shall discuss it,' my father answered, looking thoughtfully at me
from under his heavy brows. 'But I pray you, friend Saxon, to give us
some further account upon these matters. My son Micah, as I understand,
hath picked you out of the waves. How came you there?'

Decimus Saxon puffed at his pipe for a minute or more in silence, as one
who is marshalling facts each in its due order.

'It came about in this wise,' he said at last. 'When John of Poland
chased the Turk from the gates of Vienna, peace broke out in the
Principalities, and many a wandering cavaliero like myself found his
occupation gone. There was no war waging save only some petty Italian
skirmish, in which a soldier could scarce expect to reap either dollars
or repute, so I wandered across the Continent, much cast down at the
strange peace which prevailed in every quarter. At last, however, on
reaching the Lowlands, I chanced to hear that the _Providence_, owned
and commanded by my two brothers, Nonus and Quartus, was about to start
from Amsterdam for an adventure to the Guinea coast. I proposed to them
that I should join them, and was accordingly taken into partnership on
condition that I paid one-third of the cost of the cargo. While waiting
at the port I chanced to come across some of the exiles, who, having
heard of my devotion to the Protestant cause, brought me to the Duke and
to Master Rumbold, who committed these letters to my charge. This makes
it clear how they came into my possession.'

'But not how you and they came into the water,' my father suggested.

'Why, that was but the veriest chance,' the adventurer answered with
some little confusion of manner. 'It was the _fortuna belli_, or more
properly _pacis_. I had asked my brothers to put into Portsmouth that I
might get rid of these letters, on which they replied in a boorish and
unmannerly fashion that they were still waiting for the thousand guineas
which represented my share of the venture. To this I answered with
brotherly familiarity that it was a small thing, and should be paid
for out of the profits of our enterprise. Their reply was I that I had
promised to pay the money down, and that money down they must have. I
then proceeded to prove, both by the Aristotelian and by the Platonic
or deductive method, that having no guineas in my possession it was
impossible for me to produce a thousand of them, at the same time
pointing out that the association of an honest man in the business was
in itself an ample return for the money, since their own reputations had
been somewhat blown on. I further offered in the same frank and friendly
spirit to meet either of them with sword or with pistol, a proposal
which should have satisfied any honour-loving Cavaliero. Their base
mercantile souls prompted them, however, to catch up two muskets, one of
which Nonus discharged at me, and it is likely that Quartus would have
followed suit had I not plucked the gun from his hand and unloaded it to
prevent further mischief. In unloading it I fear that one of the slugs
blew a hole in brother Nonus. Seeing that there was a chance of further
disagreements aboard the vessel, I at once decided to leave her, in
doing which I was forced to kick off my beautiful jack-boots, which were
said by Vanseddars himself to be he finest pair that ever went out of
his shop, square-toed, double-soled--alas! alas!'

'Strange that you should have been picked up by the son of the very man
to whom you had a letter.'

'The working of Providence,' Saxon answered. 'I have two-and-twenty
other letters which must all be delivered by hand. If you will permit me
to use your house for a while, I shall make it my headquarters.'

'Use it as though it were your own,' said my father.

'Your most grateful servant, sir,' he cried, jumping up and bowing
with his hand over his heart. 'This is indeed a haven of rest after the
ungodly and profane company of my brothers. Shall we then put up a hymn,
and retire from the business of the day?'

My father willingly agreed, and we sang 'Oh, happy land!' after which
our visitor followed me to his room, bearing with him the unfinished
bottle of usquebaugh which my mother had left on the table. He took it
with him, he explained, as a precaution against Persian ague, contracted
while battling against the Ottoman, and liable to recur at strange
moments. I left him in our best spare bedroom, and returned to my
father, who was still seated, heavy with thought, in his old corner.

'What think you of my find, Dad?' I asked.

'A man of parts and of piety,' he answered; 'but in truth he has brought
me news so much after my heart, that he could not be unwelcome were he
the Pope of Rome.'

'What news, then?'

'This, this!' he cried joyously, plucking the letter out of his bosom.
'I will read it to you, lad. Nay, perhaps I had best sleep the night
upon it, and read it to-morrow when our heads are clearer. May the Lord
guide my path, and confound the tyrant! Pray for light, boy, for my life
and yours may be equally at stake.'




Chapter VI. Of the Letter that came from the Lowlands

In the morning I was up betimes, and went forthwith, after the country
fashion, to our quest's room to see if there was aught in which I could
serve him. On pushing at his door, I found that it was fastened, which
surprised me the more as I knew that there was neither key nor bolt upon
the inside. On my pressing against it, however, it began to yield, and
I could then see that a heavy chest which was used to stand near the
window had been pulled round in order to shut out any intrusion. This
precaution, taken under my father's roof, as though he were in a den of
thieves, angered me, and I gave a butt with my shoulder which cleared
the box out of the way, and enabled me to enter the room.

The man Saxon was sitting up in bed, staring about him as though he
were not very certain for the moment where he was. He had tied a white
kerchief round his head by way of night bonnet, and his hard-visaged,
clean-shaven face, looking out through this, together with his bony
figure, gave him some resemblance to a gigantic old woman. The bottle
of usquebaugh stood empty by his bedside. Clearly his fears had been
realised, and he had had an attack of the Persian ague.

'Ah, my young friend!' he said at last. 'Is it, then, the custom of this
part of the country to carry your visitor's rooms by storm or escalado
in the early hours of the morning?'

'Is it the custom,' I answered sternly, 'to barricade up your door when
you are sleeping under the roof-tree of an honest man? What did you
fear, that you should take such a precaution?'

'Nay, you are indeed a spitfire,' he replied, sinking back upon the
pillow, and drawing the clothes round him, 'a feuerkopf as the Germans
call it, or sometimes tollkopf, which in its literal significance
meaneth a fool's head. Your father was, as I have heard, a strong and a
fierce man when the blood of youth ran in his veins; but you, I should
judge, are in no way behind him. Know, then, that the bearer of papers
of import, _documenta preciosa sed periculosa_, is bound to leave
nought to chance, but to guard in every way the charge which hath been
committed to him. True it is that I am in the house of an honest man,
but I know not who may come or who may go during the hours of the night.
Indeed, for the matter of that--but enough is said. I shall be with you
anon.'

'Your clothes are dry and are ready for you,' I remarked.

'Enough! enough!' he answered. 'I have no quarrel with the suit which
your father has lent me. It may be that I have been used to better, but
they will serve my turn. The camp is not the court.'

It was evident to me that my father's suit was infinitely better, both
in texture and material, than that which our visitor had brought
with him. As he had withdrawn his head, however, entirely beneath the
bedclothes, there was nothing more to be said, so I descended to the
lower room, where I found toy father busily engaged fastening a new
buckle to his sword-belt while my mother and the maid were preparing the
morning meal.

'Come into the yard with me, Micah,' quoth my father; 'I would have
a word with you.' The workmen had not yet come to their work, so we
strolled out into the sweet morning air, and seated ourselves on the low
stone bankment on which the skins are dressed.

'I have been out here this morning trying my hand at the broadsword
exercise, 'said he; 'I find that I am as quick as ever on a thrust, but
my cuts are sadly stiff. I might be of use at a pinch, but, alas! I
am not the same swordsman who led the left troop of the finest horse
regiment that ever followed a kettledrum. The Lord hath given, and the
Lord hath taken away! Yet, if I am old and worn, there is the fruit of
my loins to stand in my place and to wield the same sword in the same
cause. You shall go in my place, Micah.'

'Go! Go whither?'

'Hush, lad, and listen! Let not your mother know too much, for the
hearts of women are soft. When Abraham offered up his eldest born, I
trow that he said little to Sarah on the matter. Here is the letter.
Know you who this Dicky Rumbold is?'

'Surely I have heard you speak of him as an old companion of yours.'

'The same--a staunch man and true. So faithful was he--faithful even to
slaying--that when the army of the righteous dispersed, he did not lay
aside his zeal with his buff-coat. He took to business as a maltster at
Hoddesdon, and in his house was planned the famous Rye House Plot, in
which so many good men were involved.'

'Was it not a foul assassination plot?' I asked.

'Nay, nay, be not led away by terms! It is a vile invention of the
malignants that these men planned assassination. What they would do they
purposed doing in broad daylight, thirty of them against fifty of the
Royal Guard, when Charles and James passed on their way to Newmarket. If
the royal brothers got pistol-bullet or sword-stab, it would be in open
fight, and at the risk of their attackers. It was give and take, and no
murder.'

He paused and looked inquiringly at me; but I could not truthfully
say that I was satisfied, for an attack upon the lives of unarmed and
unsuspecting men, even though surrounded by a bodyguard, could not, to
my mind, be justified.

'When the plot failed,' my father continued, 'Rumbold had to fly for his
life, but he succeeded in giving his pursuers the slip and in making his
way to the Lowlands. There he found that many enemies of the Government
had gathered together. Repeated messages from England, especially from
the western counties and from London, assured them that if they would
but attempt an invasion they might rely upon help both in men and in
money. They were, however, at fault for some time for want of a leader
of sufficient weight to carry through so large a project; but now
at last they have one, who is the best that could have been singled
out--none other than the well-beloved Protestant chieftain James, Duke
of Monnmouth, son of Charles II.'

'Illegitimate son,' I remarked.

'That may or may not be. There are those who say that Lucy Walters was
a lawful wife. Bastard or no, he holds the sound principles of the true
Church, and he is beloved by the people. Let him appear in the West, and
soldiers will rise up like the flowers in the spring time.'

He paused, and led me away to the farther end of the yard, for the
workmen had begun to arrive and to cluster round the dipping trough.

'Monmouth is coming over,' he continued, 'and he expects every brave
Protestant man to rally to his standard. The Duke of Argyle is to
command a separate expedition, which will set the Highlands of Scotland
in a blaze. Between them they hope to bring the persecutor of the
faithful on his knees. But I hear the voice of the man Saxon, and I must
not let him say that I have treated him in a churlish fashion. Here is
the letter, lad. Read it with care, and remember that when brave men are
striving for their rights it is fitting that one of the old rebel house
of Clarke should be among them.'

I took the letter, and wandering off into the fields, I settled myself
under a convenient tree, and set myself to read it. This yellow sheet
which I now hold in my hand is the very one which was brought by Decimus
Saxon, and read by me that bright May morning under the hawthorn shade.
I give it to you as it stands;


'To my friend and companion in the cause of the Lord, Joseph
Clarke.--Know, friend, that aid and delivery is coming upon Israel,
and that the wicked king and those who uphold him shall be smitten and
entirely cast down, until their place in the land shall know them no
more. Hasten, then, to testify to thy own faith, that in the day of
trouble ye be not found wanting.

'It has chanced from time to time that many of the suffering Church,
both from our own land and from among the Scots, have assembled in this
good Lutheran town of Amsterdam, until enough are gathered together to
take a good work in hand. For amongst our own folk there are my
Lord Grey of Wark, Wade, Dare of Taunton, Ayloffe, Holmes, Hollis,
Goodenough, and others whom thou shalt know. Of the Scots there are the
Duke of Argyle, who has suffered sorely for the Covenant, Sir Patrick
Hume, Fletcher of Saltoun, Sir John Cochrane, Dr. Ferguson, Major
Elphinstone, and others. To these we would fain have added Locke and old
Hal Ludlow, but they are, as those of the Laodicean Church, neither cold
nor warm.

'It has now come to pass, however, that Monmouth, who has long lived in
dalliance with the Midianitish woman known by the name of Wentworth, has
at last turned him to higher things, and has consented to make a bid for
the crown. It was found that the Scots preferred to follow a chieftain
of their own, and it has therefore been determined that Argyle--M'Callum
More, as the breechless savages of Inverary call him--shall command a
separate expedition landing upon the western coast of Scotland. There
he hopes to raise five thousand Campbells, and to be joined by all the
Covenanters and Western Whigs, men who would make troops of the old
breed had they but God-fearing officers with an experience of the chance
of fields and the usages of war. With such a following he should be able
to hold Glasgow, and to draw away the King's force to the north. Ayloffe
and I go with Argyle. It is likely that our feet may be upon Scottish
ground before thy eyes read these words.

'The stronger expedition starts with Monmouth, and lands at a fitting
place in the West, where we are assured that we have many friends. I
cannot name the spot lest this letter miscarry, but thou shalt hear
anon. I have written to all good men along the coast, bidding them to
be prepared to support the rising. The King is weak, and hated by the
greater part of his subjects. It doth but need one good stroke to bring
his crown in the dust. Monmouth will start in a few weeks, when his
equipment is finished and the weather favourable. If thou canst come,
mine old comrade, I know well that thou wilt need no bidding of mine to
bring thee to our banner. Should perchance a peaceful life and waning
strength forbid thy attendance, I trust that thou wilt wrestle for us
in prayer, even as the holy prophet of old; and perchance, since I hear
that thou hast prospered according to the things of this world, thou
mayst be able to fit out a pikeman or two, or to send a gift towards the
military chest, which will be none too plentifully lined. We trust
not to gold, but to steel and to our own good cause, yet gold will be
welcome none the less. Should we fall, we fall like men and Christians.
Should we succeed, we shall see how the perjured James, the persecutor
of the saints with the heart like a nether millstone, the man who smiled
when the thumbs of the faithful were wrenched out of their sockets at
Edinburgh--we shall see how manfully he can bear adversity when it falls
to his lot. May the hand of the Almighty be over us!

'I know little of the bearer of this, save that he professes to be of
the elect. Shouldst thou go to Monmouth's camp, see that thou take him
with thee, for I hear that he hath had good experience in the German,
Swedish, and Otttoman wars.--Yours in the faith of Christ, Richard
Rumbold.

'Present my services to thy spouse. Let her read Timothy chapter two,
ninth to fifteenth verses.'


This long letter I read very carefully, and then putting it in my pocket
returned indoors to my breakfast. My father looked at me, as I entered,
with questioning eyes, but I had no answer to return him, for my own
mind was clouded and uncertain.

That day Decimus Saxon left us, intending to make a round of the country
and to deliver his letters, but promising to be back again ere long. We
had a small mishap ere he went, for as we were talking of his journey
my brother Hosea must needs start playing with my father's powder-flask,
which in some way went off with a sudden fluff, spattering the walls
with fragments of metal. So unexpected and loud was the explosion,
that both my father and I sprang to our feet; but Saxon, whose back
was turned to my brother, sat four-square in his chair without a glance
behind him or a shade of change in his rugged face. As luck would have
it, no one was injured, not even Hosea, but the incident made me think
more highly of our new acquaintance. As he started off down the village
street, his long stringy figure and strange gnarled visage, with my
father's silver-braided hat cocked over his eye, attracted rather
more attention than I cared to see, considering the importance of the
missives which he bore, and the certainty of their discovery should he
be arrested as a masterless man. Fortunately, however, the curiosity
of the country folk did but lead them to cluster round their doors and
windows, staring open-eyed, while he, pleased at the attention which
he excited, strode along with his head in the air and a cudgel of
mine twirling in his hand. He had left golden opinions behind him. My
father's good wishes had been won by his piety and by the sacrifices
which he claimed to have made for the faith. My mother he had taught how
wimples are worn amongst the Serbs, and had also demonstrated to her a
new method of curing marigolds in use in some parts of Lithuania. For
myself, I confess that I retained a vague distrust of the man, and
was determined to avoid putting faith in him more than was needful. At
present, however, we had no choice hut to treat him as an ambassador
from friends.

And I? What was I to do? Should I follow my father's wishes, and draw
my maiden sword on behalf of the insurgents, or should I stand aside and
see how events shaped themselves? It was more fitting that I should
go than he. But, on the other hand, I was no keen religious zealot.
Papistry, Church, Dissent, I believed that there was good in all of
them, but that not one was worth the spilling of human blood. James
might be a perjurer and a villain, but he was, as far as I could see,
the rightful king of England, and no tales of secret marriages or black
boxes could alter the fact that his rival was apparently an illegitimate
son, and as such ineligible to the throne. Who could say what evil act
upon the part of a monarch justified his people in setting him aside?
Who was the judge in such a case? Yet, on the other hand, the man had
notoriously broken his own pledges, and that surely should absolve
his subjects from their allegiance. It was a weighty question for a
country-bred lad to have to settle, and yet settled it must be, and that
speedily. I took up my hat and wandered away down the village street,
turning the matter over in my head.

But it was no easy thing for me to think seriously of anything in the
hamlet; for I was in some way, my dear children, though I say it myself,
a favourite with the young and with the old, so that I could not walk
ten paces without some greeting or address. There were my own brothers
trailing behind me, Baker Mitford's children tugging at my skirts, and
the millwright's two little maidens one on either hand. Then, when I had
persuaded these young rompers to leave me, out came Dame Fullarton the
widow, with a sad tale about how her grindstone had fallen out of its
frame, and neither she nor her household could lift it in again. That
matter I set straight and proceeded on my way; but I could not pass the
sign of the Wheatsheaf without John Lockarby, Reuben's father, plunging
out at me and insisting upon my coming in with him for a morning cup.

'The best glass of mead in the countryside, and brewed under my own
roof,' said he proudly, as he poured it into the flagon. 'Why, bless
you, master Micah, a man with a frame like yours wants store o' good
malt to keep it up wi'.'

'And malt like this is worthy of a good frame to contain it,' quoth
Reuben, who was at work among the flasks.

'What think ye, Micah?' said the landlord. 'There was the Squire o'
Milton over here yester morning wi' Johnny Ferneley o' the Bank side,
and they will have it that there's a man in Fareham who could wrestle
you, the best of three, and find your own grip, for a good round stake.'

'Tut! tut!' I answered; 'you would have me like a prize mastiff, showing
my teeth to the whole countryside. What matter if the man can throw me,
or I him?'

'What matter? Why, the honour of Havant,' quoth he. 'Is that no matter?
But you are right,' he continued, draining off his horn. 'What is all
this village life with its small successes to such as you? You are as
much out of your place as a vintage wine at a harvest supper. The whole
of broad England, and not the streets of Havant, is the fit stage for
a man of your kidney. What have you to do with the beating of skins and
the tanning of leather?'

'My father would have you go forth as a knight-errant, Micah,' said
Reuben, laughing. 'You might chance to get your own skin beaten and your
own leather tanned.'

'Who ever knew so long a tongue in so short a body?' cried the
innkeeper. 'But in good sooth, Master Micah, I am in sober earnest when
I say that you are indeed wasting the years of your youth, when life is
sparkling and clear, and that you will regret it when you have come to
the flat and flavourless dregs of old age.'

'There spoke the brewer,' said Reuben; 'but indeed, Micah, my father is
right, for all that he hath such a hops-and-water manner of putting it.'

'I will think over it,' I answered, and with a nod to the kindly couple
proceeded on my way.

Zachariah Palmer was planing a plank as I passed. Looking up he bade me
good-morrow.

'I have a book for you, lad,' he said.

'I have but now finished the "Comus,"' I answered, for he had lent me
John Milton's poem. 'But what is this new book, daddy?'

'It is by the learned Locke, and treateth of states and statecraft. It
is but a small thing, but if wisdom could show in the scales it would
weigh down many a library. You shall have it when I have finished it,
to-morrow mayhap or the day after. A good man is Master Locke. Is he not
at this moment a wanderer in the Lowlands, rather than bow his knee to
what his conscience approved not of?'

'There are many good men among the exiles, are there not?' said I.

'The pick of the country,' he answered. 'Ill fares the land that drives
the highest and bravest of its citizens away from it. The day is coming,
I fear, when every man will have to choose betwixt his beliefs and his
freedom. I am an old man, Micah boy, but I may live long enough to see
strange things in this once Protestant kingdom.'

'But if these exiles had their way,' I objected, 'they would place
Monmouth upon the throne, and so unjustly alter the succession.'

'Nay, nay,' old Zachary answered, laying down his plane. 'If they use
Monmouth's name, it is but to strengthen their cause, and to show that
they have a leader of repute. Were James driven from the throne, the
Commons of England in Parliament assembled would be called upon to
name his successor. There are men at Monmouth's back who would not stir
unless this were so.'

'Then, daddy,' said I, 'since I can trust you, and since you will tell
me what you do really think, would it be well, if Monmouth's standard be
raised, that I should join it?'

The carpenter stroked his white beard and pondered for a while. 'It is a
pregnant question,' he said at last, 'and yet methinks that there is but
one answer to it, especially for your father's son. Should an end be put
to James's rule, it is not too late to preserve the nation in its old
faith; but if the disease is allowed to spread, it may be that even the
tyrant's removal would not prevent his evil seed from sprouting. I hold,
therefore, that should the exiles make such an attempt, it is the duty
of every man who values liberty of conscience to rally round them. And
you, my son, the pride of the village, what better use could you make
of your strength than to devote it to helping to relieve your country
of this insupportable yoke? It is treasonable and dangerous
counsel--counsel which might lead to a short shrift and a bloody
death--but, as the Lord liveth, if you were child of mine I should say
the same.'

So spoke the old carpenter with a voice which trembled with earnestness,
and went to work upon his plank once more, while I, with a few words of
gratitude, went on my way pondering over what he had said to me. I had
not gone far, however, before the hoarse voice of Solomon Sprent broke
in upon my meditations.

'Hoy there! Ahoy!' he bellowed, though his mouth was but a few yards
from my ear. 'Would ye come across my hawse without slacking weigh? Clew
up, d'ye see, clew up!'

'Why, Captain,' I said, 'I did not see you. I was lost in thought.'

'All adrift and without look-outs,' quoth he, pushing his way through
the break in the garden hedge. 'Odd's niggars, man! friends are not
so plentiful, d'ye see, that ye need pass 'em by without a dip o' the
ensign. So help me, if I had had a barker I'd have fired a shot across
your bows.'

'No offence, Captain,' said I, for the veteran appeared to be nettled;
'I have much to think of this morning.'

'And so have I, mate,' he answered, in a softer voice. 'What think ye of
my rig, eh?' He turned himself slowly round in the sunlight as he spoke,
and I perceived that he was dressed with unusual care. He had a blue
suit of broadcloth trimmed with eight rows of buttons, and breeches of
the same material with great bunches of ribbon at the knee. His vest
was of lighter blue picked out with anchors in silver, and edged with
a finger's-breadth of lace. His boot was so wide that he might have had
his foot in a bucket, and he wore a cutlass at his side suspended from a
buff belt, which passed over his right shoulder.

'I've had a new coat o' paint all over,' said he, with a wink.
'Carramba! the old ship is water-tight yet. What would ye say, now, were
I about to sling my hawser over a little scow, and take her in tow?'

'A cow!' I cried.

'A cow! what d'ye take me for? A wench, man, and as tight a little craft
as ever sailed into the port of wedlock.'

'I have heard no better news for many a long day,' said I; 'I did not
even know that you were betrothed. When thou is the wedding to be?'

'Go slow, friend--go slow, and heave your lead-line! You have got out
of your channel, and are in shoal water. I never said as how I was
betrothed.'

'What then?' I asked.

'I am getting up anchor now, to run down to her and summon her. Look
ye, lad,' he continued, plucking off his cap and scratching his
ragged locks; 'I've had to do wi' wenches enow from the Levant to the
Antilles--wenches such as a sailorman meets, who are all paint and
pocket. It's but the heaving of a hand grenade, and they strike their
colours. This is a craft of another guess build, and unless I steer wi'
care she may put one in between wind and water before I so much as
know that I am engaged. What think ye, heh? Should I lay myself boldly
alongside, d'ye see, and ply her with small arms, or should I work
myself clear and try a long range action? I am none of your slippery,
grease-tongued, long-shore lawyers, but if so be as she's willing for a
mate, I'll stand by her in wind and weather while my planks hold out.'

'I can scarce give advice in such a case,' said I, 'for my experience is
less than yours. I should say though that you had best speak to her from
your heart, in plain sailor language.'

'Aye, aye, she can take it or leave it. Phoebe Dawson it is, the sister
of the blacksmith. Let us work back and have a drop of the right Nants
before we go. I have an anker newly come, which never paid the King a
groat.'

'Nay, you had best leave it alone,' I answered.

'Say you so? Well, mayhap you are right. Throw off your moorings, then,
and clap on sail, for we must go.'

'But I am not concerned,' said I.

'Not concerned! Not--' he was too much overcome to go on, and could
but look at me with a face full of reproach. 'I thought better of you,
Micah. Would you let this crazy old hulk go into action, and not stand
by to fire a broadside?'

'What would you have me do then?'

'Why, I would have you help me as the occasion may arise. If I start
to board her, I would have you work across the bows so as to rake
her. Should I range, up on the larboard quarter, do you lie, on the
starboard. If I get crippled, do you draw her fire until I refit. What,
man, you would not desert me!'

The old seaman's tropes and maritime conceits were not always
intelligible to me, but it was clear that he had set his heart upon my
accompanying him, which I was equally determined not to do. At last
by much reasoning I made him understand that my presence would be more
hindrance than help, and would probably be fatal to his chances of
success.

'Well, well,' he grumbled at last, 'I've been concerned in no such
expedition before. An' it be the custom for single ships to engage, I'll
stand to it alone. You shall come with me as consort, though, and stand
to and fro in the offing, or sink me if I stir a step.'

My mind was full of my father's plans and of the courses which lay
before me. There seemed to be no choice, however, as old Solomon was
in dead earnest, but to lay the matter aside for the moment and see the
upshot of this adventure.

'Mind, Solomon,' said I, 'I don't cross the threshold.'

'Aye, aye, mate. You can please yourself. We have to beat up against the
wind all the way. She's on the look-out, for I hailed her yesternight,
and let her know as how I should bear down on her about seven bells of
the morning watch.'

I was thinking as we trudged down the road that Phoebe would need to be
learned in sea terms to make out the old man's meaning, when he pulled
up short and clapped his hands to his pockets.

'Zounds!' he cried, 'I have forgot to bring a pistol.'

'In Heaven's name!' I said in amazement, 'what could you want with a
pistol?'

'Why, to make signals with,' said he. 'Odds me that I should have forgot
it! How is one's consort to know what is going forward when the flagship
carries no artillery? Had the lass been kind I should have fired one
gun, that you might know it.'

'Why,' I answered, 'if you come not out I shall judge that all is well.
If things go amiss I shall see you soon.'

'Aye--or stay! I'll hoist a white jack at the port-hole. A white jack
means that she hath hauled down her colours. Nombre de Dios, when I
was a powder-boy in the old ship _Lion_, the day that we engaged the
_Spiritus Sanctus_ of two tier o' guns--the first time that ever I heard
the screech of ball--my heart never thumped as it does now. What say ye
if we run back with a fair wind and broach that anker of Nants?'

'Nay, stand to it, man,' said I; for by this time, we had come to the
ivy-clad cottage behind which was the village smithy. 'What, Solomon!
an English seaman never feared a foe, either with petticoats or without
them.'

'No, curse me if he did!' quoth Solomon, squaring his shoulders, 'never
a one, Don, Devil, or Dutchman; so here goes for her!' So saying he made
his way into the cottage, leaving me standing by the garden wicket, half
amused and half annoyed at this interruption to my musings.

As it proved, the sailor had no very great difficulty with his suit, and
soon managed to capture his prize, to use his own language. I heard from
the garden the growling of his gruff voice, and a good deal of shrill
laughter ending in a small squeak, which meant, I suppose, that he was
coming to close quarters. Then there was silence for a little while, and
at last I saw a white kerchief waving from the window, and perceived,
moreover, that it was Phoebe herself who was fluttering it. Well, she
was a smart, kindly-hearted lass, and I was glad in my heart that the
old seaman should have such a one to look after him.

Here, then, was one good friend settled down finally for life. Another
warned me that I was wasting my best years in the hamlet. A third, the
most respected of all, advised me openly to throw in my lot with the
insurgents, should the occasion arise. If I refused, I should have
the shame of seeing my aged father setting off for the wars, whilst
I lingered at home. And why should I refuse? Had it not long been the
secret wish of my heart to see something of the great world, and what
fairer chance could present itself? My wishes, my friend's advice, and
my father's hopes all pointed in the one direction.

'Father,' said I, when I returned home, 'I am ready to go where you
will.'

'May the Lord be glorified!' he cried solemnly. 'May He watch over
your young life, and keep your heart steadfast to the cause which is
assuredly His!'

And so, my dear grandsons, the great resolution was taken, and I found
myself committed to one side in the national quarrel.



Chapter VII. Of the Horseman who rode from the West

My father set to work forthwith preparing for our equipment, furnishing
Saxon out as well as myself on the most liberal scale, for he was
determined that the wealth of his age should be as devoted to the cause
as was the strength of his youth. These arrangements had to be carried
out with the most extreme caution, for there were many Prelatists in
the village, and in the present disturbed state of the public mind any
activity on the part of so well known a man would have at once attracted
attention. So carefully did the wary old soldier manage matters,
however, that we soon found ourselves in a position to start at an
hour's notice, without any of our neighbours being a whit the wiser.

His first move was to purchase through an agent two suitable horses at
Chichester fair, which were conveyed to the stables of a trusty Whig
farmer living near Portchester, who was ordered to keep them until
they were called for. Of these animals one was a mottled grey, of great
mettle and power, standing seventeen and a half hands high, and well up
to my weight, for in those days, my dears, I had not laid on flesh, and
weighed a little under sixteen stone for all my height and strength.
A critic might have said that Covenant, for so I named my steed, was a
trifle heavy about the head and neck, but I found him a trusty, willing
brute, with great power and endurance. Saxon, who when fully accoutred
could scarce have weighed more than twelve stone, had a light bay
Spanish jennet, of great speed and spirit. This mare he named Chloe,
'after a godly maiden of his acquaintance,' though, as my father
remarked, there was a somewhat ungodly and heathenish smack about the
appellation. These horses and their harness were bought and held ready
without my father appearing in the matter in any way.

This important point having been settled, there was the further question
of arms to be discussed, which gave rise to much weighty controversy
between Decimus Saxon and my father, each citing many instances from
their own experiences where the presence or absence of some taslet
or arm-guard had been of the deepest import to the wearer. Your
great-grandfather had set his heart upon my wearing the breastplate
which still bore the dints of the Scottish spears at Dunbar, but on
trying it on we found it was too small for me. I confess that this was a
surprise, for when I looked back at the awe with which I had regarded
my father's huge proportions, it was marvellous to me to have
this convincing proof that I had outgrown him. By ripping down the
side-leather and piercing holes through which a lace could be passed, my
mother managed to arrange it so that I could wear it without discomfort.
A pair of taslets or thigh-pieces, with guards for the upper arm and
gauntlets, were all borrowed from the old Parliamentary equipment,
together with the heavy straight sword and pair of horse pistols which
formed the usual weapons of a cavalier. My father had chosen me a
head-piece in Portsmouth, fluted, with good barrets, padded inside with
soft leather, very light and yet very strong. When fully equipped,
both Saxon and my father agreed that I had all that was requisite for
a well-appointed soldier. Saxon had purchased a buff-coat, a steel cap,
and a pair of jack-boots, so that with the rapier and pistols which my
father had presented him with, he was ready to take the field at any
time.

There would, we hoped, be no great difficulty in our reaching Monmouth's
forces when the hour came. In those troublous times the main roads were
so infested by highwaymen and footpads, that it was usual for travellers
to carry weapons and even armour for their protection. There was no
reason therefore why our appearance should excite suspicion. Should
questions be asked, Saxon had a long story prepared, to the effect that
we were travelling to join Henry Somerset, Duke of Beaufort, to whose
household we belonged. This invention he explained to me, with many
points of corroboration which I was to furnish, but when I said
positively that I should rather be hanged as a rebel than speak a
falsehood, he looked at me open-eyed, and shook his head as one much
shocked. A few weeks of campaigning, he said, would soon cure me of my
squeamishness. For himself, no more truthful child had ever carried a
horn-book, but he had learned to lie upon the Danube, and looked upon
it as a necessary part of the soldier's upbringing. 'For what are all
stratagems, ambuscades, and outfalls but lying upon a large scale?' he
argued. 'What is an adroit commander but one who hath a facility for
disguising the truth? When, at the battle of Senlac, William the Norman
ordered his men to feign flight in order that they might break his
enemy's array, a wile much practised both by the Scythians of old and by
the Croats of our own day, pray what is it but the acting of a lie? Or
when Hannibal, having tied torches to the horns of great droves of oxen,
caused the Roman Consuls to imagine that his army was in retreat, was it
not a deception or infraction of the truth?--a point well brought out
by a soldier of repute in the treatise "An in bello dolo uti liceat;
an apud hostes falsiloquio uti liceat." And so if, after these great
models, I in order to gain mine ends do announce that we are bound to
Beaufort when we are in truth making for Monmouth, is it not in accord
with the usages of war and the customs of great commanders?' All which
specious argument I made no attempt to answer, beyond repeating that he
might avail himself of the usage, but that he must not look to me for
corroboration. On the other hand, I promised to hold my speech and to
say nothing which might hamper him, with which pledge he was forced to
be contented.

And now at last, my patient listeners, I shall be able to carry you out
of the humble life of the village, and to cease my gossip of the men who
were old when I was young, and who are now lying this many a year in
the Bedhampton churchyard. You shall come with me now, and you shall see
England as it was in those days, and you shall hear of how we set forth
to the wars, and of all the adventures which overtook us. And if what
I tell you should ever chance to differ from what you have read in the
book of Mr. Coke or of Mr. Oldmixon, or of any one else who has set
these matters down in print, do ye bear in mind that I am telling of
what I saw with these very eyes, and that I have helped to make history,
which is a higher thing than to write it.

It was, then, towards nightfall upon the twelfth day of June 1685 that
the news reached our part of the country that Monmouth had landed the
day before at Lyme, a small seaport on the boundary between Dorsetshire
and Devonshire. A great beacon blaze upon Portsdown Hill was the first
news that we had of it, and then came a rattling and a drumming
from Portsmouth, where the troops were assembled under arms. Mounted
messengers clattered through the village street with their heads low on
their horses' necks, for the great tidings must be carried to London,
that the Governor of Portsmouth might know how to act. (Note B,
Appendix.) We were standing at our doorway in the gloaming, watching
the coming and the going, and the line of beacon fires which were
lengthening away to the eastward, when a little man galloped up to the
door and pulled his panting horse up.

'Is Joseph Clarke here?' he asked.

'I am he,' said my father.

'Are these men true?' he whispered, pointing with his whip at Saxon and
myself. 'Then the trysting-place is Taunton. Pass it on to all whom ye
know. Give my horse a bait and a drink, I beg of ye, for I must get on
my way.'

My young brother Hosea looked to the tired creature, while we brought
the rider inside and drew him a stoup of beer. A wiry, sharp-faced man
he was, with a birth-mark upon his temple. His face and clothes were
caked with dust, and his limbs were so stiff from the saddle that he
could scarce put one foot before another.

'One horse hath died under me,' he said, 'and this can scarce last
another twenty miles. I must be in London by morning, for we hope that
Danvers and Wildman may be able to raise the city. Yester-evening I left
Monmouth's camp. His blue flag floats over Lyme.'

'What force hath he?' my father asked anxiously.

'He hath but brought over leaders. The force must come from you folk at
home. He has with him Lord Grey of Wark, with Wade, the German Buyse,
and eighty or a hundred more. Alas! that two who came are already lost
to us. It is an evil, evil omen.'

'What is amiss, then?'

'Dare, the goldsmith of Taunton, hath been slain by Fletcher of Saltoun
in some child's quarrel about a horse. The peasants cried out for the
blood of the Scot, and he was forced to fly aboard the ships. A sad
mishap it is, for he was a skilful leader and a veteran soldier.'

'Aye, aye,' cried Saxon impatiently, 'there will be some more skilful
leaders and veteran soldiers in the West presently to take his place.
But if he knew the usages of war, how came it that he should fight upon
a private quarrel at such a time?' He drew a flat brown book from
his bosom, and ran his long thin finger down the table of contents.
'Subisectio nona'--'here is the very case set forth, "An in hello
publico provocatus ad duellum privatae amicitiae causa declinare
possit," in which the learned Fleming layeth it down that a man's
private honour must give way to the good of the cause. Did it not happen
in my own case that, on the eve of the raising of the Anlagerung of
Vienna, we stranger officers having been invited to the tent of the
General, it chanced that a red-headed Irisher, one O'Daffy, an ancient
in the regiment of Pappenheimer, did claim precedence of me on the
ground of superiority of blood? On this I drew my glove across his face,
not, mark ye, in anger, but as showing that I differed in some degree
from his opinion. At which dissent he did at once offer to sustain his
contention, but I, having read this subsection to him, did make it clear
to him that we could not in honour settle the point until the Turk was
chased from the city. So after the onfall--'

'Nay, sir, I may hear the narrative some future day,' said the
messenger, staggering to his feet. 'I hope to find a relay at
Chichester, and time presses. Work for the cause now, or be slaves for
ever. Farewell!' He clambered into his saddle, and we heard the clatter
of his hoofs dying away down the London road.

'The time hath come for you to go, Micah,' said my father solemnly.'
Nay, wife, do not weep, but rather hearten the lad on his way by a
blithe word and a merry face. I need not tell you to fight manfully
and fearlessly in this quarrel. Should the tide of war set in this
direction, you may find your old father riding by your side. Let us now
bow down and implore the favour of the Almighty upon this expedition.'

We all knelt down in the low-roofed, heavy-raftered room while the old
man offered up an earnest, strenuous prayer for our success. Even now,
as I speak to ye, that group rises up before mine eyes. I see once
again your ancestor's stern, rugged face, with his brows knitted and
his corded hands writhed together in the fervour of his supplication. My
mother kneels beside him with the tears trickling down her sweet, placid
face, stifling her sobs lest the sound of them make my leave-taking more
bitter. The children are in the sleeping-room upstairs, and we hear the
patter of their bare feet upon the floor. The man Saxon sprawls across
one of the oaken chairs, half kneeling, half reclining, with his long
legs trailing out behind, and his face buried in his hands. All round
in the flickering light of the hanging lamp I see the objects which have
been so familiar to me from childhood--the settle by the fireplace,
the high-back stiff-elbowed chairs, the stuffed fox above the door, the
picture of Christian viewing the Promised Land from the summit of the
Delectable Mountains--all small trifles in themselves, but making up
among them the marvellous thing we call home, the all-powerful lodestone
which draws the wanderer's heart from the farther end of the earth.
Should I ever see it again save in my dreams--I, who was leaving this
sheltered cove to plunge into the heart of the storm?

The prayer finished, we all rose with the exception of Saxon, who
remained with his face buried in his hands for a minute or so before
starting to his feet. I shrewdly suspect that he had been fast asleep,
though he explained that he had paused to offer up an additional
supplication. My father placed his hands upon my head and invoked the
blessing of Heaven upon me. He then drew my companion aside, and I
heard the jingling of coin, from which I judge that he was giving him
something wherewith to start upon his travels. My mother clasped me to
her heart, and slipped a small square of paper into my hand, saying that
I was to look at it at my leisure, and that I should make her happy if
I would but conform to the instructions contained in it. This I promised
to do, and tearing myself away I set off down the darkened village
street, with my long-limbed companion striding by my side.

It was close upon one in the morning, and all the country folk had been
long abed. Passing the Wheatsheaf and the house of old Solomon, I could
not but wonder what they would think of my martial garb were they afoot.
I had scarce time to form the same thought before Zachary Palmer's
cottage when his door flew open, and the carpenter came running out with
his white hair streaming in the fresh night breeze.

'I have been awaiting you, Micah,' he cried. 'I had heard that Monmouth
was up, and I knew that you would not lose a night ere starting. God
bless you, lad, God bless you! Strong of arm and soft of heart, tender
to the weak and stern to the oppressor, you have the prayers and the
love of all who know you.' I pressed his extended hands, and the last
I saw of my native hamlet was the shadowy figure of the carpenter as he
waved his good wishes to me through the darkness.

We made our way across the fields to the house of Whittier, the Whig
farmer, where Saxon got into his war harness. We found our horses ready
saddled and bridled, for my father had at the first alarm sent a message
across that we should need them. By two in the morning we were breasting
Portsdown Hill, armed, mounted, and fairly started on our journey to the
rebel camp.


Chapter VIII. Of our Start for the Wars

All along the ridge of Portsdown Hill we had the lights of Portsmouth
and of the harbour ships twinkling beneath us on the left, while on
the right the Forest of Bere was ablaze with the signal fires which
proclaimed the landing of the invader. One great beacon throbbed upon
the summit of Butser, while beyond that, as far as eye could reach,
twinkling sparks of light showed how the tidings were being carried
north into Berkshire and eastward into Sussex. Of these fires, some were
composed of faggots piled into heaps, and others of tar barrels set upon
poles. We passed one of these last just opposite to Portchester, and the
watchers around it, hearing the tramp of our horses and the clank of
our arms, set up a loud huzza, thinking doubtless that we were King's
officers bound for the West.

Master Decimus Saxon had flung to the winds the precise demeanour which
he had assumed in the presence of my father, and rattled away with many
a jest and scrap of rhyme or song as we galloped through the darkness.

'Gadzooks!' said he frankly, 'it is good to be able to speak freely
without being expected to tag every sentence with a hallelujah or an
amen.'

'You were ever the leader in those pious exercises,' I remarked drily.

'Aye, indeed. You have nicked it there! If a thing must be done, then
take a lead in it, whatever it may be. A plaguy good precept, which has
stood me in excellent stead before now. I cannot bear in mind whether I
told you how I was at one time taken prisoner by the Turks and conveyed
to Stamboul. There were a hundred of us or more, but the others either
perished under the bastinado, or are to this day chained to an oar in
the Imperial Ottoman galleys, where they are like to remain until they
die under the lash, or until some Venetian or Genoese bullet finds its
way into their wretched carcasses. I alone came off with my freedom.'

'And pray, how did you make your escape?' I asked.

'By the use of the wit wherewith Providence hath endowed me,' he
answered complacently; 'for, seeing that their accursed religion is the
blind side of these infidels, I did set myself to work upon it. To this
end I observed the fashion in which our guard performed their morning
and evening exercises, and having transformed my doublet into a praying
cloth, I did imitate them, save only that I prayed at greater length and
with more fervour.'

'What!' I cried in horror. 'You did pretend to be a Mussulman?'

'Nay, there was no pretence. I became a Mussulman. That, however,
betwixt ourselves, as it might not stand me in very good stead with some
Reverend Aminadab Fount-of-Grace in the rebel camp, who is no admirer of
Mahmoud.'

I was so astounded at the impudence of this confession, coming from the
mouth of one who had been leading the exercises of a pious Christian
family, that I was fairly bereft of speech. Decimus Saxon whistled a few
bars of a sprightly tune, and then continued--

'My perseverance in these exercises soon led to my being singled out
from among the other prisoners, until I so prevailed upon my gaolers
that the doors were opened for me, and I was allowed out on condition
of presenting myself at the prison gates once a day. What use, think ye,
did I make of my freedom?'

'Nay, you are capable of anything,' said I.

'I set off forthwith to their chief mosque--that of St. Sophia. When the
doors opened and the muezzin called, I was ever the first to hurry into
devotions and the last to leave them. Did I see a Mussulman strike his
head upon the pavement, I would strike mine twice. Did I see him bend
and bow, I was ready to prostrate myself. In this way ere long the piety
of the converted Giaour became the talk of the city, and I was provided
with a hut in which to make my sacred meditations. Here I might have
done well, and indeed I had well-nigh made up my mind to set up as
a prophet and write an extra chapter to the Koran, when some foolish
trifle made the faithful suspicious of my honesty. It was but some
nonsense of a wench being found in my hut by some who came to consult
me upon a point of faith, but it was enough to set their heathen tongues
wagging; so I thought it wisest to give them the slip in a Levantine
coaster and leave the Koran uncompleted. It is perhaps as well, for it
would be a sore trial to have to give up Christian women and pork, for
their garlic-breathing houris and accursed kybobs of sheep's flesh.'

We had passed through Fareham and Botley during this conversation, and
were now making our way down the Bishopstoke road. The soil changes
about here from chalk to sand, so that our horses' hoofs did but make
a dull subdued rattle, which was no bar to our talk--or rather to my
companion's, for I did little more than listen. In truth, my mind was so
full of anticipations of what was before us, and of thoughts of the
home behind, that I was in no humour for sprightly chatter. The sky was
somewhat clouded, but the moon glinted out between the rifts, showing
us the long road which wound away in front of us. On either side were
scattered houses with gardens sloping down toward the road. The heavy,
sickly scent of strawberries was in the air.

'Hast ever slain a man in anger?' asked Saxon, as we galloped along.

'Never,' I answered.

'Ha! You will find that when you hear the clink of steel against steel,
and see your foeman's eyes, you will straightway forget all rules,
maxims, and precepts of the fence which your father or others may have
taught you.'

'I have learned little of the sort,' said I. My father did but teach
me to strike an honest downright blow. This sword can shear through a
square inch of iron bar.'

'Scanderbeg's sword must have Scanderbeg's arm,' he remarked. 'I
have observed that it is a fine piece of steel. One of the real old
text-compellers and psalm-expounders which the faithful drew in the days
of yore, when they would:

          "Prove their religion orthodox,
           By Apostolic blows and knocks."

You have not fenced much, then?'

'Scarce at all,' said I.

'It is as well. With an old and tried swordsman like myself, knowledge
of the use of his weapon is everything; but with a young Hotspur of your
temper, strength and energy go for much. I have oft remarked that those
who are most skilled at the shooting of the popinjay, the cleaving of
the Turk's head, and other such sports, are ever laggards in the field.
Had the popinjay a crossbow as well, and an arrow on the string, or
had the Turk a fist as well as a head, our young gallant's nerves would
scarce be as steady over the business. I make no doubt, Master Clarke,
that we shall make trusty comrades. What saith old Butler?

          "Never did trusty squire with knight,
           Or knight with squire ere jump more right."

I have scarce dared to quote "Hudibras" for these weeks past, lest I
should set the Covenant fermenting in the old man's veins.'

'If we are indeed to be comrades,' said I sternly, 'you must learn to
speak with more reverence and less flippancy of my father, who would
assuredly never have harboured you had he heard the tale which you have
told me even now.'

'Belike not,' the adventurer answered, chuckling to himself. 'It is a
long stride from a mosque to a conventicle. But be not so hot-headed,
my friend. You lack that repose of character which will come to you,
no doubt, in your more mature years. What, man! within five minutes of
seeing me you would have smitten me on the head with an oar, and ever
since you have been like a bandog at my heels, ready to hark if I do but
set my foot over what you regard as the straight line. Remember that you
go now among men who fight on small occasion of quarrel. A word awry may
mean a rapier thrust.'

'Do you bear the same in mind,' I answered hotly; 'my temper is
peaceful, but covert threats and veiled menace I shall not abide.'

'Odd's mercy!' he cried. 'I see that you will start carving me anon, and
take me to Monmouth's camp in sections. Nay, nay, we shall have fighting
enow without falling out among ourselves. What houses are those on the
left?'

'The village of Swathling,' I replied. 'The lights of Bishopstoke lie to
the right, in the hollow.'

'Then we are fifteen miles on our way, and methinks there is already
some faint flush of dawn in the east. Hullo, what have we here? Beds
must be scarce if folks sleep on the highways.'

A dark blur which I had remarked upon the roadway in front of us had
resolved itself as we approached into the figure of a man, stretched
at full length, with his face downwards, and his head resting upon his
crossed arms.

'Some reveler, mayhap, from the village inn,' I remarked.

'There's blood in the air,' said Saxon, raising up his beak-like nose
like a vulture which scents carrion. 'Methinks he sleeps the sleep which
knows no waking.'

He sprang down from his saddle, and turned the figure over upon his
back. The cold pale light of the early dawn shimmering upon his staring
eyes and colourless face showed that the old soldier's instinct was
correct, and that he had indeed drawn his last breath.

'Here's a pretty piece of work,' said Saxon, kneeling by the dead man's
side and passing his hands over his pockets. 'Footpads, doubtless. Not a
stiver in his pockets, nor as much as a sleeve-link to help pay for the
burial.'

'How was he slain!' I asked in horror, looking down at the poor vacant
face, the empty house from which the tenant had departed.

'A stab from behind and a tap on the head from the butt of a pistol.
He cannot have been dead long, and yet every groat is gone. A man of
position, too, I should judge from his dress--broadcloth coat by the
feel, satin breeches, and silver buckles on his shoes. The rogues must
have had some plunder with him. Could we but run across them, Clarke, it
would be a great and grand thing.'

'It would indeed,' said I heartily. 'What greater privilege than to
execute justice upon such cowardly murderers!'

'Pooh! pooh!' he cried. 'Justice is a slippery dame, and hath a
two-edged sword in her hand. We may have enough of justice in our
character as rebels to give us a surfeit of it. I would fain overtake
these robbers that we may relieve them of their _spolia opima_, together
with any other wealth which they may have unlawfully amassed. My learned
friend the Fleming layeth it down that it is no robbery to rob a robber.
But where shall we conceal this body?'

'Wherefore should we conceal it?' I asked.

'Why, man, unused to war or the precautions of a warrior, you must yet
see that should this body be found here, there will be a hue and cry
through the country, and that strangers like ourselves will be arrested
on suspicion. Should we clear ourselves, which is no very easy matter,
the justice will at least want to know whence we come and whither we
go, which may lead to inquiries that may bode us little good. I shall
therefore take the liberty, mine unknown and silent friend, of dragging
you into yon bushes, where for a day or two at least you are like to lie
unobserved, and so bring no harm upon honest men.'

'For God's sake do not treat it so unkindly,' I cried, springing down
from my horse and laying my hand upon my companion's arm. 'There is no
need to trail it in so unseemly a fashion. If it must be moved hence, I
shall carry it with all due reverence. 'So saying, I picked the body up
in my arms, and bearing it to a wayside clump of yellow gorse bushes, I
laid it solemnly down and drew the branches over it to conceal it.

'You have the thews of an ox and the heart of a woman, 'muttered my
companion. 'By the Mass, that old white-headed psalm-singer was right;
for if my memory serves me, he said words to that effect. A few handfuls
of dust will hide the stains. Now we may jog upon our way without any
fear of being called upon to answer for another man's sins. Let me but
get my girth tightened and we may soon be out of danger's way.'

'I have had to do,' said Saxon, as we rode onwards, 'with many gentry
of this sort, with Albanian brigands, the banditti of Piedmont, the
Lanzknechte and Freiritter of the Rhine, Algerine picaroons, and other
such folk. Yet I cannot call to mind one who hath ever been able to
retire in his old age on a sufficient competence. It is but a precarious
trade, and must end sooner or later in a dance on nothing in a tight
cravat, with some kind friend tugging at your legs to ease you of any
breath that you might have left.'

'Nor does that end all,' I remarked.

'No. There is Tophet behind and the flames of hell. So our good friends
the parsons tell us. Well, if a man is to make no money in this world,
be hanged at the end of it, and finally burn for ever, he hath assuredly
wandered on to a thorny track. If, on the other hand, one could always
lay one's hands on a well-lined purse, as those rogues have done
to-night, one might be content to risk something in the world to come.'

'But what can the well-filled purse do for them?' said I. 'What will
the few score pieces which these bloodthirsty wretches have filched from
this poor creature avail them when their own hour of death comes round?'

'True,' said Saxon dryly; 'they may, however, prove useful in the
meantime. This you say is Bishopstoke. What are the lights over yonder?'

'They come, I think, from Bishop's Waltham,' I answered.

'We must press on, for I would fain be in Salisbury before it is broad
day. There we shall put our horses up until evening and have some rest,
for there is nothing gained by man or beast coming jaded to the wars.
All this day the western roads will be crowded with couriers, and mayhap
patrolled by cavalry as well, so that we cannot show our faces upon it
without a risk of being stopped and examined. Now if we lie by all day,
and push on at dusk, keeping off the main road and making our way across
Salisbury Plain and the Somersetshire downs, we shall be less likely to
come to harm.'

'But what if Monmouth be engaged before we come up to him?' I asked.

'Then we shall have missed a chance of getting our throats cut. Why,
man, supposing that he has been routed and entirely dispersed, would
it not be a merry conceit for us to appear upon the scene as two loyal
yeomen, who had ridden all the way from Hampshire to strike in against
the King's enemies? We might chance to get some reward in money or in
land for our zeal. Nay, frown not, for I was but jesting. Breathe our
horses by walking them up this hill. My jennet is as fresh as when we
started, but those great limbs of thine are telling upon the grey.'

The patch of light in the east had increased and broadened, and the sky
was mottled with little pink feathers of cloud. As we passed over
the low hills by Chandler's Ford and Romsey we could see the smoke of
Southampton to the south-east, and the broad dark expanse of the New
Forest with the haze of morning hanging over it. A few horsemen passed
us, pricking along, too much engrossed in their own errand to inquire
ours. A couple of carts and a long string of pack-horses, laden
principally with bales of wool, came straggling along a byroad, and
the drivers waved their broad hats to us and wished us God-speed. At
Dunbridge the folk were just stirring, and paused in taking down the
cottage shutters to come to the garden railings and watch us pass. As we
entered Dean, the great red sun pushed its rosy rim over the edge of the
horizon, and the air was filled with the buzz of insects and the sweet
scent of the morning. We dismounted at this latter village, and had a
cup of ale while resting and watering the horses. The landlord could
tell us nothing about the insurgents, and indeed seemed to care very
little about the matter one way or the other. 'As long as brandy pays a
duty of six shillings and eightpence a gallon, and freight and leakage
comes to half a crown, while I am expected to sell it at twelve
shillings, it matters little to me who is King of England. Give me a
king that will prevent the hop-blight and I am his man.' Those were the
landlord's politics, and I dare say a good many more were of his way of
thinking.

From Dean to Salisbury is all straight road with moor, morass, and
fenland on either side, broken only by the single hamlet of Aldersbury,
just over the Wiltshire border. Our horses, refreshed by the short rest,
stepped out gallantly, and the brisk motion, with the sunlight and the
beauty of the morning, combined to raise our spirits and cheer us after
the depression of the long ride through the darkness, and the incident
of the murdered traveller. Wild duck, widgeon, and snipe flapped up from
either side of the road at the sound of the horses' hoofs, and once a
herd of red deer sprang to their feet from among the ferns and scampered
away in the direction of the forest. Once, too, when passing a dense
clump of trees, we saw a shadowy white creature half hidden by the
trunks, which must, I fancy, have been one of those wild cattle of
which I have heard the peasants speak, who dwell in the recesses of
the southern woods, and are so fierce and intractable that none dare
approach them. The breadth of the view, the keenness of the air, and the
novelty of the sense of having great work to do, all combined to send a
flush of life through my veins such as the quiet village existence
had never been able to give. My more experienced companion felt the
influence too, for he lifted up a cracked voice and broke into a droning
chant, which he assured me was an Eastern ode which had been taught him
by the second sister of the Hospodar of Wallachia.

'Anent Monmouth,' he remarked, coming back suddenly to the realities of
our position. 'It is unlikely that he can take the field for some days,
though much depends upon his striking a blow soon, and so raising the
courage of his followers before the King's troops can come down upon
him. He has, mark ye, not only his troops to find, but their weapons,
which is like to prove a more difficult matter. Suppose he can raise
five thousand men--and he cannot stir with less--he will not have one
musket in five, so the rest must do as they can with pikes and bills, or
such other rude arms as they can find. All this takes time, and though
there may be skirmishes, there can scarce be any engagement of import
before we arrive.'

'He will have been landed three or four days ere we reach him,' said I.

'Hardly time for him with his small staff of officers to enrol his men
and divide them into regiments. I scarce expect to find him at Taunton,
though we were so directed. Hast ever heard whether there are any rich
Papists in those parts?'

'I know not,' I replied.

'If so there might be plate chests and silver chargers, to say nothing
of my lady's jewels and other such trifles to reward a faithful soldier.
What would war be without plunder! A bottle without the wine--a shell
without the oyster. See the house yonder that peeps through the trees.
I warrant there is a store of all good things under that roof, which you
and I might have for the asking, did we but ask with our swords in our
grip. You are my witness that your father did give and not lend me this
horse.'

'Why say you that, then?'

'Lest he claim a half of whatever booty I may chance to gain. What saith
my learned Fleming under the heading "an qui militi equum praebuit,
praedae ab eo captae particeps esse debeat?" which signifieth "whether
he who lendeth a horse hath a claim on the plunder of him who borroweth
it." In this discourse he cites a case wherein a Spanish commander
having lent a steed to one of his captains, and the said captain having
captured the general of the enemy, the commander did sue him for a
half share of the twenty thousand crowns which formed the ransom of the
prisoner. A like case is noted by the famous Petrinus Bellus in his book
"De Re Militari," much read by leaders of repute.' (Note C. Appendix.)

'I can promise you,' I answered, 'that no such claim shall ever be made
by my father upon you. See yonder, over the brow of the hill, how the
sun shines upon the high cathedral tower, which points upwards with its
great stone finger to the road that every man must travel.'

'There is good store of silver and plate in these same churches,' quoth
my companion. 'I remember that at Leipsic, when I was serving my first
campaign, I got a candlestick, which I was forced to sell to a Jew
broker for a fourth of its value; yet even at his price it sufficed to
fill my haversack with broad pieces.'

It chanced that Saxon's mare had gained a stride or two upon mine whilst
he spoke, so that I was able to get a good view of him without turning
my head. I had scarce had light during our ride to see how his harness
sat upon him, but now I was amazed on looking at him to mark the change
which it had wrought in the man. In his civil dress his lankiness and
length of limb gave him an awkward appearance, but on horse-back, with
his lean, gaunt face looking out from his steel cap, his breastplate
and buff jacket filling out his figure, and his high boots of untanned
leather reaching to the centre of his thighs, he looked the veteran
man-at-arms which he purported to be. The ease with which he sat his
horse, the high, bold expression upon his face, and the great length of
his arms, all marked him as one who could give a good account of himself
in a fray. In his words alone I could have placed little trust, but
there was that in his bearing which assured even a novice like myself
that he was indeed a trained man of war.

'That is the Avon which glitters amongst the trees,' I remarked. 'We are
about three miles from Salisbury town.'

'It is a noble spire,' said he, glancing at the great stone spire in
front of us. 'The men of old would seem to have spent all their days in
piling stones upon stones. And yet we read of tough battles and shrewd
blows struck, showing that they had some time for soldierly relaxation,
and were not always at this mason work.'

'The Church was rich in those days,' I answered, shaking my bridle, for
Covenant was beginning to show signs of laziness. 'But here comes one
who might perhaps tell us something of the war.'

A horseman who bore traces of having ridden long and hard was rapidly
approaching us. Both rider and steed were grey with dust and splashed
with mire, yet he galloped with loosened rein and bent body, as one to
whom every extra stride is of value.

'What ho, friend!' cried Saxon, reining his mare across the road so as
to bar the man's passage. 'What news from the West?'

'I must not tarry,' the messenger gasped, slackening his speed for an
instant. 'I bear papers of import from Gregory Alford, Mayor of Lyme, to
Ins Majesty's Council. The rebels make great head, and gather together
like bees in the swarming time. There are some thousands in arms
already, and all Devonshire is on the move. The rebel horse under Lord
Grey hath been beaten back from Bridport by the red militia of Dorset,
but every prickeared Whig from the Channel to the Severn is making his
way to Monmouth.' With this brief summary of the news he pushed his way
past us and clattered on in a cloud of dust upon his mission.

'The broth is fairly on the fire, then,' quoth Decimus Saxon, as we rode
onwards. 'Now that skins have been slit the rebels may draw their swords
and fling away their scabbards, for it's either victory for them or
their quarters will be dangling in every market town of the county. Heh,
lad? we throw a main for a brave stake.'

'Marked ye that Lord Grey had met with a check,' said I.

'Pshaw! it is of no import. A cavalry skirmish at the most, for it is
impossible that Monmouth could have brought his main forces to Bridport;
nor would he if he could, for it is out of his track. It was one of
those three-shots-and-a-gallop affrays, where each side runs away and
each claims the victory. But here we are in the streets of Salisbury.
Now leave the talking to me, or your wrong-headed truthfulness may lay
us by the heels before our time.'

Passing down the broad High Street we dismounted in front of the Blue
Boar inn, and handed our tired horses over to the ostler, to whom
Saxon, in a loud voice, and with many rough military oaths, gave strict
injunctions as to their treatment. He then clanked into the inn parlour,
and throwing himself into one chair with his feet upon another, he
summoned the landlord up before him, and explained our needs in a tone
and manner which should give him a due sense of our quality.

'Of your best, and at once,' quoth he. 'Have your largest double-couched
chamber ready with your softest lavender-scented sheets, for we have had
a weary ride and must rest. And hark ye, landlord, no palming off your
stale, musty goods as fresh, or of your washy French wines for the true
Hainault vintage. I would have you to understand that my friend here and
I are men who meet with some consideration in the world, though we
care not to speak our names to every underling. Deserve well of us,
therefore, or it may be the worse for you.'

This speech, combined with my companion's haughty manner and fierce
face, had such an effect upon the landlord that he straightway sent
us in the breakfast which had been prepared for three officers of the
Blues, who were waiting for it in the next apartment. This kept them
fasting for another half-hour, and we could hear their oaths and
complaints through the partition while we were devouring their capon and
venison pie. Having eaten a hearty meal and washed it down with a bottle
of Burgundy we sought our room, and throwing our tired limbs upon the
bed, were soon in a deep slumber.



Chapter IX. Of a Passage of Arms at the Blue Boar

I had slept several hours when I was suddenly aroused by a prodigious
crash, followed by the clash of arms and shrill cries from the lower
floor. Springing to my feet I found that the bed upon which my comrade
had lain was vacant, and that the door of the apartment was opened. As
the uproar still continued, and as I seemed to discern his voice in the
midst of it, I caught up my sword, and without waiting to put on either
head-piece, steel-breast, or arm-plates, I hurried to the scene of the
commotion.

The hall and passage were filled with silly maids and staring drawers,
attracted, like myself, by the uproar. Through these I pushed my way
into the apartment where we had breakfasted in the morning, which was
a scene of the wildest disorder. The round table in the centre had
been tilted over upon its side, and three broken bottles of wine, with
apples, pears, nuts, and the fragments of the dishes containing them,
were littered over the floor. A couple of packs of cards and a dice-box
lay amongst the scattered feast. Close by the door stood Decimus Saxon,
with his drawn rapier in his hand and a second one beneath his feet,
while facing him there was a young officer in a blue uniform, whose face
was reddened with shame and anger, and who looked wildly about the room
as though in search of some weapon to replace that of which he had been
deprived. He might have served Cibber or Gibbons as a model for a statue
of impotent rage. Two other officers dressed in the same blue uniform
stood by their comrade, and as I observed that they had laid their hands
upon the hilts of their swords, I took my place by Saxon's side, and
stood ready to strike in should the occasion arise.

'What would the maitre d'armes say--the maitre d'escrime?' cried my
companion. 'Methinks he should lose his place for not teaching you to
make a better show. Out on him! Is this the way that he teaches the
officers of his Majesty's guard to use their weapons?'

'This raillery, sir,' said the elder of the three, a squat, brown,
heavy-faced man, 'is not undeserved, and yet might perchance be
dispensed with. I am free to say that our friend attacked you somewhat
hastily, and that a little more deference should have been shown by so
young a soldier to a cavalier of your experience.'

The other officer, who was a fine-looking, noble-featured man, expressed
himself in much the same manner. 'If this apology will serve,' said he,
'I am prepared to join in it. If, however, more is required, I shall be
happy to take the quarrel upon myself.'

'Nay, nay, take your bradawl!' Saxon answered good-humouredly, kicking
the sword towards his youthful opponent. 'But, mark you! when you would
lunge, direct your point upwards rather than down, for otherwise you
must throw your wrist open to your antagonist, who can scarce fail to
disarm you. In quarte, tierce, or saccoon the same holds good.'

The youth sheathed his sword, but was so overcome by his own easy defeat
and the contemptuous way in which his opponent had dismissed him, that
he turned and hurried out of the room. Meanwhile Decimus Saxon and the
two officers set to work getting the table upon its legs and restoring
the room to some sort of order, in which I did what I could to assist
them.

'I held three queens for the first time to-day,' grumbled the soldier of
fortune. 'I was about to declare them when this young bantam flew at my
throat. He hath likewise been the cause of our losing three flasks of
most excellent muscadine. When he hath drunk as much bad wine as I have
been forced to do, he will not be so hasty in wasting the good.'

'He is a hot-headed youngster,' the older officer replied, 'and a little
solitary reflection added to the lesson which you have taught him may
bring him profit. As for the muscadine, that loss will soon be repaired,
the more gladly as your friend here will help us to drink it.'

'I was roused by the crash of weapons,' said I, 'and I scarce know now
what has occurred.'

'Why, a mere tavern brawl, which your friend's skill and judgment
prevented from becoming serious. I prythee take the rush-bottomed chair,
and do you, Jack, order the wine. If our comrade hath spilled the last
it is for us to furnish this, and the best the cellars contain. We have
been having a hand at basset, which Mr. Saxon here playeth as skilfully
as he wields the small-sword. It chanced that the luck ran against young
Horsford, which doubtless made him prone to be quick in taking offence.
Your friend in conversation, when discoursing of his experiences in
foreign countries, remarked that the French household troops were to
his mind brought to a higher state of discipline than any of our own
regiments, on which Horsford fired up, and after a hot word or two they
found themselves, as you have seen, at drawn bilbo. The boy hath seen no
service, and is therefore over-eager to give proof of his valour.'

'Wherein,' said the tall officer, 'he showed a want of thought towards
me, for had the words been offensive it was for me, who am a senior
captain and brevet-major, to take it up, and not for a slip of a cornet,
who scarce knows enough to put his troop through the exercise.'

'You say right, Ogilvy,' said the other, resuming his seat by the table
and wiping the cards which had been splashed by the wine.' Had the
comparison been made by an officer of Louis's guard for the purpose
of contumely and braggadocio, it would then indeed have become us to
venture a passado. But when spoken by an Englishman of ripe experience
it becomes a matter of instructive criticism, which should profit rather
than annoy.'

'True, Ambrose,' the other answered. 'Without such criticism a force
would become stagnant, and could never hope to keep level with those
continental armies, which are ever striving amongst themselves for
increased efficacy.'

So pleased was I at these sensible remarks on the part of the strangers,
that I was right glad to have the opportunity of making their closer
acquaintance over a flask of excellent wine. My father's prejudices
had led me to believe that a King's officer was ever a compound of the
coxcomb and the bully, but I found on testing it that this idea, like
most others which a man takes upon trust, had very little foundation
upon truth. As a matter of fact, had they been dressed in less warlike
garb and deprived of their swords and jack-boots, they would have passed
as particularly mild-mannered men, for their conversation ran in the
learned channels, and they discussed Boyle's researches in chemistry and
the ponderation of air with much gravity and show of knowledge. At
the same time, their brisk bearing and manly carriage showed that in
cultivating the scholar they hail not sacrificed the soldier.

'May I ask, sir,' said one of them, addressing Saxon, 'whether in
your wide experiences you have ever met with any of those sages and
philosophers who have conferred such honour and fame upon France and
Germany?'

My companion looked ill at ease, as one who feels that he has been taken
off his ground. 'There was indeed one such at Nurnberg,' he answered,
'one Gervinus or Gervanus, who, the folk said, could turn an ingot of
iron into an ingot of gold as easily as I turn this tobacco into ashes.
Old Pappenheimer shut him up with a ton of metal, and threatened to put
the thumbikins upon him unless he changed it into gold pieces. I can
vouch for it that there was not a yellow boy there, for I was captain of
the guard and searched the whole dungeon through. To my sorrow I say it,
for I had myself added a small iron brazier to the heap, thinking that
if there should be any such change it would be as well that I should
have some small share in the experiment.'

'Alchemy, transmutation of metals, and the like have been set aside by
true science,' remarked the taller officer. 'Even old Sir Thomas Browne
of Norwich, who is ever ready to plead the cause of the ancients, can
find nothing to say in favour of it. From Trismegistus downwards through
Albertus Magnus, Aquinas, Raymond Lullius, Basil Valentine, Paracelsus,
and the rest, there is not one who has left more than a cloud of words
behind him.'

'Nor did the rogue I mention,' said Saxon. 'There was another,
Van Helstatt, who was a man of learning, and cast horoscopes in
consideration of some small fee or honorarium. I have never met so wise
a man, for he would talk of the planets and constellations as though he
kept them all in his own backyard. He made no more of a comet than if it
were a mouldy china orange, and he explained their nature to us, saying
that they were but common stars which had had a hole knocked in them, so
that their insides or viscera protruded. He was indeed a philosopher!'

'And did you ever put his skill to the test?' asked one of the officers,
with a smile.

'Not I, forsooth, for I have ever kept myself clear of black magic or
diablerie of the sort. My comrade Pierce Scotton, who was an Oberst
in the Imperial cavalry brigade, did pay him a rose noble to have his
future expounded. If I remember aright, the stars said that he was
over-fond of wine and women--he had a wicked eye and a nose like a
carbuncle. 'They foretold also that he would attain a marshal's baton
and die at a ripe age, which might well have come true had he not been
unhorsed a month later at Ober-Graustock, and slain by the hoofs of his
own troop. Neither the planets nor even the experienced farrier of
the regiment could have told that the brute would have foundered so
completely.'

The officers laughed heartily at my companion's views, and rose from
their chairs, for the bottle was empty and the evening beginning to
draw in. 'We have work to do here,' said the one addressed as Ogilvy.
'Besides, we must find this foolish boy of ours, and tell him that it is
no disgrace to be disarmed by so expert a swordsman. We have to prepare
the quarters for the regiment, who will be up to join Churchill's
forces not later than to-night. Ye are yourselves bound for the West, I
understand?'

'We belong to the Duke of Beaufort's household,' said Saxon.

'Indeed! I thought ye might belong to Portman's yellow regiment of
militia. I trust that the Duke will muster every man he can, and make
play until the royal forces come up.'

'How many will Churchill bring?' asked my companion carelessly.

'Eight hundred horse at the most, but my Lord Feversham will follow
after with close on four thousand foot.'

'We may meet on the field of battle, if not before,' said I, and we bade
our friendly enemies a very cordial adieu.

'A skilful equivoque that last of yours, Master Micah,' quoth Decimus
Saxon, 'though smacking of double dealing in a truth-lover like
yourself. If we meet them in battle I trust that it may be with
chevaux-de-frise of pikes and morgenstierns before us, and a litter of
caltrops in front of them, for Monmouth has no cavalry that could stand
for a moment against the Royal Guards.'

'How came you to make their acquaintance?' I asked.

'I slept a few hours, but I have learned in camps to do with little
rest. Finding you in sound slumber, and hearing the rattle of the
dice-box below, I came softly down and found means to join their
party--whereby I am a richer man by fifteen guineas, and might have
had more had that young fool not lugged out at me, or had the talk not
turned afterwards upon such unseemly subjects as the laws of chemistry
and the like. Prythee, what have the Horse Guards Blue to do with the
laws of chemistry? Wessenburg of the Pandours would, even at his own
mess table, suffer much free talk--more perhaps than fits in with the
dignity of a leader. Had his officers ventured upon such matter as
this, however, there would have been a drum-head court-martial, or a
cashiering at the least.'

Without stopping to dispute either Master Saxon's judgment or that of
Wessenburg of the Pandours, I proposed that we should order an evening
meal, and should employ the remaining hour or two of daylight in looking
over the city. The principal sight is of course the noble cathedral,
which is built in such exact proportion that one would fail to
understand its great size did one not actually enter it and pace round
the long dim aisles. So solemn were its sweeping arches and the long
shafts of coloured light which shone through the stained-glass windows,
throwing strange shadows amongst the pillars, that even my companion,
albeit not readily impressed, was silent and subdued. It was a great
prayer in stone.

On our way back to the inn we passed the town lock-up, with a railed
space in front of it, in which three great black-muzzled bloodhounds
were stalking about, with fierce crimsoned eyes and red tongues lolling
out of their mouths. They were used, a bystander told us, for the
hunting down of criminals upon Salisbury Plain, which had been a refuge
for rogues and thieves, until this means had been adopted for following
them to their hiding-places. It was well-nigh dark before we returned to
the hostel, and entirely so by the time that we had eaten our suppers,
paid our reckoning, and got ready for the road.

Before we set off I bethought me of the paper which my mother had
slipped into my hand on parting, and drawing it from my pouch I read
it by the rushlight in our chamber. It still bore the splotches of the
tears which she had dropped on it, poor soul, and ran in this wise:--

'Instructions from Mistress Mary Clarke to her son Micah, on the twelfth
day of June in the year of our Lord sixteen hundred and eighty-five.

'On occasion of his going forth, like David of old, to do battle
with the Goliath of Papistry, which hath overshadowed and thrown into
disrepute that true and reverent regard for ritual which should exist in
the real Church of England, as ordained by law.

'Let these points be observed by him, namely, to wit:

'1. Change your hosen when the occasion serves. You have two pairs in
your saddle-bag, and can buy more, for the wool work is good in the
West.

'2. A hare's foot suspended round the neck driveth away colic.

'3. Say the Lord's Prayer night and morning. Also read the scriptures,
especially Job, the Psalms, and the Gospel according to St. Matthew.

'4. Daffy's elixir possesses extraordinary powers in purifying the blood
and working off all phlegms, humours, vapours, or rheums. The dose is
five drops. A small phial of it will be found in the barrel of your left
pistol, with wadding around it lest it come to harm.

'5. Ten golden pieces are sewn into the hem of your under doublet. Touch
them not, save as a last resource.

'6. Fight stoutly for the Lord, and yet I pray you, Micah, be not too
forward in battle, but let others do their turn also.

Press not into the heart of the fray, and yet flinch not from the
standard of the Protestant faith.

'And oh, Micah, my own bright boy, come back safe to your mother, or my
very heart will break!

'And the deponent will ever pray.'


The sudden gush of tenderness in the last few lines made the tears
spring to my eyes, and yet I could scarce forbear from smiling at the
whole composition, for my dear mother had little time to cultivate the
graces of style, and it was evidently her thought that in order to make
her instructions binding it was needful to express them in some sort of
legal form. I had little time to think over her advice, however, for I
had scarce finished reading it before the voice of Decimus Saxon, and
the clink of the horses' hoofs upon the cobble-stones of the yard,
informed me that all was ready for our departure.




Chapter X. Of our Perilous Adventure on the Plain

We were not half a mile from the town before the roll of kettledrums and
the blare of bugles swelling up musically through the darkness announced
the arrival of the regiment of horse which our friends at the inn had
been expecting.

'It is as well, perhaps,' said Saxon, 'that we gave them the slip,
for that young springald might have smelled a rat and played us some
ill-turn. Have you chanced to see my silken kerchief?'

'Not I,' I answered.

'Nay, then, it must have fallen from my bosom during our ruffle. I
can ill afford to leave it, for I travel light in such matters. Eight
hundred men, quoth the major, and three thousand to follow. Should I
meet this same Oglethorpe or Ogilvy when the little business is over,
I shall read him a lesson on thinking less of chemistry and more of
the need of preserving military precautions. It is well always to be
courteous to strangers and to give them information, but it is well also
that the information should be false.'

'As his may have been,' I suggested.

'Nay, nay, the words came too glibly from his tongue. So ho, Chloe, so
ho! She is full of oats and would fain gallop, but it is so plaguy dark
that we can scarce see where we are going.'

We had been trotting down the broad high-road shimmering vaguely white
in the gloom, with the shadowy trees dancing past us on either side,
scarce outlined against the dark background of cloud. We were now coming
upon the eastern edge of the great plain, which extends forty miles one
way and twenty the other, over the greater part of Wiltshire and past
the boundaries of Somersetshire. The main road to the West skirts this
wilderness, but we had agreed to follow a less important track,
which would lead us to our goal, though in a more tedious manner. Its
insignificance would, we hoped, prevent it from being guarded by the
King's horse. We had come to the point where this byroad branches off
from the main highway when we heard the clatter of horses' hoofs behind
us.

'Here comes some one who is not afraid to gallop,' I remarked.

'Halt here in the shadow!' cried Saxon, in a short, quick whisper. 'Have
your blade loose in the scabbard. He must have a set errand who rides so
fast o' nights.'

Looking down the road we could make out through the darkness a shadowy
blur which soon resolved itself into man and horse. The rider was
well-nigh abreast of us before he was aware of our presence, when he
pulled up his steed in a strange, awkward fashion, and faced round in
our direction.

'Is Micah Clarke there?' he said, in a voice which was strangely
familiar to my ears.

'I am Micah Clarke,' said I.

'And I am Reuben Lockarby,' cried our pursuer, in a mock heroic voice.
'Ah, Micah lad, I'd embrace you were it not that I should assuredly fall
out of the saddle if I attempted it, and perchance drag you along. That
sudden pull up well-nigh landed me on the roadway. I have been sliding
off and clambering on ever since I bade goodbye to Havant. Sure, such a
horse for slipping from under one was never bestridden by man.'

'Good Heavens, Reuben!' I cried in amazement, 'what brings you all this
way from home?'

'The very same cause which brings you, Micah, and also Don Decimo Saxon,
late of the Solent, whom methinks I see in the shadow behind you. How
fares it, oh illustrious one?'

'It is you, then, young cock of the woods!' growled Saxon, in no very
overjoyed voice.

'No less a person,' said Reuben. 'And now, my gay cavalieros, round with
your horses and trot on your way, for there is no time to be lost. We
ought all to be at Taunton to-morrow.'

'But, my dear Reuben,' said I, 'it cannot be that you are coming with us
to join Monmouth. What would your father say? This is no holiday jaunt,
but one that may have a sad and stern ending. At the best, victory can
only come through much bloodshed and danger. At the worst, we are as
like to wind up upon a scaffold as not.'

'Forwards, lads, forwards!' cried he, spurring on his horse, 'it is all
arranged and settled. I am about to offer my august person, together
with a sword which I borrowed and a horse which I stole, to his most
Protestant highness, James, Duke of Monmouth.'

'But how comes it all?' I asked, as we rode on together. 'It warms my
very heart to see you, but you were never concerned either in religion
or in politics. Whence, then, this sudden resolution?'

'Well, truth to tell,' he replied, 'I am neither a king's man nor a
duke's man, nor would I give a button which sat upon the throne. I do
not suppose that either one or the other would increase the custom of
the Wheatsheaf, or want Reuben Lockarby for a councillor. I am a Micah
Clarke man, though, from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet;
and if he rides to the wars, may the plague strike me if I don't stick
to his elbow!' He raised his hand excitedly as he spoke, and instantly
losing his balance, he shot into a dense clump of bushes by the roadside
whence his legs flapped helplessly in the darkness.

'That makes the tenth,' said he, scrambling out and clambering into
his saddle once more. 'My father used to tell me not to sit a horse too
closely. "A gentle rise and fall," said the old man. Egad, there is more
fall than rise, and it is anything but gentle.'

'Odd's truth!' exclaimed Saxon. 'How in the name of all the saints in
the calendar do you expect to keep your seat in the presence of an enemy
if you lose it on a peaceful high-road?'

'I can but try, my illustrious,' he answered, rearranging his ruffled
clothing. 'Perchance the sudden and unexpected character of my movements
may disconcert the said enemy.'

'Well, well, there may be more truth in that than you are aware of,'
quoth Saxon, riding upon Lockarby's bridle arm, so that there was scarce
room for him to fall between us. 'I had sooner fight a man like that
young fool at the inn, who knew a little of the use of his weapon, than
one like Micah here, or yourself, who know nothing. You can tell what
the one is after, but the other will invent a system of his own which
will serve his turn for the nonce. Ober-hauptmann Muller was reckoned to
be the finest player at the small-sword in the Kaiser's army, and could
for a wager snick any button from an opponent's vest without cutting the
cloth. Yet was he slain in an encounter with Fahnfuhrer Zollner, who was
a cornet in our own Pandour corps, and who knew as much of the rapier as
you do of horsemanship. For the rapier, be it understood, is designed
to thrust and not to cut, so that no man wielding it ever thinks of
guarding a side-stroke. But Zollner, being a long-armed man, smote his
antagonist across the face with his weapon as though it had been a
cane, and then, ere he had time to recover himself, fairly pinked him.
Doubtless if the matter were to do again, the Oberhauptmann would have
got his thrust in sooner, but as it was, no explanation or excuse could
get over the fact that the man was dead.'

'If want of knowledge maketh a dangerous swordsman,' quoth Reuben, 'then
am I even more deadly than the unpronounceable gentleman whom you have
mentioned. To continue my story, however, which I broke off in order to
step down from my horse, I found out early in the morning that ye were
gone, and Zachary Palmer was able to tell me whither. I made up my mind,
therefore, that I would out into the world also. To this end I borrowed
a sword from Solomon Sprent, and my father having gone to Gosport,
I helped myself to the best nag in his stables--for I have too much
respect for the old man to allow one of his flesh and blood to go
ill-provided to the wars. All day I have ridden, since early morning,
being twice stopped on suspicion of being ill-affected, but having the
good luck to get away each time. I knew that I was close at your heels,
for I found them searching for you at the Salisbury Inn.'

Decimus whistled. 'Searching for us?' said he.

'Yes. It seems that they had some notion that ye were not what ye
professed to be, so the inn was surrounded as I passed, but none knew
which road ye had taken.'

'Said I not so?' cried Saxon. 'That young viper hath stirred up the
regiment against us. We must push on, for they may send a party on our
track.'

'We are off the main road now, 'I remarked; 'even should they pursue us,
they would be unlikely to follow this side track.'

'Yet it would be wise to show them a clean pair of heels,' said Saxon,
spurring his mare into a gallop. Lockarby and I followed his example,
and we all three rode swiftly along the rough moorland track.

We passed through scattered belts of pinewood, where the wild cat howled
and the owl screeched, and across broad stretches of fenland and moor,
where the silence was only broken by the booming cry of the bittern or
the fluttering of wild duck far above our heads. The road was in parts
overgrown with brambles, and was so deeply rutted and so studded with
sharp and dangerous hollows, that our horses came more than once upon
their knees. In one place the wooden bridge which led over a stream had
broken down, and no attempt had been made to repair it, so that we were
compelled to ride our horses girth deep through the torrent. At first
some scattered lights had shown that we were in the neighbourhood of
human habitations, but these became fewer as we advanced, until the last
died away and we found ourselves upon the desolate moor which stretched
away in unbroken solitude to the shadowy horizon. The moon had broken
through the clouds and now shone hazily through wreaths of mist,
throwing a dim light over the wild scene, and enabling us to keep to
the track, which was not fenced in in any way and could scarce be
distinguished from the plain around it.

We had slackened our pace under the impression that all fear of pursuit
was at an end, and Reuben was amazing us by an account of the excitement
which had been caused in Havant by our disappearance, when through the
stillness of the night a dull, muffled rat-tat-tat struck upon my ear.
At the same moment Saxon sprang from his horse and listened intently
with sidelong head.

'Boot and saddle!' he cried, springing into his seat again. 'They are
after us as sure as fate. A dozen troopers by the sound. We must shake
them off, or goodbye to Monmouth.'

'Give them their heads,' I answered, and striking spurs into our steeds,
we thundered on through the darkness. Covenant and Chloe were as fresh
as could be wished, and soon settled down into a long springy gallop.
Our friend's horse however, had been travelling all day, and its
long-drawn, laboured breathing showed that it could not hold out for
long. Through the clatter of our horses' hoofs I could still from time
to time hear the ominous murmur from behind us.

'This will never do, Reuben,' said I anxiously, as the weary creature
stumbled, and the rider came perilously near to shooting over its head.

'The old horse is nearly foundered,' he answered ruefully. 'We are off
the road now, and the rough ground is too much for her.'

'Yes, we are off the track,' cried Saxon over his shoulder--for he led
us by a few paces. 'Bear in mind that the Bluecoats have been on the
march all day, so that their horses may also be blown. How in Himmel
came they to know which road we took?'

As if in answer to his ejaculation, there rose out of the still night
behind us a single, clear, bell-like note, swelling and increasing in
volume until it seemed to fill the whole air with its harmony.

'A bloodhound!' cried Saxon.

A second sharper, keener note, ending in an unmistakable howl, answered
the first.

'Another of them,' said he. 'They have loosed the brutes that we saw
near the Cathedral. Gad! we little thought when we peered over the rails
at them, a few hours ago, that they would so soon be on our own track.
Keep a firm knee and a steady seat, for a slip now would be your last.'

'Holy mother!' cried Reuben, 'I had steeled myself to die in battle--but
to be dogsmeat! It is something outside the contract.'

'They hold them in leash,' said Saxon, between his teeth, 'else they
would outstrip the horses and be lost in the darkness.

Could we but come on running water we might put them off our track.'

'My horse cannot hold on at this pace for more than a very few minutes,'
Reuben cried. 'If I break down, do ye go on, for ye must remember
that they are upon your track and not mine. They have found cause for
suspicion of the two strangers of the inn, but none of me.'

'Nay, Reuben, we shall stand or fall together,' said I sadly, for at
every step his horse grew more and more feeble. 'In this darkness they
will make little distinction between persons.'

'Keep a good heart,' shouted the old soldier, who was now leading us by
twenty yards or more. 'We can hear them because the wind blows from that
way, but it's odds whether they have heard us. Methinks they slacken in
their pursuit.'

'The sound of their horses has indeed grown fainter,' said I joyfully.

'So faint that I can hear it no longer,' my companion cried.

We reined up our panting steeds and strained our ears, but not a
sound could we hear save the gentle murmur of the breeze amongst the
whin-bushes, and the melancholy cry of the night-jar. Behind us the
broad rolling plain, half light and half shadow, stretched away to
the dim horizon without sign of life or movement. 'We have either
outstripped them completely, or else they have given up the chase,' said
I. 'What ails the horses that they should tremble and snort?'

'My poor beast is nearly done for,' Reuben remarked, leaning forward and
passing his hand down the creature's reeking neck.

'For all that we cannot rest,' said Saxon. 'We may not be out of danger
yet. Another mile or two may shake us clear. But I like it not.'

'Like not what?'

'These horses and their terrors. The beasts can at times both see and
hear more than we, as I could show by divers examples drawn from mine
own experience on the Danube and in the Palatinate, were the time and
place more fitting. Let us on, then, before we rest.'

The weary horses responded bravely to the call, and struggled onwards
over the broken ground for a considerable time. At last we were thinking
of pulling up in good earnest, and of congratulating ourselves upon
having tired out our pursuers, when of a sudden the bell-like baying
broke upon our ears far louder than it had been before--so loud, indeed,
that it was evident that the dogs were close upon our heels.

'The accursed hounds!' cried Saxon, putting spurs to his horse and
shooting ahead of us; 'I feared as much. They have freed them from the
leash. There is no escape from the devils, but we can choose the spot
where we shall make our stand.'

'Come on, Reuben,' I shouted. 'We have only to reckon with the dogs now.
Their masters have let them loose, and turned back for Salisbury.'

'Pray heaven they break their necks before they get there!' he cried.
'They set dogs on us as though we were rats in a cock-pit. Yet they call
England a Christian country! It's no use, Micah. Poor Dido can't stir
another step.'

As he spoke, the sharp fierce bay of the hounds rose again, clear and
stern on the night air, swelling up from a low hoarse growl to a high
angry yelp. There seemed to be a ring of exultation in their wild cry,
as though they knew that their quarry was almost run to earth.

'Not another step!' said Reuben Lockarby, pulling up and drawing his
sword. 'If I must fight, I shall fight here.'

'There could be no better place,' I replied. Two great jagged rocks rose
before us, jutting abruptly out of the ground, and leaving a space of
twelve or fifteen feet between them. Through this gap we rode, and
I shouted loudly for Saxon to join us. His horse, however, had been
steadily gaining upon ours, and at the renewed alarm had darted off
again, so that he was already some hundred yards from us. It was useless
to summon him, even could he hear our voices, for the hounds would be
upon us before he could return.

'Never heed him,' I said hurriedly. 'Do you rein your steed behind
that rock, and I behind this. They will serve to break the force of the
attack. Dismount not, but strike down, and strike hard.'

On either side in the shadow of the rock we waited in silence for our
terrible pursuers. Looking back at it, my dear children, I cannot but
think that it was a great trial on such young soldiers as Reuben and
myself to be put, on the first occasion of drawing our swords, into such
a position. For I have found, and others have confirmed my opinion,
that of all dangers that a man is called upon to face, that arising from
savage and determined animals is the most unnerving. For with men there
is ever the chance that some trait of weakness or of want of courage may
give you an advantage over them, but with fierce beasts there is no such
hope. We knew that the creatures to whom we were opposed could never
be turned from our throats while there was breath in their bodies. One
feels in one's heart, too, that the combat is an unequal one, for your
life is precious at least to your friends, while their lives, what are
they? All this and a great deal more passed swiftly through our minds
as we sat with drawn swords, soothing our trembling horses as best we
might, and waiting for the coming of the hounds.

Nor had we long to wait. Another long, deep, thunderous bay sounded
in our ears, followed by a profound silence, broken only by the quick
shivering breathing of the horses. Then suddenly, and noiselessly, a
great tawny brute, with its black muzzle to the earth, and its overhung
cheeks napping on either side, sprang into the band of moonlight between
the rocks, and on into the shadow beyond. It never paused or swerved for
an instant, but pursued its course straight onwards without a glance
to right or to left. Close behind it came a second, and behind that a
third, all of enormous size, and looking even larger and more terrible
than they were in the dim shifting light. Like the first, they took no
notice of our presence, but bounded on along the trail left by Decimus
Saxon.

The first and second I let pass, for I hardly realised that they so
completely overlooked us. When the third, however, sprang out into the
moonlight, I drew my right-hand pistol from its holster, and resting
its long barrel across my left forearm, I fired at it as it passed. The
bullet struck the mark, for the brute gave a fierce howl of rage and
pain, but true to the scent it never turned or swerved. Lockarby fired
also as it disappeared among the brushwood, but with no apparent effect.
So swiftly and so noiselessly did the great hounds pass, that they might
have been grim silent spirits of the night, the phantom dogs of Herne
the hunter, but for that one fierce yelp which followed my shot.

'What brutes!' my companion ejaculated; 'what shall we do, Micah?'

'They have clearly been laid on Saxon's trail,' said I. 'We must follow
them up, or they will be too many for him. Can you hear anything of our
pursuers?'

'Nothing.'

'They have given up the chase, then, and let the dogs loose as a last
resource. Doubtless the creatures are trained to return to the town. But
we must push on, Reuben, if we are to help our companion.'

'One more spurt, then, little Dido,' cried Reuben; 'can you muster
strength for one more? Nay, I have not the heart to put spurs to you. If
you can do it, I know you will.'

The brave mare snorted, as though she understood her riders words, and
stretched her weary limbs into a gallop. So stoutly did she answer the
appeal that, though I pressed Covenant to his topmost speed, she was
never more than a few strides behind him.

'He took this direction,' said I, peering anxiously out into the
darkness. 'He can scarce have gone far, for he spoke of making a stand.
Or, perhaps, finding that we are not with him, he may trust to the speed
of his horse.'

'What chance hath a horse of outstripping these brutes?' Reuben
answered. 'They must run him to earth, and he knows it. Hullo! what have
we here?'

A dark dim form lay stretched in the moonlight in front of us. It was
the dead body of a hound--the one evidently at which I had fired.

'There is one of them disposed of, 'I cried joyously; 'we have but two
to settle with now.'

'As I spoke we heard the crack of two pistol-shots some little distance
to the left. Heading our steeds in that direction, we pressed on at the
top of our speed. Presently out of the darkness in front of us there
arose such a roaring and a yelping as sent the hearts into our mouths.
It was not a single cry, such as the hounds had uttered when they were
on the scent, but a continuous deep-mouthed uproar, so fierce and so
prolonged, that we could not doubt that they had come to the end of
their run.

'Pray God that they have not got him down!' cried Reuben, in a faltering
voice.

The same thought had crossed my own mind, for I have heard a similar
though lesser din come from a pack of otter hounds when they had
overtaken their prey and were tearing it to pieces. Sick at heart, I
drew my sword with the determination that, if we were too late to save
our companion, we should at least revenge him upon the four-footed
fiends. Bursting through a thick belt of scrub and tangled gorse bushes,
we came upon a scene so unlike what we had expected that we pulled up
our horses in astonishment.

A circular clearing lay in front of us, brightly illuminated by the
silvery moonshine. In the centre of this rose a giant stone, one
of those high dark columns which are found all over the plain, and
especially in the parts round Stonehenge. It could not have been less
than fifteen feet in height, and had doubtless been originally straight,
but wind and weather, or the crumbling of the soil, had gradually
suffered it to tilt over until it inclined at such an angle that an
active man might clamber up to the summit. On the top of this ancient
stone, cross-legged and motionless, like some strange carved idol of
former days, sat Decimus Saxon, puffing sedately at the long pipe which
was ever his comfort in moments of difficulty. Beneath him, at the base
of the monolith, as our learned men call them, the two great bloodhounds
were rearing and springing, clambering over each other's backs in their
frenzied and futile eagerness to reach the impassive figure perched
above them, while they gave vent to their rage and disappointment in the
hideous uproar which had suggested such terrible thoughts to our mind.

We had little time, however, to gaze at this strange scene, for upon our
appearance the hounds abandoned their helpless attempts to reach Saxon,
and flew, with a fierce snarl of satisfaction, at Reuben and myself.
One great brute, with flaring eyes and yawning mouth, his white fangs
glistening in the moonlight, sprang at my horse's neck; but I met him
fair with a single sweeping cut, which shore away his muzzle, and left
him wallowing and writhing in a pool of blood. Reuben, meanwhile, had
spurred his horse forward to meet his assailant; but the poor tired
steed flinched at the sight of the fierce hound, and pulled up suddenly,
with the result that her rider rolled headlong into the very jaws of the
animal. It might have gone ill with Reuben had he been left to his own
resources. At the most he could only have kept the cruel teeth from
his throat for a very few moments; but seeing the mischance, I drew my
remaining pistol, and springing from my horse, discharged it full into
the creature's flank while it struggled with my friend. With a last
yell of rage and pain it brought its fierce jaws together in one wild
impotent snap, and then sank slowly over upon its side, while Reuben
crawled from beneath it, scared and bruised, but none the worse
otherwise for his perilous adventure.

'I owe you one for that, Micah,' he said gratefully. 'I may live to do
as much for you.'

'And I owe ye both one,' said Saxon, who had scrambled down from his
place of refuge. 'I pay my debts, too, whether for good or evil. I might
have stayed up there until I had eaten my jack-boots, for all the chance
I had of ever getting down again. Sancta Maria! but that was a shrewd
blow of yours, Clarke! The brute's head flew in halves like a rotten
pumpkin. No wonder that they stuck to my track, for I have left both my
spare girth and my kerchief behind me, which would serve to put them on
Chloe's scent as well as mine own.'

'And where is Chloe?' I asked, wiping my sword.

'Chloe had to look out for herself. I found the brutes gaining on me,
you see, and I let drive at them with my barkers; but with a horse
flying at twenty mile an hour, what chance is there for a single slug
finding its way home?' Things looked black then, for I had no time to
reload, and the rapier, though the king of weapons in the duello, is
scarce strong enough to rely upon on an occasion like this. As luck
would have it, just as I was fairly puzzled, what should I come across
but this handy stone, which the good priests of old did erect, as far as
I can see, for no other purpose than to provide worthy cavalieros with
an escape from such ignoble and scurvy enemies. I had no time to spare
in clambering up it, for I had to tear my heel out of the mouth of the
foremost of them, and might have been dragged down by it had he not
found my spur too tough a morsel for his chewing. But surely one of my
bullets must have readied its mark.' Lighting the touch-paper in his
tobacco-box, he passed it over the body of the hound which had attacked
me, and then of the other.

'Why, this one is riddled like a sieve,' he cried. 'What do you load
your petronels with, good Master Clarke?'

'With two leaden slugs.'

'Yet two leaden slugs have made a score of holes at the least! And of
all things in this world, here is the neck of a bottle stuck in the
brute's hide!'

'Good heavens!' I exclaimed. 'I remember. My dear mother packed a bottle
of Daffy's elixir in the barrel of my pistol.'

'And you have shot it into the bloodhound!' roared Reuben. 'Ho! ho! When
they hear that tale at the tap of the Wheatsheaf, there will be some
throats dry with laughter. Saved my life by shooting a dog with a bottle
of Daffy's elixir!'

'And a bullet as well, Reuben, though I dare warrant the gossips will
soon contrive to leave that detail out. It is a mercy the pistol did not
burst. But what do you propose to do now, Master Saxon?'

'Why, to recover my mare if it can anywise be done,' said the
adventurer.' Though on this vast moor, in the dark, she will be as
difficult to find as a Scotsman's breeches or a flavourless line in
"Hudibras."'

'And Reuben Lockarby's steed can go no further,' I remarked. 'But do
mine eyes deceive me, or is there a glimmer of light over yonder?'

'A Will-o'-the-wisp,' said Saxon.

          "An _ignis fatuus_ that bewitches,
           And leads men into pools and ditches."

Yet I confess that it burns steady and clear, as though it came from
lamp, candle, rushlight, lanthorn, or other human agency.'

'Where there is light there is life,' cried Reuben. 'Let us make for it,
and see what chance of shelter we may find there.'

'It cannot come from our dragoon friends,' remarked Decimus. 'A murrain
on them! how came they to guess our true character; or was it on the
score of some insult to the regiment that that young Fahnfuhrer has set
them on our track? If I have him at my sword's point again, he shall
not come off so free. Well, do ye lead your horses, and we shall explore
this light, since no better course is open to us.'

Picking our way across the moor, we directed our course for the bright
point which twinkled in the distance; and as we advanced we hazarded
a thousand conjectures as to whence it could come. If it were a human
dwelling, what sort of being could it be who, not content with living in
the heart of this wilderness, had chosen a spot so far removed from the
ordinary tracks which crossed it? The roadway was miles behind us, and
it was probable that no one save those driven by such a necessity as
that which had overtaken us would ever find themselves in that desolate
region. No hermit could have desired an abode more completely isolated
from all communion with his kind.

As we approached we saw that the light did indeed come from a small
cottage, which was built in a hollow, so as to be invisible from any
quarter save that from which we approached it. In front of this humble
dwelling a small patch of ground had been cleared of shrub, and in the
centre of this little piece of sward our missing steed stood grazing at
her leisure upon the scanty herbage. The same light which had attracted
us had doubtless caught her eye, and drawn her towards it by hopes of
oats and of water. With a grunt of satisfaction Saxon resumed possession
of his lost property, and leading her by the bridle, approached the door
of the solitary cottage.



Chapter XI. Of the Lonely Man and the Gold Chest

The strong yellow glare which had attracted us across the moor found its
way out through a single narrow slit alongside the door which served the
purpose of a rude window. As we advanced towards it the light changed
suddenly to red, and that again to green, throwing a ghastly pallor over
our faces, and especially heightening the cadaverous effect of Saxon's
austere features. At the same time we became aware of a most subtle
and noxious odour which poisoned the air all round the cottage.
This combination of portents in so lonely a spot worked upon the old
man-at-arms' superstitious feelings to such an extent that he paused
and looked back at us inquiringly. Both Reuben and I were determined,
however, to carry the adventure through, so he contented himself with
falling a little behind us, and pattering to himself some exorcism
appropriate to the occasion. Walking up to the door, I rapped upon it
with the hilt of my sword and announced that we were weary travellers
who were seeking a night's shelter.

The first result of my appeal was a sound as of some one bustling
rapidly about, with the clinking of metal and noise of the turning of
locks. This died away into a hush, and I was about to knock once more
when a crackling voice greeted us from the other side of the door.

'There is little shelter here, gentlemen, and less provisions,' it said.
'It is but six miles to Amesbury, where at the Cecil Arms ye shall find,
I doubt not, all that is needful for man and for beast.'

'Nay, nay, mine invisible friend,' quoth Saxon, who was much reassured
by the sound of a human voice, 'this is surely but a scurvy reception.
One of our horses is completely foundered, and none of them are in
very good plight, so that we could no more make for the Cecil Arms at
Amesbury than for the Gruner Mann at Lubeck. I prythee, therefore, that
you will allow us to pass the remainder of the night under your roof.'

At this appeal there was much creaking of locks and rasping of bolts,
which ended in the door swinging slowly open, and disclosing the person
who had addressed us.

By the strong light which shone out from behind him we could see that
he was a man of venerable aspect, with snow-white hair and a countenance
which bespoke a thoughtful and yet fiery nature. The high pensive brow
and flowing beard smacked of the philosopher, but the keen sparkling
eye, the curved aquiline nose, and the lithe upright figure which the
weight of years had been unable to bend, were all suggestive of the
soldier. His lofty bearing, and his rich though severe costume of black
velvet, were at strange variance with the humble nature of the abode
which he had chosen for his dwelling-place.

'Ho!' said he, looking keenly at us. 'Two of ye unused to war, and the
other an old soldier. Ye have been pursued, I see!'

'How did you know that, then?' asked Decimus Saxon.

'Ah, my friend, I too have served in my time. My eyes are not so old but
that they can tell when horses have been spurred to the utmost, nor is
it difficult to see that this young giant's sword hath been employed in
something less innocent than toasting bacon. Your story, however, can
keep. Every true soldier thinks first of his horse, so I pray that you
will tether yours without, since I have neither ostler nor serving man
to whom I may entrust them.'

The strange dwelling into which we presently entered had been prolonged
into the side of the little hill against which it had been built, so
as to form a very long narrow hall. The ends of this great room, as we
entered, were wrapped in shadow, but in the centre was a bright glare
from a brazier full of coals, over which a brass pipkin was suspended.
Beside the fire a long wooden table was plentifully covered with curved
glass flasks, basins, tubings, and other instruments of which I knew
neither the name nor the purpose. A long row of bottles containing
various coloured liquids and powders were arranged along a shelf, whilst
above it another shelf bore a goodly array of brown volumes. For the
rest there was a second rough-hewn table, a pair of cupboards, three or
four wooden settles, and several large screens pinned to the walls
and covered all over with figures and symbols, of which I could make
nothing. The vile smell which had greeted us outside was very much worse
within the chamber, and arose apparently from the fumes of the boiling,
bubbling contents of the brazen pot.

'Ye behold in me,' said our host, bowing courteously to us, 'the last of
an ancient family. I am Sir Jacob Clancing of Snellaby Hall.'

'Smellaby it should be, methinks,' whispered Reuben, in a voice which
fortunately did not reach the ears of the old knight.

'I pray that ye be seated,' he continued, 'and that ye lay aside your
plates and headpieces, and remove your boots. Consider this to be your
inn, and behave as freely. Ye will hold me excused if for a moment I
turn my attention from you to this operation on which I am engaged,
which will not brook delay.'

Saxon began forthwith to undo his buckles and to pull off his harness,
while Reuben, throwing himself into a chair, appeared to be too weary
to do more than unfasten his sword-belt. For my own part, I was glad
to throw off my gear, but I kept my attention all the while upon the
movements of our host, whose graceful manners and learned appearance had
aroused my curiosity and admiration.

He approached the evil-smelling pot, and stirred it up with a face
which indicated so much anxiety that it was clear that he had pushed his
courtesy to us so far as to risk the ruin of some important experiment.
Dipping his ladle into the compound, he scooped some up, and then poured
it slowly back into the vessel, showing a yellow turbid fluid. The
appearance of it evidently reassured him, for the look of anxiety
cleared away from his features, and he uttered an exclamation of relief.
Taking a handful of a whitish powder from a trencher at his side he
threw it into the pipkin, the contents of which began immediately to
seethe and froth over into the fire, causing the flames to assume
the strange greenish hue which we had observed before entering. This
treatment had the effect of clearing the fluid, for the chemist was
enabled to pour off into a bottle a quantity of perfectly watery
transparent liquid, while a brownish sediment remained in the vessel,
and was emptied out upon a sheet of paper. This done, Sir Jacob Clancing
pushed aside all his bottles, and turned towards us with a smiling face
and a lighter air.

'We shall see what my poor larder can furnish forth,' said he.
'Meanwhile, this odour may be offensive to your untrained nostrils, so
we shall away with it. He threw a few grains of some balsamic resin
into the brazier, which at once filled the chamber with a most agreeable
perfume. He then laid a white cloth upon the table, and taking from a
cupboard a dish of cold trout and a large meat pasty, he placed them
upon it, and invited us to draw up our settles and set to work.

'I would that I had more toothsome fare to offer ye,' said he. 'Were
we at Snellaby Hall, ye should not be put off in this scurvy fashion, I
promise ye. This may serve, however, for hungry men, and I can still
lay my hands upon a brace of bottles of the old Alicant.' So saying, he
brought a pair of flasks out from a recess, and having seen us served
and our glasses filled, he seated himself in a high-backed oaken chair
and presided with old-fashioned courtesy over our feast. As we supped, I
explained to him what our errand was, and narrated the adventures of the
night, without making mention of our destination.

'You are bound for Monmouth's camp,' he said quietly, when I had
finished, looking me full in the face with his keen dark eyes. 'I know
it, but ye need not fear lest I betray you, even were it in my power.
What chance, think ye, hath the Duke against the King's forces?'

'As much chance as a farmyard fowl against a spurred gamecock, did he
rely only on those whom he hath with him,' Saxon answered. 'He hath
reason to think, however, that all England is like a powder magazine,
and he hopes to be the spark to set it alight.'

The old man shook his head sadly. 'The King hath great resources,' he
remarked. 'Where is Monmouth to get his trained soldiers?'

'There is the militia,' I suggested.

'And there are many of the old parliamentary breed, who are not too far
gone to strike a blow for their belief,' said Saxon. 'Do you but get
half-a-dozen broad-brimmed, snuffle-nosed preachers into a camp, and the
whole Presbytery tribe will swarm round them like flies on a honey-pot.
No recruiting sergeants will ever raise such an army as did Noll's
preachers in the eastern counties, where the promise of a seat by the
throne was thought of more value than a ten-pound bounty. I would I
could pay mine own debts with these same promises.'

'I should judge from your speech, sir,' our host observed, 'that you are
not one of the sectaries. How comes it, then, that you are throwing the
weight of your sword and your experience into the weaker scale?'

'For the very reason that it is the weaker scale,' said the soldier of
fortune. 'I should gladly have gone with my brother to the Guinea coast
and had no say in the matter one way or the other, beyond delivering
letters and such trifles. Since I must be doing something, I choose to
fight for Protestantism and Monmouth. It is nothing to me whether James
Stuart or James Walters sits upon the throne, but the court and army of
the King are already made up. Now, since Monmouth hath both courtiers
and soldiers to find, it may well happen that he may be glad of my
services and reward them with honourable preferment.'

'Your logic is sound,' said our host, 'save only that you have omitted
the very great chance which you will incur of losing your head if the
Duke's party are borne down by the odds against them.'

'A man cannot throw a main without putting a stake on the board,' said
Saxon.

'And you, young sir,' the old man asked, 'what has caused you to take a
hand in so dangerous a game?'

'I come of a Roundhead stock,' I answered, 'and my folk have always
fought for the liberty of the people and the humbling of tyranny. I come
in the place of my father.'

'And you, sir?' our questioner continued, looking at Reuben.

'I have come to see something of the world, and to be with my friend and
companion here,' he replied.

'And I have stronger reasons than any of ye,' Sir Jacob cried, 'for
appearing in arms against any man who bears the name of Stuart. Had I
not a mission here which cannot be neglected, I might myself be tempted
to hie westward with ye, and put these grey hairs of mine once more into
the rough clasp of a steel headpiece. For where now is the noble castle
of Snellaby, and where those glades and woods amidst which the Clancings
have grown up, and lived and died, ere ever Norman William set his
foot on English soil? A man of trade--a man who, by the sweat of his
half-starved workers, had laid by ill-gotten wealth, is now the owner
of all that fair property. Should I, the last of the Clancings, show
my face upon it, I might be handed over to the village beadle as a
trespasser, or scourged off it perhaps by the bowstrings of insolent
huntsmen.'

'And how comes so sudden a reverse of fortune?' I asked.

'Fill up your glasses!' cried the old man, suiting the action to the
word. 'Here's a toast for you! Perdition to all faithless princes!
How came it about, ye ask? Why, when the troubles came upon the first
Charles, I stood by him as though he had been mine own brother. At
Edgehill, at Naseby, in twenty skirmishes and battles, I fought stoutly
in his cause, maintaining a troop of horse at my own expense, formed
from among my own gardeners, grooms, and attendants. Then the military
chest ran low, and money must be had to carry on the contest. My silver
chargers and candlesticks were thrown into the melting-pot, as were
those of many another cavalier. They went in metal and they came out
as troopers and pikemen. So we tided over a few months until again the
purse was empty, and again we filled it amongst us. This time it was the
home farm and the oak trees that went. Then came Marston Moor, and every
penny and man was needed to repair that great disaster. I flinched not,
but gave everything. This boiler of soap, a prudent, fat-cheeked man,
had kept himself free from civil broils, and had long had a covetous eye
upon the castle. It was his ambition, poor worm, to be a gentleman, as
though a gabled roof and a crumbling house could ever make him that. I
let him have his way, however, and threw the sum received, every guinea
of it, into the King's coffers. And so I held out until the final ruin
of Worcester, when I covered the retreat of the young prince, and may
indeed say that save in the Isle of Man I was the last Royalist who
upheld the authority of the crown. The Commonwealth had set a price upon
my head as a dangerous malignant, so I was forced to take my passage in
a Harwich ketch, and arrived in the Lowlands with nothing save my sword
and a few broad pieces in my pocket.'

'A cavalier might do well even then,' remarked Saxon. 'There are ever
wars in Germany where a man is worth his hire. When the North Germans
are not in arms against the Swedes or French, the South Germans are sure
to be having a turn with the janissaries.'

'I did indeed take arms for a time in the employ of the United
Provinces, by which means I came face to face once more with mine old
foes, the Roundheads. Oliver had lent Reynolds's brigade to the French,
and right glad was Louis to have the service of such seasoned troops.
'Fore God, I stood on the counterscarp at Dunkirk, and I found myself,
when I should have been helping the defence, actually cheering on the
attack. My very heart rose when I saw the bull-dog fellows clambering up
the breach with their pikes at the trail, and never quavering in their
psalm-tune, though the bullets sung around them as thick as bees in the
hiving time. And when they did come to close hugs with the Flemings, I
tell you they set up such a rough cry of soldierly joy that my pride
in them as Englishmen overtopped my hatred of them as foes. However, my
soldiering was of no great duration, for peace was soon declared, and
I then pursued the study of chemistry, for which I had a strong turn,
first with Vorhaager of Leyden, and later with De Huy of Strasburg,
though I fear that these weighty names are but sounds to your ears.'

'Truly,' said Saxon, 'there seemeth to be some fatal attraction in this
same chemistry, for we met two officers of the Blue Guards in Salisbury,
who, though they were stout soldierly men in other respects, had also a
weakness in that direction.'

'Ha!' cried Sir Jacob, with interest. 'To what school did they belong?'

'Nay, I know nothing of the matter,' Saxon answered, 'save that they
denied that Gervinus of Nurnberg, whom I guarded in prison, or any other
man, could transmute metals.'

'For Gervinus I cannot answer,' said our host, 'but for the possibility
of it I can pledge my knightly word. However, of that anon. The time
came at last when the second Charles was invited back to his throne,
and all of us, from Jeffrey Hudson, the court dwarf, up to my Lord
Clarendon, were in high feather at the hope of regaining our own once
more. For my own claim, I let it stand for some time, thinking that it
would be a more graceful act for the King to help a poor cavalier who
had ruined himself for the sake of his family without solicitation on
his part. I waited and waited, but no word came, so at last I betook
myself to the levee and was duly presented to him. "Ah," said he,
greeting me with the cordiality which he could assume so well, "you
are, if I mistake not, Sir Jasper Killigrew?" "Nay, your Majesty,"
I answered, "I am Sir Jacob Clancing, formerly of Snellaby Hall, in
Staffordshire;" and with that I reminded him of Worcester fight and of
many passages which had occurred to us in common. "Od's fish!" he cried,
"how could I be so forgetful! And how are all at Snellaby?" I then
explained to him that the Hall had passed out of my hands, and told him
in a few words the state to which I had been reduced. His face clouded
over and his manner chilled to me at once. "They are all on to me for
money and for places," he said, "and truly the Commons are so niggardly
to me that I can scarce be generous to others. However, Sir Jacob, we
shall see what can be done for thee," and with that he dismissed me.
That same night the secretary of my Lord Clarendon came to me, and
announced with much form and show that, in consideration of my long
devotion and the losses which I had sustained, the King was graciously
pleased to make me a lottery cavalier.'

'And pray, sir, what is a lottery cavalier?' I asked.

'It is nothing else than a licensed keeper of a gambling-house. This
was his reward to me. I was to be allowed to have a den in the piazza
of Covent Garden, and there to decoy the young sparks of the town and
fleece them at ombre. To restore my own fortunes I was to ruin others.
My honour, my family, my reputation, they were all to weigh for
nothing so long as I had the means of bubbling a few fools out of their
guineas.'

'I have heard that some of the lottery cavaliers did well,' remarked
Saxon reflectively.

'Well or ill, it way no employment for me. I waited upon the King and
implored that his bounty would take another form. His only reply was
that for one so poor I was strangely fastidious. For weeks I hung about
the court--I and other poor cavaliers like myself, watching the royal
brothers squandering upon their gaming and their harlots sums which
would have restored us to our patrimonies. I have seen Charles put upon
one turn of a card as much as would have satisfied the most exacting of
us. In the parks of St. James, or in the Gallery at Whitehall, I still
endeavoured to keep myself before his eyes, in the hope that some
provision would be made for me. At last I received a second message from
him. It was that unless I could dress more in the mode he could dispense
with my attendance. That was his message to the old broken soldier who
had sacrificed health, wealth, position, everything in the service of
his father and himself.'

'Shameful!' we cried, all three.

'Can you wonder, then, that I cursed the whole Stuart race,
false-hearted, lecherous, and cruel? For the Hall, I could buy it back
to-morrow if I chose, but why should I do so when I have no heir?'

'Ho, you have prospered then!' said Decimus Saxon, with one of his
shrewd sidelong looks. 'Perhaps you have yourself found out how to
convert pots and pans into gold in the way you have spoken of. But that
cannot be, for I see iron and brass in this room which would hardly
remain there could you convert it to gold.'

'Gold has its uses, and iron has its uses,' said Sir Jacob oracularly.
'The one can never supplant the other.'

'Yet these officers,' I remarked, 'did declare to us that it was but a
superstition of the vulgar.'

'Then these officers did show that their knowledge was less than their
prejudice. Alexander Setonius, a Scot, was first of the moderns to
achieve it. In the month of March 1602 he did change a bar of lead into
gold in the house of a certain Hansen, at Rotterdam, who hath testified
to it. He then not only repeated the same process before three learned
men sent by the Kaiser Rudolph, but he taught Johann Wolfgang Dienheim
of Freibourg, and Gustenhofer of Strasburg, which latter taught it to my
own illustrious master--'

'Who in turn taught it to you,' cried Saxon triumphantly. 'I have no
great store of metal with me, good sir, but there are my head-piece,
back and breast-plate, taslets and thigh-pieces, together with my
sword, spurs, and the buckles of my harness. I pray you to use your most
excellent and praiseworthy art upon these, and I will promise within a
few days to bring round a mass of metal which shall be more worthy of
your skill.'

'Nay, nay,' said the alchemist, smiling and shaking his head. 'It can
indeed be done, but only slowly and in order, small pieces at a time,
and with much expenditure of work and patience. For a man to enrich
himself at it he must labour hard and long; yet in the end I will not
deny that he may compass it. And now, since the flasks are empty and
your young comrade is nodding in his chair, it will perhaps be as well
for you to spend as much of the night as is left in repose.' He drew
several blankets and rugs from a corner and scattered them over the
floor. 'It is a soldier's couch,' he remarked; 'but ye may sleep on
worse before ye put Monmouth on the English throne. For myself, it is
my custom to sleep in an inside chamber, which is hollowed out of the
hill.' With a few last words and precautions for our comfort he withdrew
with the lamp, passing through a door which had escaped our notice at
the further end of the apartment.

Reuben, having had no rest since he left Havant, had already dropped
upon the rugs, and was fast asleep, with a saddle for a pillow. Saxon
and I sat for a few minutes longer by the light of the burning brazier.

'One might do worse than take to this same chemical business,' my
companion remarked, knocking the ashes out of his pipe. 'See you yon
iron-bound chest in the corner?'

'What of it?'

'It is two thirds full of gold, which this worthy gentleman hath
manufactured.'

'How know you that?' I asked incredulously.

'When you did strike the door panel with the hilt of your sword, as
though you would drive it in, you may have heard some scuttling about,
and the turning of a lock. Well, thanks to my inches, I was able to look
through yon slit in the wall, and I saw our friend throw something into
the chest with a chink, and then lock it. It was but a glance at the
contents, yet I could swear that that dull yellow light could come from
no metal but gold. Let us see if it be indeed locked.' Rising from his
seat he walked over to the box and pulled vigorously at the lid.

'Forbear, Saxon, forbear!' I cried angrily. 'What would our host say,
should he come upon you?'

'Nay, then, he should not keep such things beneath his roof. With a
chisel or a dagger now, this might be prized open.'

'By Heaven!' I whispered, 'if you should attempt it I shall lay you on
your back.'

'Well, well, young Anak! it was but a passing fancy to see the treasure
again. Now, if he were but well favoured to the King, this would be
fair prize of war. Marked ye not that he claimed to have been the last
Royalist who drew sword in England? and he confessed that he had been
proscribed as a malignant. Your father, godly as he is, would have
little compunction in despoiling such an Amalekite. Besides, bethink
you, he can make more as easily as your good mother maketh cranberry
dumplings.'

'Enough said!' I answered sternly. 'It will not bear discussion. Get ye
to your couch, lest I summon our host and tell him what manner of man he
hath entertained.'

With many grumbles Saxon consented at last to curl his long limbs up
upon a mat, whilst I lay by his side and remained awake until the mellow
light of morning streamed through the chinks between the ill-covered
rafters. Truth to tell, I feared to sleep, lest the freebooting habits
of the soldier of fortune should be too strong for him, and he should
disgrace us in the eyes of our kindly and generous entertainer. At last,
however, his long-drawn breathing assured me that he was asleep, and I
was able to settle down to a few hours of welcome rest.



Chapter XII. Of certain Passages upon the Moor

In the morning, after a breakfast furnished by the remains of our
supper, we looked to our horses and prepared for our departure. Ere we
could mount, however, our kindly host came running out to us with a load
of armour in his arms.

'Come hither,' said he, beckoning to Reuben. 'It is not meet, lad, that
you should go bare-breasted against the enemy when your comrades are
girt with steel. I have here mine own old breastplate and head-piece,
which should, methinks, fit you, for if you have more flesh than I, I am
a larger framework of a man. Ah, said I not so! Were't measured for you
by Silas Thomson, the court armourer, it could not grip better. Now
on with the head-piece. A close fit again. You are now a cavalier whom
Monmouth or any other leader might be proud to see ride beneath his
banner.'

Both helmet and body-plates were of the finest Milan steel, richly
inlaid with silver and with gold, and carved all over in rare and
curious devices. So stern and soldierly was the effect, that the
ruddy, kindly visage of our friend staring out of such a panoply had an
ill-matched and somewhat ludicrous appearance.

'Nay, nay,' cried the old cavalier, seeing a smile upon our features,
'it is but right that so precious a jewel as a faithful heart should
have a fitting casket to protect it.'

'I am truly beholden to you, sir,' said Reuben; 'I can scarce find words
to express my thanks. Holy mother! I have a mind to ride straight back
to Havant, to show them how stout a man-at-arms hath been reared amongst
them.'

'It is steel of proof,' Sir Jacob remarked; 'a pistol-bullet might
glance from it. And you,' he continued, turning to me, 'here is a small
gift by which you shall remember this meeting. I did observe that you
did cast a wistful eye upon my bookshelf. It is Plutarch's lives of the
ancient worthies, done into English by the ingenious Mr. Latimer. Carry
this volume with you, and shape your life after the example of the giant
men whose deeds are here set forth. In your saddle-bag I place a small
but weighty packet, which I desire you to hand over to Monmouth upon
the day of your arrival in his camp. As to you, sir,' addressing Decimus
Saxon, 'here is a slug of virgin gold for you, which may fashion into a
pin or such like ornament. You may wear it with a quiet conscience, for
it is fairly given to you and not filched from your entertainer whilst
he slept.'

Saxon and I shot a sharp glance of surprise at each other at this
speech, which showed that our words of the night before were not unknown
to him. Sir Jacob, however, showed no signs of anger, but proceeded to
point out our road and to advise us as to our journey.

'You must follow this sheep-track until you come on another and broader
pathway which makes for the West,' said he. 'It is little used, and
there is small chance of your falling in with any of your enemies upon
it. This path will lead you between the villages of Fovant and Hindon,
and soon to Mere, which is no great distance from Bruton, upon the
Somersetshire border.'

Thanking our venerable host for his great kindness towards us we gave
rein to our horses, and left him once more to the strange solitary
existence in which we had found him. So artfully had the site of
his cottage been chosen, that when we looked back to give him a last
greeting both he and his dwelling had disappeared already from our view,
nor could we, among the many mounds and hollows, determine where the
cottage lay which had given us such welcome shelter. In front of us and
on either side the great uneven dun-coloured plain stretched away to the
horizon, without a break in its barren gorse-covered surface. Over the
whole expanse there was no sign of life, save for an occasional rabbit
which whisked into its burrow on hearing our approach, or a few thin and
hungry sheep, who could scarce sustain life by feeding on the coarse and
wiry grass which sprang from the unfruitful soil.

The pathway was so narrow that only one of us could ride upon it at a
time, but we presently abandoned it altogether, using it simply as a
guide, and galloping along side by side over the rolling plain. We were
all silent, Reuben meditating upon his new corslet, as I could see from
his frequent glances at it; while Saxon, with his eyes half closed, was
brooding over some matter of his own. For my own part, my thoughts ran
upon the ignominy of the old soldier's designs upon the gold chest, and
the additional shame which rose from the knowledge that our host had in
some way divined his intention. No good could come of an alliance with a
man so devoid of all feelings of honour or of gratitude. So strongly did
I feel upon it that I at last broke the silence by pointing to a
cross path, which turned away from the one which we were pursuing, and
recommending him to follow it, since he had proved that he was no fit
company for honest men.

'By the living rood!' he cried, laying his hand upon the hilt of his
rapier,' have you taken leave of your senses? These are words such as no
honourable cavaliero can abide.'

'They are none the less words of truth,' I answered.

His blade flashed out in an instant, while his mare bounded twice her
length under the sharp dig of his spurs.

'We have here,' he cried, reining her round, with his fierce lean face
all of a quiver with passion, 'an excellent level stretch on which to
discuss the matter. Out with your bilbo and maintain your words.'

'I shall not stir a hair's-breadth to attack you,' I answered. 'Why
should I, when I bear you no ill-will? If you come against me, however,
I will assuredly beat you out of your saddle, for all your tricky sword
play.' I drew my broadsword as I spoke, and stood upon my guard, for I
guessed that with so old a soldier the onset would be sharp and sudden.

'By all the saints in heaven!' cried Reuben, 'which ever of ye strikes
first at the other I'll snap this pistol at his head. None of your
jokes, Don Decimo, for by the Lord I'll let drive at you if you were my
own mother's son. Put up your sword, for the trigger falls easy, and my
finger is a twitching.'

'Curse you for a spoil-sport!' growled Saxon, sulkily sheathing his
weapon. 'Nay, Clarke,' he added, after a few moments of reflection,
'this is but child's play, that two camarados with a purpose in view
should fall out over such a trifle. I, who am old enough to be your
father, should have known better than to have drawn upon you, for a
boy's tongue wags on impulse and without due thought. Do but say that
you have said more than you meant.'

'My way of saying it may have been over plain and rough,' I answered,
for I saw that he did but want a little salve where my short words had
galled him. 'At the same time, our ways differ from your ways, and that
difference must be mended, or you can be no true comrade of ours.'

'All right, Master Morality,' quoth he, 'I must e'en unlearn some of the
tricks of my trade. Od's feet, man, if ye object to me, what the henker
would ye think of some whom I have known? However, let that pass. It
is time that we were at the wars, for our good swords will not bide in
their scabbards.

          "The trenchant blade, Toledo trusty,
           For want of fighting was grown rusty,
           And ate into itself for lack
           Of somebody to hew and hack."

You cannot think a thought but old Samuel hath been before you.'

'Surely we shall be at the end of this dreary plain presently,' Reuben
cried. 'Its insipid flatness is enough to set the best of friends by the
ears. We might be in the deserts of Libya instead of his most graceless
Majesty's county of Wiltshire.'

'There is smoke over yonder, upon the side of that hill,' said Saxon,
pointing to the southward.

'Methinks I see one straight line of houses there,' I observed, shading
my eyes with my hand. 'But it is distant, and the shimmer of the sun
disturbs the sight.'

'It must be the hamlet of Hindon,' said Reuben. 'Oh, the heat of this
steel coat! I wonder if it were very un-soldierly to slip it off and tie
it about Dido's neck. I shall be baked alive else, like a crab in its
shell. How say you, illustrious, is it contravened by any of those
thirty-nine articles of war which you bear about in your bosom?'

'The bearing of the weight of your harness, young man,' Saxon answered
gravely, 'is one of the exercises of war, and as such only attainable by
such practice as you are now undergoing. You have many things to learn,
and one of them is not to present petronels too readily at folk's heads
when you are on horseback. The jerk of your charger's movement even now
might have drawn your trigger, and so deprived Monmouth of an old and
tried soldier.'

'There would be much weight in your contention,' my friend answered,
'were it not that I now bethink me that I had forgot to recharge my
pistol since discharging it at that great yellow beast yesternight.'

Decimus Saxon shook his head sadly. 'I doubt we shall never make a
soldier of you,' he remarked. 'You fall from your horse if the brute
does bit change his step, you show a levity which will not jump with the
gravity of the true soldado, you present empty petronels as a menace,
and finally, you crave permission to tie your armour--armour which the
Cid himself might be proud to wear--around the neck of your horse. Yet
you have heart and mettle, I believe, else you would not be here.'

'Gracias, Signor!' cried Reuben, with a bow which nearly unhorsed him;
'the last remark makes up for all the rest, else had I been forced to
cross blades with you, to maintain my soldierly repute.'

'Touching that same incident last night,' said Saxon, 'of the chest
filled, as I surmise, with gold, which I was inclined to take as lawful
plunder, I am now ready to admit that I may have shown an undue haste
and precipitance, considering that the old man treated us fairly.'

'Say no more of it,' I answered, 'if you will but guard against such
impulses for the future.'

'They do not properly come from me,' he replied, 'but from Will
Spotterbridge, who was a man of no character at all.'

'And how comes he to be mixed up in the matter?' I asked curiously.

'Why, marry, in this wise. My father married the daughter of this same
Will Spotterbridge, and so weakened a good old stock by an unhealthy
strain. Will was a rake-hell of Fleet Street in the days of James, a
chosen light of Alsatia, the home of bullies and of brawlers. His blood
hath through his daughter been transmitted to the ten of us, though I
rejoice to say that I, being the tenth, it had by that time lost much
of its virulence, and indeed amounts to little more than a proper pride,
and a laudable desire to prosper.'

'How, then, has it affected the race?' I asked.

'Why,' he answered, 'the Saxons of old were a round-faced, contented
generation, with their ledgers in their hands for six days and their
bibles on the seventh. If my father did but drink a cup of small beer
more than his wont, or did break out upon provocation into any fond
oath, as "Od's niggers!" or "Heart alive!" he would mourn over it as
though it were the seven deadly sins. Was this a man, think ye, in the
ordinary course of nature to beget ten long lanky children, nine of
whom might have been first cousins of Lucifer, and foster-brothers of
Beelzebub?'

'It was hard upon him,' remarked Reuben.

'On him! Nay, the hardship was all with us. If he with his eyes
open chose to marry the daughter of an incarnate devil like Will
Spotterbridge, because she chanced to be powdered and patched to his
liking, what reason hath he for complaint? It is we, who have the blood
of this Hector of the taverns grafted upon our own good honest stream,
who have most reason to lift up our voices.'

'Faith, by the same chain of reasoning,' said Reuben, 'one of my
ancestors must have married a woman with a plaguy dry throat, for both
my father and I are much troubled with the complaint.'

'You have assuredly inherited a plaguy pert tongue,' growled Saxon.
'From what I have told you, you will see that our whole life is a
conflict between our natural Saxon virtue and the ungodly impulses of
the Spotterbridge taint. That of which you have had cause to complain
yesternight is but an example of the evil to which I am subjected.'

'And your brothers and sisters?' I asked; 'how hath this circumstance
affected them?' The road was bleak and long, so that the old soldier's
gossip was a welcome break to the tedium of the journey.

'They have all succumbed,' said Saxon, with a groan. 'Alas, alas! they
were a goodly company could they have turned their talents to better
uses. Prima was our eldest born. She did well until she attained
womanhood. Secundus was a stout seaman, and owned his own vessel when
he was yet a young man. It was remarked, however, that he started on a
voyage in a schooner and came back in a brig, which gave rise to some
inquiry. It may be, as he said, that he found it drifting about in the
North Sea, and abandoned his own vessel in favour of it, but they hung
him before he could prove it. Tertia ran away with a north-country
drover, and hath been on the run ever since. Quartus and Nonus have been
long engaged in busying themselves over the rescue of the black folk
from their own benighted and heathen country, conveying them over by the
shipload to the plantations, where they may learn the beauties of the
Christian religion. They are, however, men of violent temper and profane
speech, who cherish no affection for their younger brother. Quintus was
a lad of promise, but he found a hogshead of rumbo which was thrown up
from a wreck, and he died soon afterwards. Sextus might have done well,
for he became clerk to Johnny Tranter the attorney; but he was of an
enterprising turn, and he shifted the whole business, papers, cash, and
all to the Lowlands, to the no small inconvenience of his employer, who
hath never been able to lay hands either on one or the other from that
day to this. Septimus died young. As to Octavius, Will Spotterbridge
broke out early in him, and he was slain in a quarrel over some dice,
which were said by his enemies to be so weighted that the six must ever
come upwards. Let this moving recital be a warning to ye, if ye are
fools enough to saddle yourselves with a wife, to see that she hath
no vice in her, for a fair face is a sorry make-weight against a foul
mind.'

Reuben and I could not but laugh over this frank family confession,
which our companion delivered without a sign of shame or embarrassment.
'Ye have paid a heavy price for your father's want of discretion,' I
remarked. 'But what in the name of fate is this upon our left?'

'A gibbet, by the look of it,' said Saxon, peering across at the gaunt
framework of wood, which rose up from a little knoll. 'Let us ride past
it, for it is little out of our way. They are rare things in England,
though by my faith there were more gallows than milestones when Turenne
was in the Palatinate. What between the spies and traitors who were bred
by the war, the rascally Schwartzritter and Lanzknechte, the Bohemian
vagabonds, and an occasional countryman who was put out of the way lest
he do something amiss, there was never such a brave time for the crows.'

As we approached this lonely gibbet we saw that a dried-up wisp of a
thing which could hardly be recognised as having once been a human being
was dangling from the centre of it. This wretched relic of mortality
was secured to the cross-bar by an iron chain, and flapped drearily
backwards and forwards in the summer breeze. We had pulled up our
horses, and were gazing in silence at this sign-post of death, when what
had seemed to us to be a bundle of rags thrown down at the foot of the
gallows began suddenly to move, and turned towards us the wizened face
of an aged woman, so marked with evil passions and so malignant in its
expression that it inspired us with even more horror than the unclean
thing which dangled above her head.

'Gott in Himmel!' cried Saxon, 'it is ever thus! A gibbet draws witches
as a magnet draws needles. All the hexerei of the country side will sit
round one, like cats round a milk-pail. Beware of her! she hath the evil
eye!'

'Poor soul! It is the evil stomach that she hath,' said Reuben, walking
his horse up to her. 'Whoever saw such a bag of bones! I warrant that
she is pining away for want of a crust of bread.'

The creature whined, and thrust out two skinny claws to grab the piece
of silver which our friend had thrown down to her. Her fierce dark
eyes and beak-like nose, with the gaunt bones over which the yellow
parchment-like skin was stretched tightly, gave her a fear-inspiring
aspect, like some foul bird of prey, or one of those vampires of whom
the story-tellers write.

'What use is money in the wilderness?' I remarked; 'she cannot feed
herself upon a silver piece.'

She tied the coin hurriedly into the corner of her rags, as though she
feared that I might try to wrest it from her. 'It will buy bread,' she
croaked.

'But who is there to sell it, good mistress?' I asked.

'They sell it at Fovant, and they sell it at Hindon,' she answered. 'I
bide here o' days, but I travel at night.'

'I warrant she does, and on a broomstick,' quoth Saxon; 'but tell us,
mother, who is it who hangs above your head?'

'It is he who slew my youngest born,' cried the old woman, casting a
malignant look at the mummy above her, and shaking a clenched hand at it
which was hardly more fleshy than its own. 'It is he who slew my bonny
boy. Out here upon the wide moor he met him, and he took his young life
from him when no kind hand was near to stop the blow. On that ground
there my lad's blood was shed, and from that watering hath grown this
goodly gallows-tree with its fine ripe fruit upon it. And here, come
rain, come shine, shall I, his mother, sit while two bones hang together
of the man who slow my heart's darling.' She nestled down in her rags
as she spoke, and leaning her chin upon her hands stared up with an
intensity of hatred at the hideous remnant.

'Come away, Reuben,' I cried, for the sight was enough to make one
loathe one's kind. 'She is a ghoul, not a woman.'

'Pah! it gives one a foul taste in the mouth,' quoth Saxon. 'Who is for
a fresh gallop over the Downs? Away with care and carrion!

          "Sir John got on his bonny brown steed,
           To Monmouth for to ride--a.
           A brave buff coat upon his back,
           A broadsword by his side--a.
           Ha, ha, young man, we rebels can
           Pull down King James's pride--a!"

Hark away, lads, with a loose rein and a bloody heel!'

We spurred our steeds and galloped from the unholy spot as fast as our
brave beasts could carry us. To all of us the air had a purer flavour
and the heath a sweeter scent by contrast with the grim couple whom we
had left behind us. What a sweet world would this be, my children, were
it not for man and his cruel ways!

When we at last pulled up we had set some three or four miles between
the gibbet and ourselves. Right over against us, on the side of a gentle
slope, stood a bright little village, with a red-roofed church rising up
from amidst a clump of trees. To our eyes, after the dull sward of the
plain, it was a glad sight to see the green spread of the branches and
the pleasant gardens which girt the hamlet round. All morning we had
seen no sight of a human being, save the old hag upon the moor and a few
peat-cutters in the distance. Our belts, too, were beginning to be loose
upon us, and the remembrance of our breakfast more faint.

'This,' said I, 'must be the village of Mere, which we were to pass
before coming to Bruton. We shall soon be over the Somersetshire
border.'

'I trust that we shall soon be over a dish of beefsteaks,' groaned
Reuben. 'I am well-nigh famished. So fair a village must needs have a
passable inn, though I have not seen one yet upon my travels which would
compare with the old Wheatsheaf.'

'Neither inn nor dinner for us just yet,' said Saxon. 'Look yonder to
the north, and tell me what you see.'

On the extreme horizon there was visible a long line of gleaming,
glittering points, which shone and sparkled like a string of diamonds.
These brilliant specks were all in rapid motion, and yet kept their
positions to each other.

'What is it, then?' we both cried.

'Horse upon the march,' quoth Saxon. 'It may be our friends of
Salisbury, who have made a long day's journey; or, as I am inclined
to think, it may be some other body of the King's horse. They are far
distant, and what we see is but the sun shining on their casques; yet
they are bound for this very village, if I mistake not. It would be
wisest to avoid entering it, lest the rustics set them upon our track.
Let us skirt it and push on for Bruton, where we may spare time for bite
and sup.'

'Alas, alas! for our dinners!' cried Reuben ruefully. 'I have fallen
away until my body rattles about, inside this shell of armour, like a
pea in a pod. However, lads, it is all for the Protestant faith.'

'One more good stretch to Bruton, and we may rest in peace,' said Saxon.
'It is ill dining when a dragoon may be served up as a grace after meat.
Our horses are still fresh, and we should be there in little over an
hour.'

We pushed on our way accordingly, passing at a safe distance from Mere,
which is the village where the second Charles did conceal himself after
the battle of Worcester. The road beyond was much crowded by peasants,
who were making their way out of Somersetshire, and by farmers' waggons,
which were taking loads of food to the West, ready to turn a few guineas
either from the King's men or from the rebels. We questioned many as to
the news from the war, but though we were now on the outskirts of the
disturbed country, we could gain no clear account of how matters stood,
save that all agreed that the rising was on the increase. The country
through which we rode was a beautiful one, consisting of low swelling
hills, well tilled and watered by numerous streamlets. Crossing over the
river Brue by a good stone bridge, we at last reached the small country
town for which we had been making, which lies embowered in the midst of
a broad expanse of fertile meadows, orchards, and sheep-walks. From the
rising ground by the town we looked back over the plain without seeing
any traces of the troopers. We learned, too, from an old woman of the
place, that though a troop of the Wiltshire Yeomanry had passed through
the day before, there were no soldiers quartered at present in the
neighbourhood. Thus assured we rode boldly into the town, and soon found
our way to the principal inn. I have some dim remembrance of an
ancient church upon an eminence, and of a quaint stone cross within the
market-place, but assuredly, of all the recollections which I retain of
Bruton there is none so pleasing as that of the buxom landlady's face,
and of the steaming dishes which she lost no time in setting before us.



Chapter XIII. Of Sir Gervas Jerome, Knight Banneret of the County of
Surrey

The inn was very full of company, being occupied not only by many
Government agents and couriers on their way to and from the seat of
the rising, but also by all the local gossips, who gathered there to
exchange news and consume Dame Hobson the landlady's home-brewed. In
spite, however, of this stress of custom and the consequent uproar, the
hostess conducted us into her own private room, where we could consume
her excellent cheer in peace and quietness. This favour was due, I
think, to a little sly manoeuvring and a few whispered words from Saxon,
who amongst other accomplishments which he had picked up during his
chequered career had a pleasing knack of establishing friendly relations
with the fair sex, irrespective of age, size, or character. Gentle
and simple, Church and Dissent, Whig and Tory, if they did but wear a
petticoat our comrade never failed, in spite of his fifty years, to make
his way into their good graces by the help of his voluble tongue mid
assured manner.

'We are your grateful servants, mistress,' said he, when the smoking
joint and the batter pudding had been placed upon the table. 'We have
robbed you of your room. Will you not honour us so far as to sit down
with us and share our repast?'

'Nay, kind sir,' said the portly dame, much flattered by the proposal;
'it is not for me to sit with gentles like yourselves.'

'Beauty has a claim which persons of quality, and above all cavalieros
of the sword, are the first to acknowledge,' cried Saxon, with his
little twinkling eyes fixed in admiration upon her buxom countenance.
'Nay, by my troth, you shall not leave us. I shall lock the door first.
If you will not eat, you shall at least drink a cup of Alicant with me.'

'Nay, sir, it is too much honour,' cried Dame Hobson, with a simper. 'I
shall go down into the cellars and bring a flask of the best.'

'Nay, by my manhood, you shall not,' said Saxon, springing up from his
seat. 'What are all these infernal lazy drawers here for if you are to
descend to menial offices?' Handing the widow to a chair he clanked away
into the tap-room, where we heard him swearing at the men-servants, and
cursing them for a droning set of rascals who had taken advantage of
the angelic goodness of their mistress and her incomparable sweetness of
temper.

'Here is the wine, fair mistress,' said he, returning presently with a
bottle in either hand. 'Let me fill your glass. Ha! it flows clear and
yellow like a prime vintage. These rogues can stir their limbs when they
find that there is a man to command them.'

'Would that there were ever such,' said the widow meaningly, with a
languishing look at our companion. 'Here is to you, sir--and to ye, too,
young sirs,' she added, sipping at her wine. 'May there be a speedy end
to the insurrection, for I judge, from your gallant equipment, that ye
be serving the King.'

'His business takes us to the West,' said Reuben, 'and we have every
reason to hope that there will be a speedy end to the insurrection.'

'Aye, aye, though blood will be shed first,' she said, shaking her head.
'They tell me that the rebels are as many as seven thousand, and that
they swear to give an' take no quarter, the murderous villains! Alas!
how any gentleman can fall to such bloody work when he might have a
clean honourable occupation, such as innkeeping or the like, is more
than my poor mind can understand. There is a sad difference betwixt the
man who lieth on the cold ground, not knowing how long it may be before
he is three feet deep in it, and he who passeth his nights upon a warm
feather bed, with mayhap a cellar beneath it stocked with even such
wines as we are now drinking.' She again looked hard at Saxon as she
spoke, while Reuben and I nudged each other beneath the table.

'This business hath doubtless increased your trade, fair mistress,'
quoth Saxon.

'Aye, and in the way that payeth best,' said she. 'The few kilderkins of
beer which are drunk by the common folk make little difference one way
or the other. But now, when we have lieutenants of counties, officers,
mayors, and gentry spurring it for very life down the highways, I have
sold more of my rare old wines in three days than ever I did before in
a calendar month. It is not ale, or strong waters, I promise you, that
those gentles drink, but Priniac, Languedoc, Tent, Muscadine, Chiante,
and Tokay--never a flask under the half-guinea.'

'So indeed!' quoth Saxon thoughtfully. 'A snug home and a steady
income.'

'Would that my poor Peter had lived to share it with me,' said Dame
Hobson, laying down her glass, and rubbing her eyes with a corner of
her kerchief. 'He was a good man, poor soul, though in very truth and
between friends he did at last become as broad and as thick as one of
his own puncheons. All well, the heart is the thing! Marry come up! if a
woman were ever to wait until her own fancy came her way, there would be
more maids than mothers in the land.'

'Prythee, good dame, how runs your own fancy?' asked Reuben
mischievously.

'Not in the direction of fat, young man,' she answered smartly, with a
merry glance at our plump companion.

'She has hit you there, Reuben,' said I.

'I would have no pert young springald,' she continued, 'but one who hath
knowledge of the world, and ripe experience. Tall he should be, and of
sinewy build, free of speech that he might lighten the weary hours, and
help entertain the gentles when they crack a flagon of wine. Of business
habits he must be, too, forsooth, for is there not a busy hostel and two
hundred good pounds a year to pass through his fingers? If Jane Hobson
is to be led to the altar again it must be by such a man as this.'

Saxon had listened with much attention to the widow's words, and had
just opened his mouth to make some reply to her when a clattering and
bustle outside announced the arrival of some traveller. Our
hostess drank off her wine and pricked up her ears, but when a loud
authoritative voice was heard in the passage, demanding a private room
and a draught of sack, her call to duty overcame her private concerns,
and she bustled off with a few words of apology to take the measure of
the new-comer.

'Body o' me, lads!' quoth Decimus Saxon the moment that she disappeared,
'ye can see how the land lies. I have half a mind to let Monmouth carve
his own road, and to pitch my tent in this quiet English township.'

'Your tent, indeed!' cried Reuben; 'it is a brave tent that is furnished
with cellars of such wine as we are drinking. And as to the quiet, my
illustrious, if you take up your residence here I'll warrant that the
quiet soon comes to an end.'

'You have seen the woman,' said Saxon, with his brow all in a wrinkle
with thought. 'She hath much to commend her. A man must look to himself.
Two hundred pounds a year are not to be picked off the roadside every
June morning. It is not princely, but it is something for an old soldier
of fortune who hath been in the wars for five-and-thirty years, and
foresees the time when his limbs will grow stiff in his harness. What
sayeth our learned Fleming--"an mulier--" but what in the name of the
devil have we here?'

Our companion's ejaculation was called forth by a noise as of a slight
scuffle outside the door, with a smothered 'Oh, sir!' and 'What will the
maids think?' The contest was terminated by the door being opened, and
Dame Hobson re-entering the room with her face in a glow, and a slim
young man dressed in the height of fashion at her heels.

'I am sure, good gentlemen,' said she, 'that ye will not object to this
young nobleman drinking his wine in the same room with ye, since all the
others are filled with the townsfolk and commonalty.'

'Faith! I must needs be mine own usher,' said the stranger, sticking his
gold-laced cap under his left arm and laying his hand upon his heart,
while he bowed until his forehead nearly struck the edge of the table.
'Your very humble servant, gentlemen, Sir Gervas Jerome, knight banneret
of his Majesty's county of Surrey, and at one time custos rotulorum of
the district of Beacham Ford.'

'Welcome, sir,' quoth Reuben, with a merry twinkle in his eye. 'You have
before you Don Decimo Saxon of the Spanish nobility, together with Sir
Micah Clarke and Sir Reuben Lockarby, both of his Majesty's county of
Hampshire.'

'Proud and glad to meet ye, gentlemen!' cried the newcomer, with a
flourish. 'But what is this upon the table? Alicant? Fie, fie, it is a
drink for boys. Let us have some good sack with plenty of body in it.
Claret for youth, say I, sack for maturity, and strong waters in old
age. Fly, my sweetest, move those dainty feet of thine, for egad! my
throat is like leather. Od's 'oons, I drank deep last night, and yet
it is clear that I could not have drunk enough, for I was as dry as a
concordance when I awoke.'

Saxon sat silently at the table, looking so viciously at the stranger
out of his half-closed glittering eyes that I feared that we should
have another such brawl as occurred at Salisbury, with perhaps a more
unpleasant ending. Finally, however, his ill-humour at the gallant's
free and easy attention to our hostess spent itself in a few muttered
oaths, and he lit his long pipe, the never-failing remedy of a ruffled
spirit. As to Reuben and myself, we watched our new companion half in
wonder and half in amusement, for his appearance and manners were novel
enough to raise the interest of inexperienced youngsters like ourselves.

I have said that he was dressed in the height of fashion, and such
indeed was the impression which a glance would give. His face was thin
and aristocratic, with a well-marked nose, delicate features, and gay
careless expression. Some little paleness of the cheeks and darkness
under the eyes, the result of hard travel or dissipation, did but add a
chastening grace to his appearance. His white periwig, velvet and silver
riding coat, lavender vest and red satin knee-breeches were all of the
best style and cut, but when looked at closely, each and all of these
articles of attire bore evidence of having seen better days. Beside the
dust and stains of travel, there was a shininess or a fading of colour
here and there which scarce accorded with the costliness of their
material or the bearing of their wearer. His long riding-boots had a
gaping seam in the side of one of them, whilst his toe was pushing
its way through the end of the other. For the rest, he wore a handsome
silver-hilted rapier at his side, and had a frilled cambric shirt
somewhat the worse for wear and open at the front, as was the mode with
the gallants of those days. All the time he was speaking he mumbled a
toothpick, which together with his constant habit of pronouncing his
o's as a's made his conversation sound strange to our ears. (Note D
Appendix) Whilst we were noting these peculiarities he was reclining
upon Dame Hobson's best taffatta-covered settee, tranquilly combing his
wig with a delicate ivory comb which he had taken from a small satin bag
which hung upon the right of his sword-belt.

'Lard preserve us from country inns!' he remarked. 'What with the boors
that swarm in every chamber, and the want of mirrors, and jasmine water,
and other necessaries, blister me if one has not to do one's toilet
in the common room. 'Oons! I'd as soon travel in the land of the Great
Mogul!'

'When you shall come to be my age, young sir,' Saxon answered, 'you may
know better than to decry a comfortable country hostel.'

'Very like, sir, very like!' the gallant answered, with a careless
laugh. 'For all that, being mine own age, I feel the wilds of Wiltshire
and the inns of Bruton to be a sorry change after the Mall, and the fare
of Pontack's or the Coca Tree. Ah, Lud! here comes the sack! Open it, my
pretty Hebe, and send a drawer with fresh glasses, for these gentlemen
must do me the honour of drinking with me. A pinch of snuff, sirs? Aye,
ye may well look hard at the box. A pretty little thing, sirs, from a
certain lady of title, who shall be nameless; though, if I were to say
that her title begins with a D and her name with a C, a gentleman of the
Court might hazard a guess.'

Our hostess, having brought fresh glasses, withdrew, and Decimus
Saxon soon found an opportunity for following her. Sir Gervas Jerome
continued, however, to chatter freely to Reuben and myself over
the wine, rattling along as gaily and airily as though we were old
acquaintances.

'Sink me, if I have not frighted your comrade away!' he remarked, 'Or is
it possible that he hath gone on the slot of the plump widow? Methought
he looked in no very good temper when I kissed her at the door. Yet it
is a civility which I seldom refuse to anything which wears a cap. Your
friend's appearance smacked more of Mars than of Venus, though, indeed,
those who worship the god are wont to be on good terms with the goddess.
A hardy old soldier, I should judge, from his feature and attire.'

'One who hath seen much service abroad,' I answered.

'Ha! ye are lucky to ride to the wars in the company of so accomplished
a cavalier. For I presume that it is to the wars that ye are riding,
since ye are all so armed and accoutred.'

'We are indeed bound for the West,' I replied, with some reserve, for in
Saxon's absence I did not care to be too loose-tongued.

'And in what capacity?' he persisted. 'Will ye risk your crowns in
defence of King James's one, or will ye strike in, hit or miss, with
these rogues of Devon and Somerset? Stop my vital breath, if I would not
as soon side with the clown as with the crown, with all due respect to
your own principles!'

'You are a daring man,' said I, 'if you air your opinions thus in every
inn parlour. Dost not know that a word of what you have said, whispered
to the nearest justice of the peace, might mean your liberty, if not
your life?'

'I don't care the rind of a rotten orange for life or liberty either,'
cried our acquaintance, snapping his finger and thumb. 'Burn me if
it wouldn't be a new sensation to bandy words with some heavy-chopped
country justice, with the Popish plot still stuck in his gizzard, and
be thereafter consigned to a dungeon, like the hero in John Dryden's
latest. I have been round-housed many a time by the watch in the old
Hawkubite days; but this would be a more dramatic matter, with high
treason, block, and axe all looming in the background.'

'And rack and pincers for a prologue,' said Reuben. 'This ambition is
the strangest that I have ever heard tell of.'

'Anything for a change,' cried Sir Gervas, filling up a bumper. 'Here's
to the maid that's next our heart, and here's to the heart that loves
the maids! War, wine, and women, 'twould be a dull world without them.
But you have not answered my question.'

'Why truly, sir,' said I, 'frank as you have been with us, I can scarce
be equally so with you, without the permission of the gentleman who has
just left the room. He is the leader of our party. Pleasant as our short
intercourse has been, these are parlous times, and hasty confidences are
apt to lead to repentance.'

'A Daniel come to judgment!' cried our new acquaintance. 'What ancient,
ancient words from so young a head! You are, I'll warrant, five years
younger than a scatterbrain like myself, and yet you talk like the seven
wise men of Greece. Wilt take me as a valet?'

'A valet!' I exclaimed.

'Aye, a valet, a man-servant. I have been waited upon so long that it is
my turn to wait now, and I would not wish a more likely master. By the
Lard! I must, in applying for a place, give an account of my character
and a list of my accomplishments. So my rascals ever did with me, though
in good truth I seldom listened to their recital. Honesty--there I
score a trick. Sober--Ananias himself could scarce say that I am
that. Trustworthy--indifferently so. Steady--hum! about as much so
as Garraway's weathercock. Hang it, man, I am choke full of good
resolutions, but a sparkling glass or a roguish eye will deflect me, as
the mariners say of the compass. So much for my weaknesses. Now let me
see what qualifications I can produce. A steady nerve, save only when I
have my morning qualms, and a cheerful heart; I score two on that. I
can dance saraband, minuet, or corranto; fence, ride, and sing French
chansons. Good Lard! who ever heard a valet urge such accomplishments? I
can play the best game of piquet in London. So said Sir George Etherege
when I won a cool thousand off him at the Groom Parter. But that won't
advance me much, either. What is there, then, to commend me? Why, marry,
I can brew a bowl of punch, and I can broil a devilled fowl. It is not
much, but I can do it well.'

'Truly, good sir,' I said, with a smile, 'neither of these
accomplishments is like to prove of much use to us on our present
errand. You do, however, but jest, no doubt, when you talk of descending
to such a position.'

'Not a whit! not a whit!' he replied earnestly. '"To such base uses do
we come," as Will Shakespeare has it. If you would be able to say that
you have in your service Sir Gervas Jerome, knight banneret, and sole
owner of Beacham Ford Park, with a rent-roll of four thousand good
pounds a year, he is now up for sale, and will be knocked down to the
bidder who pleases him best. Say but the word, and we'll have another
flagon of sack to clinch the bargain.'

'But,' said I, 'if you are indeed owner of this fair property, why
should you descend to so menial an occupation?'

'The Jews, the Jews, oh most astute and yet most slow-witted master! The
ten tribes have been upon me, and I have been harried and wasted, bound,
ravished, and despoiled. Never was Agag, king of Amalek, more completely
in the hands of the chosen, and the sole difference is that they have
hewed into pieces mine estate instead of myself.'

'Have you lost all, then?' Reuben asked, open-eyed.

'Why no--not all--by no means all!' he answered, with a merry laugh; 'I
have a gold Jacobus and a guinea or two in my purse. 'Twill serve for
a flask or so yet. There is my silver-hilted rapier, my rings, my gold
snuff-box, and my watch by Tompion at the sign of the Three Crowns.
It was never bought under a hundred, I'll warrant. Then there are such
relics of grandeur as you see upon my person, though they begin to
look as frail and worn as a waiting-woman's virtue. In this bag, too,
I retain the means for preserving that niceness and elegance of person
which made me, though I say it, as well groomed a man as ever set foot
in St. James's Park. Here are French scissors, eyebrow brush, toothpick
case, patch-box, powder-bag, comb, puff, and my pair of red-heeled
shoes. What could a man wish for more? These, with a dry throat, a
cheerful heart, and a ready hand, are my whole stock in trade.'

Reuben and I could not forbear from laughing at the curious inventory of
articles which Sir Gervas had saved from the wreck of his fortunes. He
upon seeing our mirth was so tickled at his own misfortunes, that he
laughed in a high treble key until the whole house resounded with his
merriment. 'By the Mass,' he cried at last, 'I have never had so much
honest amusement out of my prosperity as hath been caused in me by my
downfall. Fill up your glasses!'

'We have still some distance to travel this evening, and must not drink
more,' I observed, for prudence told me that it was dangerous work for
two sober country lads to keep pace with an experienced toper.

'So!' said he in surprise. 'I should have thought that would be a
"raison de plus," as the French say. But I wish your long-legged friend
would come back, even if he were intent upon slitting my weazand for my
attention to the widow. He is not a man to flinch from his liquor, I'll
warrant. Curse this Wiltshire dust that clings to my periwig!'

'Until my comrade returns, Sir Gervas,' said I, 'you might, since the
subject does not appear to be a painful one to you, let us know how
these evil times, which you bear with such philosophy, came upon you.'

'The old story!' he answered, flicking away a few grains of snuff with
his deeply-laced cambric handkerchief. 'The old, old story! My father, a
good, easy country baronet, finding the family purse somewhat full, must
needs carry me up to town to make a man of me. There as a young lad I
was presented at Court, and being a slim active youngster with a pert
tongue and assured manner, I caught the notice of the Queen, who made
me one of her pages of honour. This post I held until I grew out of
it, when I withdrew from town, but egad! I found I must get back to it
again, for Beacham Ford Park was as dull as a monastery after the life
which I had been living. In town I stayed then with such boon companions
as Tommy Lawson, my Lord Halifax, Sir Jasper Lemarck, little Geordie
Chichester, aye, and old Sidney Godolphin of the Treasury; for with all
his staid ways and long-winded budgets he could drain a cup with the
best of us, and was as keen on a main of cocks as on a committee of ways
and means. Well, it was rare sport while it lasted, and sink me if
I wouldn't do the same again if I had my time once more. It is like
sliding down a greased plank though, for at first a man goes slow
enough, and thinks he can pull himself up, but presently he goes faster
and faster, until he comes with a crash on to the rocks of ruin at the
bottom.'

'And did you run through four thousand pounds a year?' I exclaimed.

'Od's bodikins, man, you speak as if this paltry sum were all the
wealth of the Indies. Why, from Ormonde or Buckingham, with their twenty
thousand, down to ranting Dicky Talbot, there was not one of my set who
could not have bought me out. Yet I must have my coach and four, my town
house, my liveried servants, and my stable full of horses. To be in the
mode I must have my poet, and throw him a handful of guineas for his
dedication. Well, poor devil, he is one who will miss me. I warrant his
heart was as heavy as his verses when he found me gone, though perchance
he has turned a few guineas by this time by writing a satire upon me.
It would have a ready sale among my friends. Gad's life! I wonder how
my levees get on, and whom all my suitors have fastened on to now. There
they were morning after morning, the French pimp, the English bully, the
needy man o' letters, the neglected inventor--I never thought to have
got rid of them, but indeed I have shaken them off very effectually now.
When the honey-pot is broken it is farewell to the flies.'

'And your noble friends?' I asked. 'Did none of them stand by you in
your adversity?'

'Well, well, I have nought to complain of!' exclaimed Sir Gervas. 'They
were brave-hearted boys for the most part. I might have had their names
on my bills as long as their fingers could hold a pen, but slit me if I
like bleeding my own companions. They might have found a place for me,
too, had I consented to play second-fiddle where I had been used to lead
the band. I' faith, I care not what I turn my hand to amongst strangers,
but I would fain leave my memory sweet in town.'

'As to what you proposed, of serving us as a valet,' said I, 'it is not
to be thought of. We are, in spite of my friend's waggishness, but two
plain blunt countrymen, and have no more need of a valet than one of
those poets which you have spoken of. On the other hand, if you should
care to attach yourself to our party, we shall take you where you
will see service which shall be more to your taste than the curling of
periwigs or the brushing of eyebrows.'

'Nay, nay, my friend. Speak not with unseemly levity of the mysteries
of the toilet,' he cried. 'Ye would yourselves be none the worse for
a touch of mine ivory comb, and a closer acquaintance with the famous
skin-purifying wash of Murphy which I am myself in the habit of using.'

'I am beholden to you, sir,' said Reuben, 'but the famous spring water
wash by Providence is quite good enough for the purpose.'

'And Dame Nature hath placed a wig of her own upon me,' I added, 'which
I should be very loth to change.'

'Goths! Perfect Goths!' cried the exquisite, throwing up his white
hands. 'But here comes a heavy tread and the clink of armour in the
passage. 'Tis our friend the knight of the wrathful countenance, if I
mistake not.'

It was indeed Saxon, who strode into the room to tell us that our horses
were at the door, and that all was ready for our departure. Taking
him aside I explained to him in a whisper what had passed between the
stranger and ourselves, with the circumstances which had led me to
suggest that he should join our party. The old soldier frowned at the
news.

'What have we to do with such a coxcomb?' he said. 'We have hard fare
and harder blows before us. He is not fit for the work.'

'You said yourself that Monmouth will be weak in horse,' I answered.
'Here is a well-appointed cavalier, who is to all appearance a desperate
man and ready for anything. Why should we not enrol him?'

'I fear,' said Saxon, 'that his body may prove to be like the bran of
a fine cushion, of value only for what it has around it. However, it is
perhaps for the best. The handle to his name may make him welcome in the
camp, for from what I hear there is some dissatisfaction at the way in
which the gentry stand aloof from the enterprise.'

'I had feared,' I remarked, still speaking in a whisper, 'that we were
about to lose one of our party instead of gaining one in this Bruton
inn.'

'I have thought better of it,' he answered, with a smile. 'Nay, I'll
tell you of it anon. Well, Sir Gervas Jerome,' he added aloud, turning
to our new associate, 'I hear that you are coming with us. For a day you
must be content to follow without question or remark. Is that agreed!'

'With all my heart,' cried Sir Gervas.

'Then here's a bumper to our better acquaintance,' cried Saxon, raising
his glass.

'I pledge ye all,' quoth the gallant. 'Here's to a fair fight, and may
the best men win.'

'Donnerblitz, man!' said Saxon. 'I believe there's mettle in you for all
your gay plumes. I do conceive a liking for you. Give me your hand!'

The soldier of fortune's great brown grip enclosed the delicate hand
of our new friend in a pledge of comradeship. Then, having paid our
reckoning and bade a cordial adieu to Dame Hobson, who glanced methought
somewhat reproachfully or expectantly at Saxon, we sprang on our steeds
and continued our journey amidst a crowd of staring villagers, who
huzzaed lustily as we rode out from amongst them.



Chapter XIV. Of the Stiff-legged Parson and his Flock

Our road lay through Castle Carey and Somerton, which are small towns
lying in the midst of a most beautiful pastoral country, well wooded and
watered by many streams. The valleys along the centre of which the road
lies are rich and luxuriant, sheltered from the winds by long rolling
hills, which are themselves highly cultivated. Here and there we passed
the ivy-clad turret of an old castle or the peaked gables of a rambling
country house, protruding from amongst the trees and marking the country
seat of some family of repute. More than once, when these mansions were
not far from the road, we were able to perceive the unrepaired dints and
fractures on the walls received during the stormy period of the civil
troubles. Fairfax it seems had been down that way, and had left abundant
traces of his visit. I have no doubt that my father would have had much
to say of these signs of Puritan wrath had he been riding at our side.

The road was crowded with peasants who were travelling in two strong
currents, the one setting from east to west, and the other from west to
east. The latter consisted principally of aged people and of children,
who were being sent out of harm's way to reside in the less disturbed
counties until the troubles should be over. Many of these poor folk were
pushing barrows in front of them, in which a few bedclothes and some
cracked utensils represented the whole of their worldly goods. Others
more prosperous had small carts, drawn by the wild shaggy colts which
are bred on the Somerset moors. What with the spirit of the half-tamed
beasts and the feebleness of the drivers, accidents were not uncommon,
and we passed several unhappy groups who had been tumbled with their
property into a ditch, or who were standing in anxious debate round a
cracked shaft or a broken axle.

The countrymen who were making for the West were upon the other hand
men in the prime of life, with little or no baggage. Their brown faces,
heavy boots, and smockfrocks proclaimed most of them to be mere hinds,
though here and there we overtook men who, by their top-boots and
corduroys, may have been small farmers or yeomen. These fellows walked
in gangs, and were armed for the most part with stout oak cudgels,
which were carried as an aid to their journey, but which in the hands of
powerful men might become formidable weapons. From time to time one
of these travellers would strike up a psalm tune, when all the others
within earshot would join in, until the melody rippled away down the
road. As we passed some scowled angrily at us, while others whispered
together and shook their heads, in evident doubt as to our character and
aims. Now and again among the people we marked the tall broad-brimmed
hat and Geneva mantle which were the badges of the Puritan clergy.

'We are in Monmouth's country at last,' said Saxon to me, for Reuben
Lockarby and Sir Gervas Jerome had ridden on ahead. 'This is the raw
material which we shall have to lick into soldiership.'

'And no bad material either,' I replied, taking note of the sturdy
figures and bold hearty faces of the men. 'Think ye that they are bound
for Monmouth's camp, then?'

'Aye, are they. See you yon long-limbed parson on the left--him with the
pent-house hat. Markest thou not the stiffness wherewith he moves his
left leg!'

'Why, yes; he is travel-worn doubtless.'

'Ho! ho!' laughed my companion. 'I have seen such a stiffness before
now. The man hath a straight sword within he leg of his breeches. A
regular Parliamentary tuck, I'll warrant. When he is on safe ground he
will produce it, aye, and use it too, but until he is out of all danger
of falling in with the King's horse he is shy of strapping it to his
belt. He is one of the old breed by his cut, who:

          "Call fire and sword and desolation,
           A godly thorough reformation."

Old Samuel hath them to a penstroke! There is another ahead of him
there, with the head of a scythe inside his smock. Can you not see the
outline? I warrant there is not one of the rascals but hath a pike-head
or sickle-blade concealed somewhere about him. I begin to feel the
breath of war once more, and to grow younger with it. Hark ye, lad! I am
glad that I did not tarry at the inn.'

'You seemed to be in two minds about it,' said I.

'Aye, aye. She was a fine woman, and the quarters were comfortable. I do
not gainsay it. But marriage, d'ye see, is a citadel that it is plaguy
easy to find one's way into, but once in old Tilly himself could not
bring one out again with credit, I have known such a device on the
Danube, where at the first onfall the Mamelukes have abandoned the
breach for the very purpose of ensnaring the Imperial troops in the
narrow streets beyond, from which few ever returned. Old birds are not
caught with such wiles. I did succeed in gaining the ear of one of the
gossips, and asking him what he could tell me of the good dame and her
inn. It seemeth that she is somewhat of a shrew upon occasion, and that
her tongue had more to do with her husband's death than the dropsy which
the leech put it down to. Again, a new inn hath been started in the
village, which is well-managed, and is like to draw the custom from
her. It is, too, as you have said, a dull sleepy spot. All these reasons
weighed with me, and I decided that it would be best to raise my siege
of the widow, and to retreat whilst I could yet do so with the credit
and honours of war.'

''Tis best so,' said I; 'you could not have settled down to a life of
toping and ease. But our new comrade, what think you of him?'

'Faith!' Saxon answered, 'we shall extend into a troop of horse if we
add to our number every gallant who is in want of a job. As to this Sir
Gervas, however, I think, as I said at the inn, that he hath more mettle
in him than one would judge at first sight. These young sprigs of the
gentry will always fight, but I doubt if he is hardened enough or
hath constancy enough for such a campaign as this is like to be. His
appearance, too, will be against him in the eyes of the saints; and
though Monmouth is a man of easy virtue, the saints are like to have the
chief voice in his councils. Now do but look at him as he reins up that
showy grey stallion and gazes back at us. Mark his riding-hat tilted
over his eye, his open bosom, his whip dangling from his button-hole,
his hand on his hip, and as many oaths in his mouth as there are ribbons
to his doublet. Above all, mark the air with which he looks down upon
the peasants beside him. He will have to change his style if he is to
fight by the side of the fanatics. But hark! I am much mistaken if they
have not already got themselves into trouble.'

Our friends had pulled up their horses to await our coming. They had
scarce halted, however, before the stream of peasants who had been
moving along abreast of them slackened their pace, and gathered round
them with a deep ominous murmur and threatening gestures. Other
rustics, seeing that there was something afoot, hurried up to help their
companions. Saxon and I put spurs to our horses, and pushing through the
throng, which was becoming every instant larger and more menacing, made
our way to the aid of our friends, who were hemmed in on every side by
the rabble. Reuben had laid his hand upon the hilt of his sword, while
Sir Gervas was placidly chewing his toothpick and looking down at the
angry mob with an air of amused contempt.

'A flask or two of scent amongst them would not be amiss,' he remarked;
'I would I had a casting bottle.'

'Stand on your guard, but do not draw,' cried Saxon. 'What the henker
hath come over the chaw-bacons? They mean mischief. How now, friends,
why this uproar?'

This question instead of allaying the tumult appeared to make it tenfold
worse. All round us twenty deep were savage faces and angry eyes,
with the glint here and there of a weapon half drawn from its place of
concealment. The uproar, which had been a mere hoarse growl, began to
take shape and form. 'Down with the Papists!' was the cry. 'Down with
the Prelatists!' 'Smite the Erastian butchers!' 'Smite the Philistine
horsemen!' 'Down with them!'

A stone or two had already whistled past our ears, and we had been
forced in self-defence to draw our swords, when the tall minister whom
we had already observed shoved his way through the crowd, and by dint of
his lofty stature and commanding voice prevailed upon them to be silent.

'How say ye,' he asked, turning upon us, 'fight ye for Baal or for the
Lord? He who is not with us is against us.'

'Which is the side of Baal, most reverend sir, and which of the Lord?'
asked Sir Gervas Jerome. 'Methinks if you were to speak plain English
instead of Hebrew we might come to an understanding sooner.'

'This is no time for light words,' the minister cried, with a flush of
anger upon his face. 'If ye would keep your skins whole, tell me, are ye
for the bloody usurper James Stuart, or are ye for his most Protestant
Majesty King Monmouth?'

'What! He hath come to the title already!' exclaimed Saxon. 'Know then
that we are four unworthy vessels upon our way to offer our services to
the Protestant cause.'

'He lies, good Master Pettigrue, he lies most foully,' shouted a burly
fellow from the edge of the crowd. 'Who ever saw a good Protestant in
such a Punchinello dress as yonder? Is not Amalekite written upon his
raiment? Is he not attired as becometh the bridegroom of the harlot of
Rome? Why then should we not smite him?'

'I thank you, my worthy friend,' said Sir Gervas, whose attire had moved
this champion's wrath. 'If I were nearer I should give you some return
for the notice which you have taken of me.'

'What proof have we that ye are not in the pay of the usurper, and on
your way to oppress the faithful?' asked the Puritan divine.

'I tell you, man,' said Saxon impatiently, 'that we have travelled all
the way from Hampshire to fight against James Stuart. We will ride with
ye to Monmouth's camp, and what better proof could ye desire than that?'

'It may be that ye do but seek an opportunity of escaping from our
bondage,' the minister observed, after conferring with one or two of the
leading peasants. 'It is our opinion, therefore, that before coming
with us ye must deliver unto us your swords, pistols, and other carnal
weapons.'

'Nay, good sir, that cannot be,' our leader answered. 'A cavalier may
not with honour surrender his blade or his liberty in the manner ye
demand. Keep close to my bridle-arm, Clarke, and strike home at any
rogue who lays hands on you.'

A hum of anger rose from the crowd, and a score of sticks and
scythe-blades were raised against us, when the minister again interposed
and silenced his noisy following.

'Did I hear aright?' he asked. 'Is your name Clarke?'

'It is,' I answered.

'Your Christian name?'

'Micah.'

'Living at?'

'Havant.'

The clergyman conferred for a few moments with a grizzly-bearded,
harsh-faced man dressed in black buckram who stood at his elbow.

'If you are really Micah Clarke of Havant,' quoth he, 'you will be able
to tell us the name of an old soldier, skilled in the German wars, who
was to have come with ye to the camp of the faithful.'

'Why, this is he,' I answered; 'Decimus Saxon is his name.'

'Aye, aye, Master Pettigrue,' cried the old man. 'The very name given by
Dicky Rumbold. He said that either the old Roundhead Clarke or his son
would go with him. But who are these?'

'This is Master Reuben Lockarby, also of Havant, and Sir Gervas Jerome
of Surrey,' I replied. 'They are both here as volunteers desiring to
serve under the Duke of Monmouth.'

'Right glad I am to see ye, then,' said the stalwart minister heartily.
'Friends, I can answer for these gentlemen that they favour the honest
folk and the old cause.'

At these words the rage of the mob turned in an instant into the most
extravagant adulation and delight. They crowded round us, patting our
riding-boots, pulling at the skirts of our dress, pressing our hands and
calling down blessings upon our heads, until their pastor succeeded
at last in rescuing us from their attentions and in persuading them to
resume their journey. We walked our horses in the midst of them whilst
the clergyman strode along betwixt Saxon and myself. He was, as Reuben
remarked, well fitted to be an intermediary between us, for he was
taller though not so broad as I was, and broader though not so tall as
the adventurer. His face was long, thin, and hollow-cheeked, with a pair
of great thatched eyebrows and deep sunken melancholy eyes, which lit up
upon occasion with a sudden quick flash of fiery enthusiasm.

'Joshua Pettigrue is my name, gentlemen,' said he; 'I am an unworthy
worker in the Lord's vineyard, testifying with voice and with arm to His
holy covenant. These are my faithful flock, whom I am bringing westward
that they may be ready for the reaping when it pleases the Almighty to
gather them in.'

'And why have you not brought them into some show of order or
formation?' asked Saxon. 'They are straggling along the road like a line
of geese upon a common when Michaelmas is nigh. Have you no fears? Is
it not written that your calamity cometh suddenly--suddenly shall you be
broken down without remedy?'

'Aye, friend, but is it not also written, "Trust in the Lord with all
thine heart, and lean not unto thine own understanding!" Mark ye, if I
were to draw up my men in military fashion it would invite attention and
attack from any of James Stuart's horse who may come our way. It is my
desire to bring my flock to the camp and obtain pieces for them before
exposing them to so unequal a contest.'

'Truly, sir, it is a wise resolution,' said Saxon grimly, 'for if a
troop of horse came down upon these good people the pastor would find
himself without his flock.'

'Nay, that could never be!' cried Master Pettigrue with fervour. 'Say
rather that pastor, flock, and all would find their way along the thorny
track of martyrdom to the new Jerusalem. Know, friend, that I have come
from Monmouth in order to conduct these men to his standard. I received
from him, or rather from Master Ferguson, instructions to be on the
lookout for ye and for several others of the faithful we expect to join
us from the East. By what route came ye?'

'Over Salisbury Plain and so through Bruton.'

'And saw ye or met ye any of our people upon the way?'

'None,' Saxon answered. 'We left the Blue Guards at Salisbury, however,
and we saw either them or some other horse regiment near this side of
the Plain at the village of Mere.'

'Ah, there is a gathering of the eagles,' cried Master Joshua Pettigrue,
shaking his head. 'They are men of fine raiment, with war-horses and
chariots and trappings, like the Assyrians of old, yet shall the angel
of the Lord breathe upon them in the night. Yea, He shall cut them off
utterly in His wrath, and they shall be destroyed.'

'Amen! Amen!' cried as many of the peasants as were within earshot.

'They have elevated their horn, Master Pettigrue,' said the
grizzly-haired Puritan. 'They have set up their candlestick on high--the
candlestick of a perverse ritual and of an idolatrous service. Shall it
not be dashed down by the hands of the righteous?'

'Lo, this same candle waxed big and burned sooty, even as an offence to
the nostrils, in the days of our fathers,' cried a burly red-faced man,
whose dress proclaimed him to be one of the yeoman class. 'So was it
when Old Noll did get his snuffing shears to work upon it. It is a wick
which can only be trimmed by the sword of the faithful.' A grim laugh
from the whole party proclaimed their appreciation of the pious waggery
of their companion.

'Ah, Brother Sandcroft,' cried the pastor, 'there is much sweetness and
manna hidden in thy conversation. But the way is long and dreary. Shall
we not lighten it by a song of praise? Where is Brother Thistlethwaite,
whose voice is as the cymbal, the tabor, and the dulcimer?'

'Lo, most pious Master Pettigrue,' said Saxon, 'I have myself at times
ventured to lift up my voice before the Lord.' Without any further
apology he broke out in stentorian tones into the following hymn, the
refrain of which was caught up by pastor and congregation.

          The Lord He is a morion
           That guards me from all wound;
          The Lord He is a coat of mail
           That circles me all round.
          Who then fears to draw the sword,
           And fight the battle of the Lord?

          The Lord He is the buckler true
           That swings on my left arm;
          The Lord He is the plate of proof
           That shieldeth me from harm.
          Who then fears to draw the sword,
           And fight the battle of the Lord?

          Who then dreads the violent,
           Or fears the man of pride?
          Or shall I flee from two or three
           If He be by my side?
          Who then fears to draw the sword,
           And fight the battle of the Lord!

          My faith is like a citadel
           Girt round with moat and wall,
          No mine, or sap, or breach, or gap
           Can ere prevail at all.
          Who then fears to draw the sword,
           And fight the battle of the Lord?

Saxon ceased, but the Reverend Joshua Pettigrue waved his long arms and
repeated the refrain, which was taken up again and again by the long
column of marching peasants.

'It is a godly hymn,' said our companion, who had, to my disgust and
to the evident astonishment of Reuben and Sir Gervas, resumed the
snuffling, whining voice which he had used in the presence of my father.
'It hath availed much on the field of battle.'

'Truly,' returned the clergyman, 'if your comrades are of as sweet
a savour as yourself, ye will be worth a brigade of pikes to the
faithful,' a sentiment which raised a murmur of assent from the Puritans
around. 'Since, sir,' he continued, 'you have had much experience in the
wiles of war, I shall be glad to hand over to you the command of this
small body of the faithful, until such time as we reach the army.'

'It is time, too, in good faith, that ye had a soldier at your head,'
Decimus Saxon answered quietly. 'My eyes deceive me strangely if I
do not see the gleam of sword and cuirass upon the brow of yonder
declivity. Methinks our pious exercises have brought the enemy upon us.'



Chapter XV. Of our Brush with the King's Dragoons

Some little distance from us a branch road ran into that along which we
and our motley assemblage of companions-in-arms were travelling. This
road curved down the side of a well-wooded hill, and then over the level
for a quarter of a mile or so before opening on the other. Just at the
brow of the rising ground there stood a thick bristle of trees, amid the
trunks of which there came and went a bright shimmer of sparkling steel,
which proclaimed the presence of armed men. Farther back, where the road
took a sudden turn and ran along the ridge of the hill, several horsemen
could be plainly seen outlined against the evening sky. So peaceful,
however, was the long sweep of countryside, mellowed by the golden light
of the setting sun, with a score of village steeples and manor-houses
peeping out from amongst the woods, that it was hard to think that the
thundercloud of war was really lowering over that fair valley, and that
at any instant the lightning might break from it.

The country folk, however, appeared to have no difficulty at all in
understanding the danger to which they were exposed. The fugitives from
the West gave a yell of consternation, and ran wildly down the road or
whipped up their beasts of burden in the endeavour to place as safe a
distance as possible between themselves and the threatened attack. The
chorus of shrill cries and shouts, with the cracking of whips, creaking
of wheels, and the occasional crash when some cart load of goods came to
grief, made up a most deafening uproar, above which our leader's voice
resounded in sharp, eager exhortation and command. When, however, the
loud brazen shriek from a bugle broke from the wood, and the head of
a troop of horse began to descend the slope, the panic became greater
still, and it was difficult for us to preserve any order at all amidst
the wild rush of the terrified fugitives.

'Stop that cart, Clarke,' cried Saxon vehemently, pointing with his
sword to an old waggon, piled high with furniture and bedding, which was
lumbering along drawn by two raw-boned colts. At the same moment I saw
him drive his horse into the crowd and catch at the reins of another
similar one.

Giving Covenant's bridle a shake I was soon abreast of the cart which
he had indicated, and managed to bring the furious young horses to a
stand-still.

'Bring it up!' cried our leader, working with the coolness which only a
long apprenticeship to war can give. 'Now, friends, cut the traces!'
A dozen knives were at work in a moment, and the kicking, struggling
animals scampered off, leaving their burdens behind them. Saxon sprang
off his horse and set the example in dragging the waggon across the
roadway, while some of the peasants, under the direction of Reuben
Lockarby and of Master Joshua Pettigrue, arranged a couple of other
carts to block the way fifty yards further down. The latter precaution
was to guard against the chance of the royal horse riding through
the fields and attacking us from behind. So speedily was the scheme
conceived and carried out, that within a very few minutes of the first
alarm we found ourselves protected front and rear by a lofty barricade,
while within this improvised fortress was a garrison of a hundred and
fifty men.

'What firearms have we amongst us?' asked Saxon hurriedly.

'A dozen pistols at the most,' replied the elderly Puritan, who was
addressed by his companions as Hope-above Williams. 'John Rodway,
the coachman, hath his blunderbuss. There are also two godly men from
Hungerford, who are keepers of game, and who have brought their pieces
with them.'

'They are here, sir,' cried another, pointing to two stout, bearded
fellows, who were ramming charges into their long-barrelled muskets.
'Their names are Wat and Nat Millman.'

'Two who can hit their mark are worth a battalion who shoot wide,' our
leader remarked, 'Get under the waggon, my friends, and rest your pieces
upon the spokes. Never draw trigger until the sons of Belial are within
three pikes' length of ye.'

'My brother and I,' quoth one of them, 'can hit a running doe at two
hundred paces. Our lives are in the hands of the Lord, but two, at
least, of these hired butchers we shall send before us.'

'As gladly as ever we slew stoat or wild-cat,' cried the other, slipping
under the waggon. 'We are keeping the Lord's preserves now, brother Wat,
and truly these are some of the vermin that infest them.'

'Let all who have pistols line the waggon,' said Saxon, tying his mare
to the hedge--an example which we all followed. 'Clarke, do you take
charge upon the right with Sir Gervas, while Lockarby assists Master
Pettigrue upon the left. Ye others shall stand behind with stones.
Should they break through our barricades, slash at the horses with your
scythes. Once down, the riders are no match for ye.'

A low sullen murmur of determined resolution rose from the peasants,
mingled with pious ejaculations and little scraps of hymn or of prayer.
They had all produced from under their smocks rustic weapons of some
sort. Ten or twelve had petronels, which, from their antique look and
rusty condition, threatened to be more dangerous to their possessors
than to the enemy. Others had sickles, scythe-blades, flails,
half-pikes, or hammers, while the remainder carried long knives and
oaken clubs. Simple as were these weapons, history has proved that in
the hands of men who are deeply stirred by religious fanaticism they are
by no means to be despised. One had but to look at the stern, set faces
of our followers, and the gleam of exultation and expectancy which shone
from their eyes, to see that they were not the men to quail, either from
superior numbers or equipment.

'By the Mass!' whispered Sir Gervas, 'it is magnificent! An hour of this
is worth a year in the Mall. The old Puritan bull is fairly at bay. Let
us see what sort of sport the bull-pups make in the baiting of him! I'll
lay five pieces to four on the chaw-bacons!'

'Nay, it's no matter for idle betting,' said I shortly, for his
light-hearted chatter annoyed me at so solemn a moment.

'Five to four on the soldiers, then!' he persisted. 'It is too good a
match not to have a stake on it one way or the other.'

'Our lives are the stake,' said I.

'Faith, I had forgot it!' he replied, still mumbling his toothpick. '"To
be or not to be?" as Will of Stratford says. Kynaston was great on the
passage. But here is the bell that rings the curtain up.'

Whilst we had been making our dispositions the troop of horse--for there
appeared to be but one--had trotted down the cross-road, and had drawn
up across the main highway. They numbered, as far as I could judge,
about ninety troopers, and it was evident from their three-cornered
hats, steel plates, red sleeves, and bandoliers, that they were dragoons
of the regular army. The main body halted a quarter of a mile from us,
while three officers rode to the front and held a short consultation,
which ended in one of them setting spurs to his horse and cantering down
in our direction. A bugler followed a few paces behind him, waving a
white kerchief and blowing an occasional blast upon his trumpet.

'Here comes an envoy,' cried Saxon, who was standing up in the waggon.
'Now, my brethren, we have neither kettle-drum nor tinkling brass, but
we have the instrument wherewith Providence hath endowed us. Let us show
the redcoats that we know how to use it.

          "Who then dreads the violent,
           Or fears the man of pride?
           Or shall I flee from two or three
           If He be by my side?"'

Seven score voices broke in, in a hoarse roar, upon the chorus--

          'Who then fears to draw the sword,
           And fight the battle of the Lord?'

I could well believe at that moment that the Spartans had found the lame
singer Tyrtaeus the most successful of their generals, for the sound of
their own voices increased the confidence of the country folk, while the
martial words of the old hymn roused the dogged spirit in their breasts.
So high did their courage run that they broke off their song with a
loud warlike shout, waving their weapons above their heads, and ready I
verily believe to march out from their barricades and make straight for
the horsemen. In the midst of this clamour and turmoil the young dragoon
officer, a handsome, olive-faced lad, rode fearlessly up to the barrier,
and pulling up his beautiful roan steed, held up his hand with an
imperious gesture which demanded silence.

'Who is the leader of this conventicle?' he asked.

'Address your message to me, sir,' said our leader from the top of
the waggon, 'but understand that your white flag will only protect you
whilst you use such language as may come from one courteous adversary to
another. Say your say or retire.'

'Courtesy and honour,' said the officer, with a sneer, 'are not extended
to rebels who are in arms against their lawful sovereign. If you are the
leader of this rabble, I warn you if they are not dispersed within five
minutes by this watch'--he pulled out an elegant gold time-piece--'we
shall ride down upon them and cut them to pieces.'

'The Lord can protect His own,' Saxon answered, amid a fierce hum of
approval from the crowd. 'Is this all thy message?'

'It is all, and you will find it enough, you Presbyterian traitor,'
cried the dragoon cornet. 'Listen to me, misguided fools,' he continued,
standing up upon his stirrups and speaking to the peasants at the
other side of the waggon. 'What chance have ye with your whittles and
cheese-scrapers? Ye may yet save your skins if ye will but deliver up
your leaders, throw down what ye are pleased to call your arms, and
trust to the King's mercy.'

'This exceedeth the limitations of your privileges,' said Saxon, drawing
a pistol from his belt and cocking it. 'If you say another word to
seduce these people from their allegiance, I fire.'

'Hope not to benefit Monmouth,' cried the young officer, disregarding
the threat, and still addressing his words to the peasants. 'The whole
royal army is drawing round him and--'

'Have a care!' shouted our leader, in a deep harsh voice.

'His head within a month shall roll upon the scaffold.'

'But you shall never live to see it,' said Saxon, and stooping over
he fired straight at the cornet's head. At the flash of the pistol the
trumpeter wheeled round and galloped for his life, while the roan horse
turned and followed with its master still seated firmly in the saddle.

'Verily you have missed the Midianite!' cried Hope-above Williams.

'He is dead,' said our leader, pouring a fresh charge into his pistol.
'It is the law of war, Clarke,' he added, looking round at me. 'He hath
chosen to break it, and must pay forfeit.'

As he spoke I saw the young officer lean gradually over in his saddle,
until, when about half-way back to his friends, he lost his balance and
fell heavily in the roadway, turning over two or three times with
the force of his fall, and lying at last still and motionless, a
dust-coloured heap. A loud yell of rage broke from the troopers at
the sight, which was answered by a shout of defiance from the Puritan
peasantry.

'Down on your faces!' cried Saxon; 'they are about to fire.'

The crackle of musketry and a storm of bullets, pinging on the hard
ground, or cutting twigs from the hedges on either side of us, lent
emphasis to our leader's order. Many of the peasants crouched behind the
feather beds and tables which had been pulled out of the cart. Some lay
in the waggon itself, and some sheltered themselves behind or underneath
it. Others again lined the ditches on either side or lay flat upon the
roadway, while a few showed their belief in the workings of Providence
by standing upright without flinching from the bullets. Amongst these
latter were Saxon and Sir Gervas, the former to set an example to his
raw troops, and the latter out of pure laziness and indifference.
Reuben and I sat together in the ditch, and I can assure you, my dear
grandchildren, that we felt very much inclined to bob our heads when we
heard the bullets piping all around them. If any soldier ever told you
that he did not the first time that he was under fire, then that soldier
is not a man to trust. After sitting rigid and silent, however, as if
we had both stiff necks, for a very few minutes, the feeling passed
completely away, and from that day to this it has never returned to me.
You see familiarity breeds contempt with bullets as with other things,
and though it is no easy matter to come to like them, like the King of
Sweden or my Lord Cutts, it is not so very hard to become indifferent to
them.

The cornet's death did not remain long unavenged. A little old man with
a sickle, who had been standing near Sir Gervas, gave a sudden sharp
cry, and springing up into the air with a loud 'Glory to God!' fell flat
upon his face dead. A bullet had struck him just over the right eye.
Almost at the same moment one of the peasants in the waggon was shot
through the chest, and sat up coughing blood all over the wheel. I saw
Master Joshua Pettigrue catch him in his long arms, and settle some
bedding under his head, so that he lay breathing heavily and pattering
forth prayers. The minister showed himself a man that day, for amid the
fierce carbine fire he walked boldly up and down, with a drawn rapier in
his left hand--for he was a left-handed man--and his Bible in the other.
'This is what you are dying for, dear brothers,' he cried continually,
holding the brown volume up in the air; 'are ye not ready to die for
this?' And every time he asked the question a low eager murmur of assent
rose from the ditches, the waggon, and the road.

'They aim like yokels at a Wappenschaw,' said Saxon, seating himself
on the side of the waggon. 'Like all young soldiers they fire too high.
When I was an adjutant it was my custom to press down the barrels of the
muskets until my eye told me that they were level. These rogues think
that they have done their part if they do but let the gun off, though
they are as like to hit the plovers above us as ourselves.'

'Five of the faithful have fallen,' said Hope-above Williams. 'Shall we
not sally forth and do battle with the children of Antichrist? Are we to
lie here like so many popinjays at a fair for the troopers to practise
upon?'

'There is a stone barn over yonder on the hill-side,' I remarked. 'If
we who have horses, and a few others, were to keep the dragoons in
play, the people might be able to reach it, and so be sheltered from the
fire.'

'At least let my brother and me have a shot or two back at them,' cried
one of the marksmen beside the wheel.

To all our entreaties and suggestions, however, our leader only replied
by a shake of the head, and continued to swing his long legs over the
side of the waggon with his eyes fixed intently upon the horsemen, many
of whom had dismounted and were leaning their carbines over the cruppers
of their chargers.

'This cannot go on, sir,' said the pastor, in a low earnest voice; 'two
more men have just been hit.'

'If fifty more men are hit we must wait until they charge,' Saxon
answered. 'What would you do, man? If you leave this shelter you will
be cut off and utterly destroyed. When you have seen as much of war as
I have done, you will learn to put up quietly with what is not to be
avoided. I remember on such another occasion when the rearguard or
nachhut of the Imperial troops was followed by Croats, who were in
the pay of the Grand Turk, I lost half my company before the mercenary
renegades came to close fighting. Ha, my brave boys, they are mounting!
We shall not have to wait long now.'

The dragoons were indeed climbing into their saddles again, and forming
across the road, with the evident intention of charging down upon us.
At the same time about thirty men detached themselves from the main body
and trotted away into the fields upon our right. Saxon growled a hearty
oath under his breath as he observed them.

'They have some knowledge of warfare after all,' said he. 'They mean to
charge us flank and front. Master Joshua, see that your scythesmen
line the quickset hedge upon the right. Stand well up, my brothers, and
flinch not from the horses. You men with the sickles, lie in the ditch
there, and cut at the legs of the brutes. A line of stone throwers
behind that. A heavy stone is as sure as a bullet at close quarters. If
ye would see your wives and children again, make that hedge good against
the horsemen. Now for the front attack. Let the men who carry petronels
come into the waggon. Two of yours, Clarke, and two of yours, Lockarby.
I can spare one also. That makes five. Now here are ten others of a sort
and three muskets. Twenty shots in all. Have you no pistols, Sir Gervas?

'No, but I can get a pair,' said our companion, and springing upon his
horse he forced his way through the ditch, past the barrier, and so down
the road in the direction of the dragoons.

The movement was so sudden and so unexpected that there was a dead
silence for a few seconds, which was broken by a general howl of hatred
and execration from the peasants. 'Shoot upon him! Shoot down the false
Amalekite!' they shrieked. 'He hath gone to join his kind! He hath
delivered us up into the hands of the enemy! Judas! Judas!' As to the
horsemen, who were still forming up for a charge and waiting for the
flanking party to get into position, they sat still and silent, not
knowing what to make of the gaily-dressed cavalier who was speeding
towards them.

We were not left long in doubt, however. He had no sooner reached the
spot where the cornet had fallen than he sprang from his horse and
helped himself to the dead man's pistols, and to the belt which
contained his powder and ball. Mounting at his leisure, amid a shower of
bullets which puffed up the white dust all around him, he rode onwards
towards the dragoons and discharged one of his pistols at them. Wheeling
round he politely raised his cap, and galloped back to us, none the
worse for his adventure, though a ball had grazed his horse's fetlock
and another had left a hole in the skirt of his riding-coat. The
peasants raised a shout of jubilation as he rode in, and from that day
forward our friend was permitted to wear his gay trappings and to bear
himself as he would, without being suspected of having mounted the
livery of Satan or of being wanting in zeal for the cause of the saints.

'They are coming,' cried Saxon. 'Let no man draw trigger until he sees
me shoot. If any does, I shall send a bullet through him, though it was
my last shot and the troopers were amongst us.'

As our leader uttered this threat and looked grimly round upon us with
an evident intention of executing it, a shrill blare of a bugle burst
from the horsemen in front of us, and was answered by those upon our
flank. At the signal both bodies set spurs to their horses and dashed
down upon us at the top of their speed. Those in the field were delayed
for a few moments, and thrown into some disorder, by finding that the
ground immediately in front of them was soft and boggy, but having
made their way through it they re-formed upon the other side and rode
gallantly at the hedge. Our own opponents, having a clear course before
them, never slackened for an instant, but came thundering down with a
jingling of harness and a tempest of oaths upon our rude barricades.

Ah, my children! when a man in his age tries to describe such things as
these, and to make others see what he has seen, it is only then that he
understands what a small stock of language a plain man keeps by him for
his ordinary use in the world, and how unfit it is to meet any call
upon it. For though at this very moment I can myself see that white
Somersetshire road, with the wild whirling charge of the horsemen, the
red angry faces of the men, and the gaping nostrils of the horses all
wreathed and framed in clouds of dust, I cannot hope to make it clear
to your young eyes, which never have looked, and, I trust, never shall
look, upon such a scene. When, too, I think of the sound, a mere rattle
and jingle at first, but growing in strength and volume with every step,
until it came upon us with a thunderous rush and roar which gave the
impression of irresistible power, I feel that that too is beyond the
power of my feeble words to express. To inexperienced soldiers like
ourselves it seemed impossible that our frail defence and our feeble
weapons could check for an instant the impetus and weight of the
dragoons. To right and left I saw white set faces, open-eyed and rigid,
unflinching, with a stubbornness which rose less from hope than from
despair. All round rose exclamations and prayers. 'Lord, save Thy
people!' 'Mercy, Lord, mercy!' 'Be with us this day!' 'Receive our
souls, O merciful Father!' Saxon lay across the waggon with his eyes
glinting like diamonds and his petronel presented at the full length
of his rigid arm. Following his example we all took aim as steadily as
possible at the first rank of the enemy. Our only hope of safety lay
in making that one discharge so deadly that our opponents should be too
much shaken to continue their attack.

Would the man never fire? They could not be more than ten paces from us.
I could see the buckles of the men's plates and the powder charges in
their bandoliers. One more stride yet, and at last our leader's pistol
flashed and we poured in a close volley, supported by a shower of heavy
stones from the sturdy peasants behind. I could hear them splintering
against casque and cuirass like hail upon a casement. The cloud of smoke
veiling for an instant the line of galloping steeds and gallant riders
drifted slowly aside to show a very different scene. A dozen men and
horses were rolling in one wild blood-spurting heap, the unwounded
falling over those whom our balls and stones had brought down.
Struggling, snorting chargers, iron-shod feet, staggering figures rising
and falling, wild, hatless, bewildered men half stunned by a fall, and
not knowing which way to turn--that was the foreground of the picture,
while behind them the remainder of the troop were riding furiously back,
wounded and hale, all driven by the one desire of getting to a place of
safety where they might rally their shattered formation. A great shout
of praise and thanksgiving rose from the delighted peasants, and
surging over the barricade they struck down or secured the few uninjured
troopers who had boon unable or unwilling to join their companions in
their flight. The carbines, swords, and bandoliers were eagerly pounced
upon by the victors, some of whom had served in the militia, and knew
well how to handle the weapons which they had won.

The victory, however, was by no means completed. The flanking squadron
had ridden boldly at the hedge, and a dozen or more had forced their way
through, in spite of the showers of stones and the desperate thrusts of
the pikemen and scythemen. Once amongst the peasants, the long swords
and the armour of the dragoons gave them a great advantage, and though
the sickles brought several of the horses to the ground the soldiers
continued to lay about them freely, and to beat back the fierce but
ill-armed resistance of their opponents. A dragoon sergeant, a man of
great resolution and of prodigious strength, appeared to be the leader
of the party, and encouraged his followers both by word and example.
A stab from a half-pike brought his horse to the ground, but he
sprang from the saddle as it fell, and avenged its death by a sweeping
back-handed cut from his broadsword. Waving his hat in his left hand he
continued to rally his men, and to strike down every Puritan who came
against him, until a blow from a hatchet brought him on his knees and
a flail stroke broke his sword close by the hilt. At the fall of their
leader his comrades turned and fled through the hedge, but the gallant
fellow, wounded and bleeding, still showed fight, and would assuredly
have been knocked upon the head for his pains had I not picked him up
and thrown him into the waggon, where he had the good sense to lie quiet
until the skirmish was at an end. Of the dozen who broke through, not
more than four escaped, and several others lay dead or wounded upon the
other side of the hedge, impaled by scythe-blades or knocked off
their horses by stones. Altogether nine of the dragoons were slain
and fourteen wounded, while we retained seven unscathed prisoners, ten
horses fit for service, and a score or so of carbines, with good store
of match, powder, and ball. The remainder of the troop fired a
single, straggling, irregular volley, and then galloped away down the
cross-road, disappearing amongst the trees from which they had emerged.

All this, however, had not been accomplished without severe loss upon
our side. Three men had been killed and six wounded, one of them
very seriously, by the musketry fire. Five had been cut down when
the flanking party broke their way in, and only one of these could be
expected to recover. In addition to this, one man had lost his life
through the bursting of an ancient petronel, and another had his arm
broken by the kick of a horse. Our total losses, therefore, were eight
killed and the same wounded, which could not but be regarded as a very
moderate number when we consider the fierceness of the skirmish, and the
superiority of our enemy both in discipline and in equipment.

So elated were the peasants by their victory, that those who had secured
horses were clamorous to be allowed to follow the dragoons, the more so
as Sir Gervas Jerome and Reuben were both eager to lead them. Decimus
Saxon refused, however, to listen to any such scheme, nor did he show
more favour to the Reverend Joshua Pettigrue's proposal, that he should
in his capacity as pastor mount immediately upon the waggon, and improve
the occasion by a few words of healing and unction.

'It is true, good Master Pettigrue, that we owe much praise and much
outpouring, and much sweet and holy contending, for this blessing which
hath come upon Israel,' said he, 'but the time hath not yet arrived.
There is an hour for prayer and an hour for labour. Hark ye, friend'--to
one of the prisoners--'to what regiment do you belong?'

'It is not for me to reply to your questions,' the man answered sulkily.

Nay, then, we'll try if a string round your scalp and a few twists of a
drumstick will make you find your tongue,' said Saxon, pushing his face
up to that of the prisoner, and staring into his eyes with so savage an
expression that the man shrank away affrighted.

'It is a troop of the second dragoon regiment,' he said.

'Where is the regiment itself?'

'We left it on the Ilchester and Langport road.'

'You hear,' said our leader. 'We have not a moment to spare, or we may
have the whole crew about our ears. Put our dead and wounded in the
carts, and we can harness two of these chargers to them. We shall not be
in safety until we are in Taunton town.'

Even Master Joshua saw that the matter was too pressing to permit of
any spiritual exercises. The wounded men were lifted into the waggon and
laid upon the bedding, while our dead were placed in the cart which had
defended our rear. The peasants who owned these, far from making any
objection to this disposal of their property, assisted us in every way,
tightening girths and buckling traces. Within an hour of the ending of
the skirmish we found ourselves pursuing our way once more, and looking
back through the twilight at the scattered black dots upon the white
road, where the bodies of the dragoons marked the scene of our victory.




Chapter XVI. Of our Coming to Taunton

The purple shadows of evening had fallen over the countryside, and the
sun had sunk behind the distant Quantock and Brendon Hills, as our rude
column of rustic infantry plodded through Curry Rivell, Wrantage, and
Henlade. At every wayside cottage and red-tiled farmhouse the people
swarmed out us we passed, with jugs full of milk or beer, shaking hands
with our yokels, and pressing food and drink upon them. In the little
villages old and young came buzzing to greet us, and cheered long and
loud for King Monmouth and the Protestant cause. The stay-at-homes were
mostly elderly folks and children, but here and there a young labourer,
whom hesitation or duties had kept back, was so carried away by our
martial appearance, and by the visible trophies of our victory, that he
snatched up a weapon and joined our ranks.

The skirmish had reduced our numbers, but it had done much to turn our
rabble of peasants into a real military force. The leadership of Saxon,
and his stern, short words of praise or of censure had done even more.
The men kept some sort of formation, and stepped together briskly in a
compact body. The old soldier and I rode at the head of the column, with
Master Pettigrue still walking between us. Then came the cartful of
our dead, whom we were carrying with us to insure their decent burial.
Behind this walked two score of scythe and sickle men, with their rude
weapons over their shoulders, preceding the waggon in which the wounded
were carried. This was followed by the main body of the peasants,
and the rear was brought up by ten or twelve men under the command of
Lockarby and Sir Gervas, mounted upon captured chargers, and wearing the
breastplates, swords, and carbines of the dragoons.

I observed that Saxon rode with his chin upon his shoulder, casting
continual uneasy glances behind him, and halting at every piece of
rising ground to make sure that there were no pursuers at our heels. It
was not until, after many weary miles of marching, the lights of Taunton
could be seen twinkling far off in the valley beneath us that he at last
heaved a deep sigh of relief, and expressed his belief that all danger
was over.

'I am not prone to be fearful upon small occasion,' he remarked, 'but
hampered as we are with wounded men and prisoners, it might have puzzled
Petrinus himself to know what we should have done had the cavalry
overtaken us. I can now, Master Pettigrue, smoke my pipe in peace,
without pricking up my ears at every chance rumble of a wheel or shout
of a village roisterer.'

'Even had they pursued us,' said the minister stoutly, 'as long as the
hand of the Lord shall shield us, why should we fear them?'

'Aye, aye!' Saxon answered impatiently, 'but the devil prevaileth at
times. Were not the chosen people themselves overthrown and led into
captivity? How say you, Clarke?'

'One such skirmish is enough for a day,' I remarked. 'Faith! if instead
of charging us they had continued that carbine fire, we must either have
come forth or been shot where we lay.'

'For that reason I forbade our friends with the muskets to answer it,'
said Saxon. 'Our silence led them to think that we had but a pistol or
two among us, and so brought them to charge us. Thus our volley became
the more terrifying since it was unexpected. I'll wager there was not a
man amongst them who did not feel that he had been led into a trap. Mark
you how the rogues wheeled and fled with one accord, as though it had
been part of their daily drill!'

'The peasants stood to it like men,' I remarked.

'There is nothing like a tincture of Calvinism for stiffening a line of
battle,' said Saxon. 'Look at the Swede when he is at home. What more
honest, simple-hearted fellow could you find, with no single soldierly
virtue, save that he could put away more spruce beer than you would care
to pay for. Yet if you do but cram him with a few strong, homely texts,
place a pike in his hand, and give him a Gustavus to lead him, there is
no infantry in the world that can stand against him. On the other hand,
I have seen young Turks, untrained to arms, strike in on behalf of the
Koran as lustily as these brave fellows behind us did for the Bible
which Master Pettigrue held up in front of them.'

'I trust, sir,' said the minister gravely, 'that you do not, by
these remarks, intend to institute any comparison between our sacred
scriptures and the writings of the impostor Mahomet, or to infer that
there is any similarity between the devil-inspired fury of the infidel
Saracens and the Christian fortitude of the struggling faithful!'

'By no means,' Saxon answered, grinning at me over the minister's head.
'I was but showing how closely the Evil One can imitate the workings of
the Spirit.'

'Too true, Master Saxon, too true!' the clergyman answered sadly. 'Amid
the conflict and discord it is hard to pick out the true path. But
I marvel much that amidst the snares and temptations that beset a
soldier's life you have kept yourself unsullied, with your heart still
set upon the true faith.'

'It was through no strength of mine own,' said Saxon piously.

'In very truth, such men as you are much needed in Monmouth's army,'
Master Joshua exclaimed. 'They have there several, as I understand, from
Holland, Brandenburg, and Scotland, who have been trained in arms, but
who care so little for the cause which we uphold that they curse and
swear in a manner that affrights the peasants, and threatens to call
down a judgment upon the army. Others there are who cling close to the
true faith, and have been born again among the righteous; but alas! they
have had no experience of camps and fields. Our blessed Master can work
by means of weak instruments, yet the fact remains that a man may be
a chosen light in a pulpit, and yet be of little avail in an onslaught
such as we have seen this day. I can myself arrange my discourse to the
satisfaction of my flock, so that they grieve when the sand is run out;
(Note E. Appendix) but I am aware that this power would stand me in
little stead when it came to the raising of barricades and the use of
carnal weapons. In this way it comes about, in the army of the faithful,
that those who are fit to lead are hateful to the people, while those to
whose words the people will hearken know little of war. Now we have this
day seen that you are ready of head and of hand, of much experience of
battle, and yet of demure and sober life, full of yearnings after the
word, and strivings against Apollyon. I therefore repeat that you shall
be as a very Joshua amongst them, or as a Samson, destined to tear
down the twin pillars of Prelacy and Popery, so as to bury this corrupt
government in its fall.'

Decimus Saxon's only reply to this eulogy was one of those groans which
were supposed, among the zealots, to be the symbol of intense inner
conflict and emotion. So austere and holy was his expression, so solemn
his demeanour, and so frequent the upturnings of his eyes, clasping
of his hands, and other signs which marked the extreme sectary, that
I could not but marvel at the depths and completeness of the hypocrisy
which had cast so complete a cloak over his rapacious self. For very
mischief's sake I could not refrain from reminding him that there was
one at least who valued his professions at their real value.

'Have you told the worthy minister,' said I, 'of your captivity amongst
the Mussulmans, and of the noble way in which you did uphold the
Christian faith at Stamboul?'

'Nay,' cried our companion, 'I would fain hear the tale. I marvel much
that one so faithful and unbending as thyself was ever let loose by the
unclean and bloodthirsty followers of Mahomet.'

'It does not become me to tell the tale,' Saxon answered with great
presence of mind, casting at the same time a most venomous sidelong
glance at me. 'It is for my comrades in misfortune and not for me to
describe what I endured for the faith. I have little doubt, Master
Pettigrue, that you would have done as much had you been there. The town
of Taunton lies very quiet beneath us, and there are few lights for so
early an hour, seeing that it has not yet gone ten. It is clear that
Monmouth's forces have not reached it yet, else had there been some show
of camp-fires in the valley; for though it is warm enough to lie out in
the open, the men must have fires to cook their victual.'

'The army could scarce have come so far,' said the pastor. 'They have,
I hear, been much delayed by the want of arms and by the need of
discipline. Bethink ye, it was on the eleventh day of the month that
Monmouth landed at Lyme, and it is now but the night of the fourteenth.
There was much to be done in the time.'

'Four whole days!' growled the old soldier. 'Yet I expected no better,
seeing that they have, so far as I can hear, no tried soldiers amongst
them. By my sword, Tilly or Wallenstein would not have taken four days
to come from Lyme to Taunton, though all James Stuart's cavalry barred
the way. Great enterprises are not pushed through in this halting
fashion. The blow should be sharp and sudden. But tell me, worthy sir,
all that you know about the matter, for we have heard little upon the
road save rumour and surmise. Was there not some fashion of onfall at
Bridport?'

'There was indeed some shedding of blood at that place. The first two
days were consumed, as I understand, in the enrolling of the faithful
and the search for arms wherewith to equip them. You may well shake your
head, for the hours were precious. At last five hundred men were broken
into some sort of order, and marched along the coast under command of
Lord Grey of Wark and Wade the lawyer. At Bridport they were opposed
by the red Dorset militia and part of Portman's yellow coats. If all
be true that is said, neither side had much to boast of. Grey and his
cavalry never tightened bridle until they were back in Lyme once more,
though it is said their flight had more to do with the hard mouths
of their horses than with the soft hearts of the riders. Wade and his
footmen did bravely, and had the best of it against the King's troops.
There was much outcry against Grey in the camp, but Monmouth can
scarce afford to be severe upon the only nobleman who hath joined his
standard.'

'Pshaw!' cried Saxon peevishly. 'There was no great stock of noblemen in
Cromwell's army, I trow, and yet they held their own against the King,
who had as many lords by him as there are haws in a thicket. If ye have
the people on your side, why should ye crave for these bewigged fine
gentlemen, whose white hands and delicate rapiers are of as much service
as so many ladies' bodkins?'

'Faith!' said I, 'if all the fops are as careless for their lives as our
friend Sir Gervas, I could wish no better comrades in the field.'

'In good sooth, yes!' cried Master Pettigrue heartily. 'What though he
be clothed in a Joseph's coat of many colours, and hath strange turns
of speech! No man could have fought more stoutly or shown a bolder front
against the enemies of Israel. Surely the youth hath good in his heart,
and will become a seat of grace and a vessel of the Spirit, though
at present he be entangled in the net of worldly follies and carnal
vanities.'

'It is to be hoped so,' quoth Saxon devoutly. 'And what else can you
tell us of the revolt, worthy sir?'

'Very little, save that the peasants have flocked in in such numbers
that many have had to be turned away for want of arms. Every tithing-man
in Somersetshire is searching for axes and scythes. There is not
a blacksmith but is at his forge from morn to night at work upon
pike-heads. There are six thousand men of a sort in the camp, but
not one in five carries a musket. They have advanced, I hear, upon
Axminster, where they must meet the Duke of Albemarle, who hath set out
from Exeter with four thousand of the train bands.'

'Then we shall be too late, after all,' I exclaimed.

'You will have enough of battles before Monmouth exchanges his
riding-hat for a crown, and his laced roquelaure for the royal purple,'
quoth Saxon. 'Should our worthy friend here be correctly informed and
such an engagement take place, it will but be the prologue to the play.
When Feversham and Churchill come up with the King's own troops, it is
then that Monmouth takes the last spring, that lands him either on the
throne or the scaffold.'

Whilst this conversation had been proceeding we had been walking our
horses down the winding track which leads along the eastern slope of
Taunton Deane. For some time past we had been able to see in the valley
beneath us the lights of Taunton town and the long silver strip of
the river Tone. The moon was shining brightly in a cloudless heaven,
throwing a still and peaceful radiance over the fairest and richest of
English valleys. Lordly manorial houses, pinnacled towers, clusters of
nestling thatch-roofed cottages, broad silent stretches of cornland,
dark groves with the glint of lamp-lit windows shining from their
recesses--it all lay around us like the shadowy, voiceless landscapes
which stretch before us in our dreams. So calm and so beautiful was the
scene that we reined up our horses at the bend of the pathway, the tired
and footsore peasants came to a halt, while even the wounded raised
themselves in the waggon in order to feast their eyes upon this land of
promise. Suddenly, in the stillness, a strong fervent voice was heard
calling upon the source of all life to guard and preserve that which
He had created. It was Joshua Pettigrue, who had flung himself upon his
knees, and who, while asking for future guidance, was returning thanks
for the safe deliverance which his flock had experienced from the many
perils which had beset them upon their journey. I would, my children,
that I had one of those magic crystals of which we have read, that I
might show you that scene. The dark figures of the horsemen, the grave,
earnest bearing of the rustics as they knelt in prayer or leaned upon
their rude weapons, the half-cowed, half-sneering expression of the
captive dragoons, the line of white pain-drawn faces that peeped
over the side of the waggon, and the chorus of groans, cries, and
ejaculations which broke in upon the steady earnest voice of the pastor.
Above us the brilliant heavens, beneath us the beautiful sloping valley,
stretching away in the white moonlight as far as the eye could reach.
Could I but paint such a scene with the brush of a Verrio or Laguerre, I
should have no need to describe it in these halting and feeble words.

Master Pettigrue had concluded his thanksgiving, and was in the act of
rising to his feet, when the musical peal of a bell rose up from the
sleeping town before us. For a minute or more it rose and fell in its
sweet clear cadence. Then a second with a deeper, harsher note joined
in, and then a third, until he air was filled with the merry jangling.
At the same time a buzz of shouting or huzzaing could be heard, which
increased and spread until it swelled into a mighty uproar. Lights
flashed in the windows, drums beat, and the whole place was astir. These
sudden signs of rejoicing coming at the heels of the minister's prayer
were seized upon as a happy omen by the superstitious peasants, who set
up a glad cry, and pushing onwards were soon within the outskirts of the
town.

The footpaths and causeway were black with throngs of the townsfolk,
men, women, and children, many of whom were bearing torches and
lanthorns, all flocking in the same direction. Following them we found
ourselves in the market-place, where crowds of apprentice lads were
piling up faggots for a bonfire, while others were broaching two or
three great puncheons of ale. The cause of this sudden outbreak of
rejoicing was, we learned, that news had just come in that Albemarle's
Devonshire militia had partly deserted and partly been defeated at
Axminster that very morning. On hearing of our own successful skirmish
the joy of the people became more tumultuous than ever. They rushed in
amongst us, pouring blessings on our heads, in their strange burring
west-country speech, and embracing our horses as well as ourselves.
Preparations were soon made for our weary companions. A long empty wool
warehouse, thickly littered with straw, was put at their disposal, with
a tub of ale and a plentiful supply of cold meats and wheaten bread.
For our own part we made our way down East Street through the clamorous
hand-shaking crowd to the White Hart Inn, where after a hasty meal we
were right glad to seek our couches. Late into the night, however, our
slumbers were disturbed by the rejoicings of the mob, who, having burned
the effigies of Lord Sunderland and of Gregory Alford, Mayor of Lyme,
continued to sing west-country songs and Puritan hymns into the small
hours of the morning.



Chapter XVII. Of the Gathering in the Market-square

The fair town in which we now found ourselves was, although Monmouth
had not yet reached it, the real centre of the rebellion. It was a
prosperous place, with a great woollen and kersey trade, which gave
occupation to as many as seven thousand inhabitants. It stood high,
therefore, amongst English boroughs, being inferior only to Bristol,
Norwich, Bath, Exeter, York, Worcester, and Nottingham amongst the
country towns. Taunton had long been famous not only for its own
resources and for the spirit of its inhabitants, but also for the
beautiful and highly cultivated country which spread around it, and gave
rise to a gallant breed of yeomen. From time immemorial the town had
been a rallying-point for the party of liberty, and for many years it
had leaned to the side of Republicanism in politics and of Puritanism
in religion. No place in the kingdom had fought more stoutly for
the Parliament, and though it had been twice besieged by Goring, the
burghers, headed by the brave Robert Blake, had fought so desperately,
that the Royalists had been compelled each time to retire discomfited.
On the second occasion the garrison had been reduced to dog's-flesh and
horse-flesh, but no word of surrender had come either from them or
their heroic commander, who was the same Blake under whom the old seaman
Solomon Sprent had fought against the Dutch. After the Restoration the
Privy Council had shown their recollection of the part played by the
Somersetshire town, by issuing a special order that the battlements
which fenced round the maiden stronghold should be destroyed. Thus,
at the time of which I speak, nothing but a line of ruins and a few
unsightly mounds represented the massive line of wall which had been
so bravely defended by the last generation of townsmen. There were not
wanting, however, many other relics of those stormy times. The houses on
the outskirts were still scarred and splintered from the effects of
the bombs and grenades of the Cavaliers. Indeed, the whole town bore a
grimly martial appearance, as though she were a veteran among boroughs
who had served in the past, and was not averse to seeing the flash of
guns and hearing the screech of shot once more.

Charles's Council might destroy the battlements which his soldiers had
been unable to take, but no royal edict could do away with the resolute
spirit and strong opinions of the burghers. Many of them, born and bred
amidst the clash of civil strife, had been fired from their infancy by
the tales of the old war, and by reminiscences of the great assault when
Lunsford's babe-eaters were hurled down the main breach by the strong
arms of their fathers. In this way there was bred in Taunton a fiercer
and more soldierly spirit than is usual in an English country town, and
this flame was fanned by the unwearied ministerings of a chosen band
of Nonconformist clergymen, amongst whom Joseph Alleine was the most
conspicuous. No better focus for a revolt could have been chosen, for
no city valued so highly those liberties and that creed which was in
jeopardy.

A large body of the burghers had already set out to join the rebel army,
but a good number had remained behind to guard the city, and these were
reinforced by gangs of peasants, like the one to which we had attached
ourselves, who had trooped in from the surrounding country, and now
divided their time between listening to their favourite preachers and
learning to step in line and to handle their weapons. In yard, street,
and market-square there was marching and drilling, night, morning, and
noon. As we rode out after breakfast the whole town was ringing with the
shouting of orders and the clatter of arms. Our own friends of yesterday
marched into the market-place at the moment we entered it, and no sooner
did they catch sight of us than they plucked off their hats and cheered
lustily, nor would they desist until we cantered over to them and took
our places at their head.

'They have vowed that none other should lead them,' said the minister,
standing by Saxon's stirrup.

'I could not wish to lead stouter fellows,' said he. 'Let them deploy
into double line in front of the town-hall. So, so, smartly there, rear
rank!' he shouted, facing his horse towards them. 'Now swing round into
position. Keep your ground, left flank, and let the others pivot upon
you. So--as hard and as straight as an Andrea Ferrara. I prythee,
friend, do not carry your pike as though it were a hoe, though I trust
you will do some weeding in the Lord's vineyard with it. And you, sir,
your musquetoon should be sloped upon your shoulder, and not borne under
your arm like a dandy's cane. Did ever an unhappy soldier find himself
called upon to make order among so motley a crew! Even my good friend
the Fleming cannot so avail here, nor does Petrinus, in his "De re
militari," lay down any injunctions as to the method of drilling a man
who is armed with a sickle or a scythe.'

'Shoulder scythe, port scythe, present scythe--mow!' whispered Reuben to
Sir Gervas, and the pair began to laugh, heedless of the angry frowns of
Saxon.

'Let us divide them,' he said, 'into three companies of eighty men. Or
stay--how many musketeers have we in all? Five-and-fifty. Let them stand
forward, and form the first line or company. Sir Gervas Jerome, you have
officered the militia of your county, and have doubtless some knowledge
of the manual exercise. If I am commandant of this force I hand over the
captaincy of this company to you. It shall be the first line in battle,
a position which I know you will not be averse to.'

'Gad, they'll have to powder their heads,' said Sir Gervas, with
decision.

'You shall have the entire ordering of them,' Saxon answered. 'Let the
first company take six paces to the front--so! Now let the pikemen stand
out. Eighty-seven, a serviceable company! Lockarby, do you take these
men in hand, and never forget that the German wars have proved that the
best of horse has no more chance against steady pikemen than the waves
against a crag. Take the captaincy of the second company, and ride at
their head.'

'Faith! If they don't fight better than their captain rides,' whispered
Reuben, 'it will be an evil business. I trust they will be firmer in the
field than I am in the saddle.'

'The third company of scythesmen I commit to your charge, Captain Micah
Clarke,' continued Saxon. 'Good Master Joshua Pettigrue will be our
field-chaplain. Shall not his voice and his presence be to us as
manna in the wilderness, and as springs of water in dry places? The
under-officers I see that you have yourselves chosen, and your captains
shall have power to add to the number from those who smite boldly and
spare not. Now one thing I have to say to you, and I speak it that all
may hear, and that none may hereafter complain that the rules he serves
under were not made clear to him. For I tell you now that when the
evening bugle calls, and the helm and pike are laid aside, I am as you
and you as I, fellow-workers in the same field, and drinkers from the
same wells of life. Lo, I will pray with you, or preach with you, or
hearken with you, or expound to you, or do aught that may become a
brother pilgrim upon the weary road. But hark you, friends! when we are
in arms and the good work is to be done, on the march, in the field, or
on parade, then let your bearing be strict, soldierly, and scrupulous,
quick to hear and alert to obey, for I shall have no sluggards or
laggards, and if there be any such my hand shall be heavy upon them,
yea, even to the cutting of them off. I say there shall be no mercy for
such,' here he paused and surveyed his force with a set face and his
eyelids drawn low over his glinting, shifting eyes. 'If, then,' he
continued, 'there is any man among you who fears to serve under a hard
discipline, let him stand forth now, and let him betake him to some
easier leader, for I say to you that whilst I command this corps,
Saxon's regiment of Wiltshire foot shall be worthy to testify in this
great and soul-raising cause.'

The Colonel stopped and sat silent upon his mare. The long lines of
rustic faces looked up, some stolidly, some admiringly, some with an
expression of fear at his stern, gaunt face and baneful eyes. None
moved, however, so he continued.

'Worthy Master Timewell, the Mayor of this fair town of Taunton, who
has been a tower of strength to the faithful during these long and
spirit-trying times, is about to inspect us when the others shall have
assembled. Captains, to your companies then! Close up there on the
musqueteers, with three paces between each line. Scythesmen, take ground
to your left. Let the under-officers stand on the flanks and rear. So!
'tis smartly done for a first venture, though a good adjutant with a
prugel after the Imperial fashion might find work to do.'

Whilst we were thus rapidly and effectively organising ourselves into a
regiment, other bodies of peasantry more or less disciplined had marched
into the market-square, and had taken up their position there. Those
on our right had come from Frome and Radstock, in the north of
Somersetshire, and were a mere rabble armed with flails, hammers, and
other such weapons, with no common sign of order or cohesion save the
green boughs which waved in their hat-bands. The body upon our left, who
bore a banner amongst them announcing that they were men of Dorset, were
fewer in number but better equipped, having a front rank, like our own,
entirely armed with muskets.

The good townsmen of Taunton, with their wives and their daughters,
had meanwhile been assembling on the balconies and at the windows which
overlooked the square, whence they might have a view of the pageant. The
grave, square-bearded, broadclothed burghers, and their portly dames in
velvet and three-piled taffeta, looked down from every post of vantage,
while here and there a pretty, timid face peeping out from a Puritan
coif made good the old claim, that Taunton excelled in beautiful women
as well as in gallant men. The side-walks were crowded with the commoner
folk--old white-bearded wool-workers, stern-faced matrons, country
lasses with their shawls over their heads, and swarms of children, who
cried out with their treble voices for King Monmouth and the Protestant
succession.

'By my faith!' said Sir Gervas, reining back his steed until he was
abreast of me, 'our square-toed friends need not be in such post-haste
to get to heaven when they have so many angels among them on earth.
Gad's wounds, are they not beautiful? Never a patch or a diamond amongst
them, and yet what would not our faded belles of the Mall or the Piazza
give for their innocence and freshness?'

'Nay, for Heaven's sake do not smile and bow at them,' said I. 'These
courtesies may pass in London, but they may be misunderstood among
simple Somerset maidens and their hot-headed, hard-handed kinsfolk.'

I had hardly spoken before the folding-doors of the town-hall were
thrown open, and a procession of the city fathers emerged into the
market-place. Two trumpeters in parti-coloured jerkins preceded them,
who blew a flourish upon their instruments as they advanced. Behind came
the aldermen and councilmen, grave and reverend elders, clad in their
sweeping gowns of black silk, trimmed and tippeted with costly furs.
In rear of these walked a pursy little red-faced man, the town clerk,
bearing a staff of office in his hand, while the line of dignitaries
was closed by the tall and stately figure of Stephen Timewell, Mayor of
Taunton.

There was much in this magistrate's appearance to attract attention, for
all the characteristics of the Puritan party to which he belonged were
embodied and exaggerated in his person. Of great height he was and very
thin, with a long-drawn, heavy eyelidded expression, which spoke of
fasts and vigils. The bent shoulders and the head sunk upon the breast
proclaimed the advances of age, but his bright steel-grey eyes and the
animation of his eager face showed how the enthusiasm of religion
could rise superior to bodily weakness. A peaked, straggling grey beard
descended half-way to his waist, and his long snow-white hairs fluttered
out from under a velvet skull-cap. The latter was drawn tightly down
upon his head, so as to make his ears protrude in an unnatural manner
on either side, a custom which had earned for his party the title of
'prickeared,' so often applied to them by their opponents. His attire
was of studious plainness and sombre in colour, consisting of his black
mantle, dark velvet breeches, and silk hosen, with velvet bows upon his
shoes instead of the silver buckles then in vogue. A broad chain of gold
around his neck formed the badge of his office. In front of him strutted
the fat red-vested town clerk, one hand upon his hip, the other extended
and bearing his wand of office, looking pompously to right and left,
and occasionally bowing as though the plaudits were entirely on his own
behalf. This little man had tied a huge broadsword to his girdle, which
clanked along the cobble stones when he walked and occasionally inserted
itself between his legs, when he would gravely cock his foot over it
again and walk on without any abatement of his dignity. At last, finding
these interruptions become rather too frequent, he depressed the hilt of
his great sword in order to elevate the point, and so strutted onwards
like a bantam cock with a tingle straight feather in its tail.

Having passed round the front and rear of the various bodies, and
inspected them with a minuteness and attention which showed that his
years had not dulled his soldier's faculties, the Mayor faced round with
the evident intention of addressing us. His clerk instantly darted in
front of him, and waving his arms began to shout 'Silence, good people!
Silence for his most worshipful the Mayor of Taunton! Silence for
the worthy Master Stephen Timewell!' until in the midst of his
gesticulations and cries he got entangled once more with his overgrown
weapon, and went sprawling on his hands and knees in the kennel.

'Silence yourself, Master Tetheridge,' said the chief magistrate
severely. 'If your sword and your tongue were both clipped, it would be
as well for yourself and us. Shall I not speak a few words in season
to these good people but you must interrupt with your discordant
bellowings?'

The busybody gathered himself together and slunk behind the group of
councilmen, while the Mayor slowly ascended the steps of the market
cross. From this position he addressed us, speaking in a high piping
voice which gathered strength as he proceeded, until it was audible at
the remotest corners of the square.

'Friends in the faith,' he said, 'I thank the Lord that I have been
spared in my old age to look down upon this goodly assembly. For we of
Taunton have ever kept the flame of the Covenant burning amongst us,
obscured it may be at times by time-servers and Laodiceans, but none the
less burning in the hearts of our people. All round us, however,
there was a worse than Egyptian darkness, where Popery and Prelacy,
Arminianism, Erastianism, and Simony might rage and riot unchecked and
unconfined. But what do I see now? Do I see the faithful cowering
in their hiding-places and straining their ears for the sound of the
horsehoof's of their oppressors? Do I see a time-serving generation,
with lies on their lips and truth buried in their hearts? No! I see
before me godly men, not from this fair city only, but from the broad
country round, and from Dorset, and from Wiltshire, and some even as I
hear from Hampshire, all ready and eager to do mighty work in the cause
of the Lord. And when I see these faithful men, and when I think that
every broad piece in the strong boxes of my townsmen is ready to support
them, and when I know that the persecuted remnant throughout the country
is wrestling hard in prayer for us, then a voice speaks within me and
tells me that we shall tear down the idols of Dagon, and build up in
this England of ours such a temple of the true faith that not Popery,
nor Prelacy, nor idolatry, nor any other device of the Evil One shall
ever prevail against it.'

A deep irrepressible hum of approval burst from the close ranks of
the insurgent infantry, with a clang of arms as musquetoon or pike was
grounded upon the stone pavement.

Saxon half-turned his fierce face, raising an impatient hand, and the
hoarse murmur died away among our men, though our less-disciplined
companions to right and left continued to wave their green boughs and to
clatter their arms. The Taunton men opposite stood grim and silent, but
their set faces and bent brows showed that their townsman's oratory had
stirred the deep fanatic spirit which distinguished them.

'In my hands,' continued the Mayor, drawing a roll of paper from his
bosom, 'is the proclamation which our royal leader hath sent in advance
of him. In his great goodness and self-abnegation he had, in his early
declaration given forth at Lyme, declared that he should leave the
choice of a monarch to the Commons of England, but having found that
his enemies did most scandalously and basely make use of this his
self-denial, and did assert that he had so little confidence in his own
cause that he dared not take publicly the title which is due to him, he
hath determined that this should have an end. Know, therefore, that it
is hereby proclaimed that James, Duke of Monmouth, is now and henceforth
rightful King of England; that James Stuart, the Papist and fratricide,
is a wicked usurper, upon whose head, dead or alive, a price of five
thousand guineas is affixed; and that the assembly now sitting at
Westminster, and calling itself the Commons of England, is an illegal
assembly, and its acts are null and void in the sight of the law. God
bless King Monmouth and the Protestant religion!'

The trumpeters struck up a flourish and the people huzzaed, but the
Mayor raised his thin white hands as a signal for silence. 'A messenger
hath reached me this morning from the King,' he continued. 'He sends a
greeting to all his faithful Protestant subjects, and having halted at
Axminster to rest after his victory, he will advance presently and be
with ye in two days at the latest.

'Ye will grieve to hear that good Alderman Rider was struck down in the
thick of the fray. He hath died like a man and a Christian, leaving all
his worldly goods, together with his cloth-works and household property,
to the carrying on of the war. Of the other slain there are not more
than ten of Taunton birth. Two gallant young brothers have been cut off,
Oliver and Ephraim Hollis, whose poor mother--'

'Grieve not for me, good Master Timewell,' cried a female voice from the
crowd. 'I have three others as stout, who shall all be offered in the
same quarrel.'

'You are a worthy woman, Mistress Hollis,' the Mayor answered, 'and your
children shall not be lost to you. The next name upon my list is Jesse
Trefail, then come Joseph Millar, and Aminadab Holt--'

An elderly musqueteer in the first line of the Taunton foot pulled his
hat down over his brows and cried out in a loud steady voice, 'The Lord
hath given and the Lord hath taken away. Blessed be the name of the
Lord.'

'It is your only son, Master Holt,' said the Mayor, 'but the Lord also
sacrificed His only Son that you and I might drink the waters of eternal
life. The others are Path of Light Regan, James Fletcher, Salvation
Smith, and Robert Johnstone.'

The old Puritan gravely rolled up his papers, and having stood for a
few moments with his hands folded across his breast in silent prayer, he
descended from the market cross, and moved off, followed by the aldermen
and councilmen. The crowd began likewise to disperse in sedate and sober
fashion, with grave earnest faces and downcast eyes. A large number of
the countryfolk, however, more curious or less devout than the citizens,
gathered round our regiment to see the men who had beaten off the
dragoons.

'See the mon wi' a face like a gerfalcon,' cried one, pointing to Saxon;
''tis he that slew the Philistine officer yestreen, an' brought the
faithful off victorious.'

'Mark ye yon other one,' cried an old dame, 'him wi' the white face an'
the clothes like a prince. He's one o' the Quality, what's come a' the
way froe Lunnon to testify to the Protestant creed. He's a main pious
gentleman, he is, an' if he had bided in the wicked city they'd ha' had
his head off, like they did the good Lord Roossell, or put him in chains
wi' the worthy Maister Baxter.'

'Marry come up, gossip,' cried a third. 'The girt mun on the grey horse
is the soldier for me. He has the smooth cheeks o' a wench, an' limbs
like Goliath o' Gath. I'll war'nt he could pick up my old gaffer Jones
an' awa' wi' him at his saddle-bow, as easy as Towser does a rotten! But
here's good Maister Tetheridge, the clerk, and on great business too,
for he's a mun that spares ne time ne trooble in the great cause.'

'Room, good people, room! 'cried the little clerk, bustling up with an
air of authority. 'Hinder not the high officials of the Corporation in
the discharge of their functions. Neither should ye hamper the flanks
of fighting men, seeing that you thereby prevent that deploying and
extending of the line which is now advocated by many high commanders.
I prythee, who commands this cohort, or legion rather, seeing that you
have auxiliary horse attached to it?'

''Tis a regiment, sirrah,' said Saxon sternly. 'Colonel Saxon's regiment
of Wiltshire foot, which I have the honour to command.'

'I beg your Colonelship's pardon, 'cried the clerk nervously, edging
away from the swarthy-faced soldier. 'I have heard speak of your
Colonelship, and of your doings in the German wars. I have myself
trailed a pike in my youth and have broken a head or two, aye, and a
heart or two also, when I wore buff and bandolier.'

'Discharge your message,' said our Colonel shortly.

''Tis from his most worshipful the Mayor, and is addressed to yourself
and to your captains, who are doubtless these tall cavaliers whom I see
on either side of me. Pretty fellows, by my faith! but you and I know
well, Colonel, that a little trick of fence will set the smallest of us
on a level with the brawniest. Now I warrant that you and I, being
old soldiers, could, back to back, make it good against these three
gallants.'

'Speak, fellow,' snarled Saxon, and reaching out a long sinewy arm he
seized the loquacious clerk by the lappet of his gown, and shook him
until his long sword clattered again.

'How, Colonel, how?' cried Master Tetheridge, while his vest seemed to
acquire a deeper tint from the sudden pallor of his face. 'Would you
lay an angry hand upon the Mayor's representative? I wear a bilbo by my
side, as you can see. I am also somewhat quick and choleric, and warn
you therefore not to do aught which I might perchance construe into a
personal slight. As to my message, it was that his most worshipful
the Mayor did desire to have word with you and your captains in the
town-hall.'

'We shall be there anon,' said Saxon, and turning to the regiment he set
himself to explain some of the simpler movements and exercises, teaching
his officers as well as his men, for though Sir Gervas knew something of
the manual, Lockarby and I brought little but our good-will to the task.
When the order to dismiss was at last given, our companies marched back
to their barracks in the wool warehouse, while we handed over our horses
to the grooms from the White Hart, and set off to pay our respects to
the Mayor.



Chapter XVIII. Of Master Stephen Timewell, Mayor of Taunton

Within the town-hall all was bustle and turmoil. At one side behind a
low table covered with green baize sat two scriveners with great rolls
of paper in front of them. A long line of citizens passed slowly before
them, each in turn putting down a roll or bag of coins which was duly
noted by the receivers. A square iron-bound chest stood by their side,
into which the money was thrown, and we noted as we passed that it was
half full of gold pieces. We could not but mark that many of the givers
were men whose threadbare doublets and pinched faces showed that the
wealth which they were dashing down so readily must have been hoarded up
for such a purpose, at the cost of scanty fare and hard living. Most of
them accompanied their gift by a few words of prayer, or by some pithy
text anent the treasure which rusteth not, or the lending to the Lord.
The town clerk stood by the table giving forth the vouchers for each
sum, and the constant clack of his tongue filled the hall, as he read
aloud the names and amounts, with his own remarks between.

'Abraham Willis,' he shouted as we entered; 'put him down twenty-six
pounds and ten shillings. You shall receive ten per centum upon this
earth, Master Willis, and I warrant that it shall not be forgotten
hereafter. John Standish, two pounds. William Simons, two guineas.
Stand-fast Healing, forty-five pounds. That is a rare blow which you
have struck into the ribs of Prelacy, good Master Healing. Solomon
Warren, five guineas. James White, five shillings--the widow's mite,
James! Thomas Bakewell, ten pounds. Nay, Master Bakewell, surely out of
three farms on the banks of Tone, and grazing land in the fattest part
of Athelney, you can spare more than this for the good cause. We shall
doubtless see you again. Alderman Smithson, ninety pounds. Aha! There is
a slap for the scarlet woman! A few more such and her throne shall be a
ducking-stool. We shall break her down, worthy Master Smithson, even as
Jehu, the son of Nimshi, broke down the house of Baal.' So he babbled on
with praise, precept, and rebuke, though the grave and solemn burghers
took little notice of his empty clamour.

At the other side of the hall were several long wooden drinking-troughs,
which were used for the storing of pikes and scythes. Special messengers
and tithing-men had been sent out to scour the country for arms, who,
as they returned, placed their prizes here under the care of the
armourer-general. Besides the common weapons of the peasants there was a
puncheon half full of pistols and petronels, together with a good number
of muskets, screw-guns, snaphances, birding-pieces, and carbines, with
a dozen bell-mouthed brass blunderbusses, and a few old-fashioned
wall-pieces, such as sakers and culverins taken from the manor-houses of
the county. From the walls and the lumber-rooms of these old dwellings
many other arms had been brought to light which were doubtless esteemed
as things of price by our forefathers, but which would seem strange to
your eyes in these days, when a musket may be fired once in every two
minutes, and will carry a ball to a distance of four hundred paces.
There were halberds, battle-axes, morning stars, brown bills, maces, and
ancient coats of chain mail, which might even now save a man from sword
stroke or pike thrust.

In the midst of the coming and the going stood Master Timewell, the
Mayor, ordering all things like a skilful and provident commander. I
could understand the trust and love which his townsmen had for him, as
I watched him labouring with all the wisdom of an old man and the
blithesomeness of a young one. He was hard at work as we approached in
trying the lock of a falconet; but perceiving us, he came forward and
saluted us with much kindliness.

'I have heard much of ye,' said he; 'how ye caused the faithful to
gather to a head, and so beat off the horsemen of the usurper. It will
not be the last time, I trust, that ye shall see their backs. I hear,
Colonel Saxon, that ye have seen much service abroad.'

'I have been the humble tool of Providence in much good work,'
said Saxon, with a bow. 'I have fought with the Swedes against the
Brandenburgers, and again with the Brandenburgers against the Swedes, my
time and conditions with the latter having been duly carried out. I
have afterwards in the Bavarian service fought against Swedes and
Brandenburgers combined, besides having undergone the great wars on the
Danube against the Turk, and two campaigns with the Messieurs in the
Palatinate, which latter might be better termed holiday-making than
fighting.'

'A soldierly record in very truth,' cried the Mayor, stroking his white
beard. 'I hear that you are also powerfully borne onwards in prayer and
song. You are, I perceive, one of the old breed of '44, Colonel--the men
who were in the saddle all day, and on their knees half the night. When
shall we see the like of them again? A few such broken wrecks as I are
left, with the fire of our youth all burned out and nought left but the
ashes of lethargy and lukewarmness.'

'Nay, nay,' said Saxon, 'your position and present business will scarce
jump with the modesty of your words. But here are young men who will
find the fire if their elders bring the brains. This is Captain Micah
Clarke, and Captain Lockarby, and Captain the Honourable Sir Gervas
Jerome, who have all come far to draw their swords for the downtrodden
faith.'

'Taunton welcomes ye, young sirs,' said the Mayor, looking a
trifle askance, as I thought, at the baronet, who had drawn out his
pocket-mirror, and was engaged in the brushing of his eyebrows. 'I trust
that during your stay in this town ye will all four take up your abode
with me. 'Tis a homely roof and simple fare, but a soldier's wants are
few. And now, Colonel, I would fain have your advice as to these three
drakes, whether if rehooped they may be deemed fit for service; and also
as to these demi-cannons, which were used in the old Parliamentary days,
and may yet have a word to say in the people's cause.'

The old soldier and the Puritan instantly plunged into a deep
and learned disquisition upon the merits of wall-pieces, drakes,
demi-culverins, sakers, minions, mortar-pieces, falcons, and
pattereroes, concerning all which pieces of ordnance Saxon had strong
opinions to offer, fortified by many personal hazards and experiences.
He then dwelt upon the merits of fire-arrows and fire-pikes in the
attack or defence of places of strength, and had finally begun to
descant upon sconces, 'directis lateribus,' and upon works, semilunar,
rectilineal, horizontal, or orbicular, with so many references to his
Imperial Majesty's lines at Gran, that it seemed that his discourse
would never find an end. We slipped away at last, leaving him still
discussing the effects produced by the Austrian grenadoes upon a
Bavarian brigade of pikes at the battle of Ober-Graustock.

'Curse me if I like accepting this old fellow's offer,' said Sir Gervas,
in an undertone. 'I have heard of these Puritan households. Much grace
to little sack, and texts flying about as hard and as jagged as flint
stones. To bed at sundown, and a sermon ready if ye do but look kindly
at the waiting-wench or hum the refrain of a ditty.'

'His home may be larger, but it could scarce be stricter than that of my
own father,' I remarked.

'I'll warrant that,' cried Reuben. 'When we have been a morris-dancing,
or having a Saturday night game of "kiss-in-the-ring," or
"parson-has-lost-his-coat," I have seen Ironside Joe stride past us, and
cast a glance at us which hath frozen the smile upon our lips. I warrant
that he would have aided Colonel Pride to shoot the bears and hack down
the maypoles.'

''Twere fratricide for such a man to shoot a bear,' quoth Sir Gervas,
'with all respect, friend Clarke, for your honoured progenitor.'

'No more than for you to shoot at a popinjay,' I answered, laughing;
'but as to the Mayor's offer, we can but go to meat with him now, and
should it prove irksome it will be easy for you to plead some excuse,
and so get honourably quit of it. But bear in mind, Sir Gervas, that
such households are in very truth different to any with which you are
acquainted, so curb your tongue or offence may come of it. Should I cry
"hem!" or cough, it will be a sign to you that you had best beware.'

'Agreed, young Solomon!' cried he. 'It is, indeed, well to have a pilot
like yourself who knows these godly waters. For my own part, I should
never know how near I was to the shoals. But our friends have finished
the battle of Ober what's its name, and are coming towards us. I trust,
worthy Mr. Mayor, that your difficulties have been resolved?'

'They are, sir,' replied the Puritan. 'I have been much edified by your
Colonel's discourse, and I have little doubt that by serving under him
ye will profit much by his ripe experience.'

'Very like, sir, very like,' said Sir Gervas carelessly.

'But it is nigh one o'clock,' the Mayor continued, 'our frail flesh
cries aloud for meat and drink. I beg that ye will do me the favour to
accompany me to my humble dwelling, where we shall find the household
board already dressed.'

With these words he led the way out of the hall and paced slowly down
Fore Street, the people falling back to right and to left as he passed,
and raising their caps to do him reverence. Here and there, as he
pointed out to us, arrangements had been made for barring the road with
strong chains to prevent any sudden rush of cavalry. In places, too, at
the corner of a house, a hole had been knocked in the masonry through
which peeped the dark muzzle of a carronade or wall-piece. These
precautions were the more necessary as several bodies of the Royal
Horse, besides the one which we had repulsed, were known to be within
the Deane, and the town, deprived of its ramparts, was open to an
incursion from any daring commander.

The chief magistrate's house was a squat square-faced stone building
within a court which opened on to East Street. The peaked oak door,
spangled with broad iron nails, had a gloomy and surly aspect, but
the hall within was lightful and airy, with a bright polished cedar
planking, and high panelling of some dark-grained wood which gave forth
a pleasant smell as of violets. A broad night of steps rose up from the
farther end of the hall, down which as we entered a young sweet-faced
maid came tripping, with an old dame behind her, who bore in her hands a
pile of fresh napery. At the sight of us the elder one retreated up the
stairs again, whilst the younger came flying down three steps at a
time, threw her arms round the old Mayor's neck, and kissed him fondly,
looking hard into his face the while, as a mother gazes into that of a
child with whom she fears that aught may have gone amiss.

'Weary again, daddy, weary again,' she said, shaking her head anxiously,
with a small white hand upon each of his shoulders. 'Indeed, and indeed,
thy spirit is greater than thy strength.'

'Nay, nay, lass,' said he, passing his hand fondly over her rich brown
hair. The workman must toil until the hour of rest is rung. This,
gentlemen, is my granddaughter Ruth, the sole relic of my family and the
light of mine old age. The whole grove hath been cut down, and only the
oldest oak and the youngest sapling left. These cavaliers, little one,
have come from afar to serve the cause, and they have done us the honour
to accept of our poor hospitality.'

'Ye are come in good time, gentlemen,' she answered, looking us straight
in the eyes with a kindly smile as a sister might greet her brothers.
'The household is gathered round the table and the meal is ready.'

'But not more ready than we,' cried the stout old burgher. 'Do thou
conduct our guests to their places, whilst I seek my room and doff these
robes of office, with my chain and tippet, ere I break my fast.'

Following our fair guide we passed into a very large and lofty room, the
walls of which were wainscoted with carved oak, and hung at either end
with tapestry. The floor was tesselated after the French fashion, and
plentifully strewn with skins and rugs. At one end of the apartment
stood a great white marble fireplace, like a small room in itself,
fitted up, as was the ancient custom, with an iron stand in the centre,
and with broad stone benches in the recess on either side. Lines of
hooks above the chimneypiece had been used, as I surmise, to support
arms, for the wealthy merchants of England were wont to keep enough in
their houses to at least equip their apprentices and craftsmen. They
had now, however, been removed, nor was there any token of the troublous
times save a single heap of pikes and halberds piled together in a
corner.

Down the centre of this room there ran a long and massive table, which
was surrounded by thirty or forty people, the greater part of whom were
men. They were on their feet as we entered, and a grave-faced man at the
farther end was drawling forth an interminable grace, which began as a
thanksgiving for food, but wandered away into questions of Church and
State, and finally ended in a supplication for Israel now in arms to do
battle for the Lord. While this was proceeding we stood in a group
by the door with our caps doffed, and spent our time in observing the
company more closely than we could have done with courtesy had their
eyes not been cast down and their thoughts elsewhere.

They were of all ages, from greybeards down to lads scarce out of their
teens, all with the same solemn and austere expression of countenance,
and clad in the same homely and sombre garb. Save their wide white
collars and cuffs, not a string of any colour lessened the sad severity
of their attire. Their black coats and doublets were cut straight and
close, and their cordovan leather shoes, which in the days of our youth
were usually the seat of some little ornament, were uniformly square
toed and tied with sad-coloured ribbon. Most of them wore plain
sword-belts of untanned hide, but the weapons themselves, with their
broad felt hats and black cloaks, were laid under the benches or placed
upon the settles which lined the walls. They stood with their hands
clasped and their heads bent, listening to the untimely address, and
occasionally by some groan or exclamation testifying that the preacher's
words had moved them.

The overgrown grace came at last to an end, when the company sat
silently down, and proceeded without pause or ceremony to attack the
great joints which smoked before them. Our young hostess led us to the
end of the table, where a high carded chair with a black cushion upon it
marked the position of the master of the house. Mistress Timewell seated
herself upon the right of the Mayor's place, with Sir Gervas beside her,
while the post of honour upon the left was assigned to Saxon. On my left
sat Lockarby, whose eyes I observed had been fixed in undisguised and
all-absorbing admiration upon the Puritan maiden from the first moment
that he had seen her. The table was of no great breadth, so that we
could talk across in spite of the clatter of plates and dishes, the
bustle of servants, and the deep murmur of voices.

'This is my father's household,' said our hostess, addressing herself to
Saxon. 'There is not one of them who is not in his employ. He hath many
apprentices in the wool trade. We sit down forty to meat every day in
the year.'

'And to right good fare, too,' quoth Saxon, glancing down the table.
'Salmon, ribs of beef, loin of mutton, veal, pasties--what could man
wish for more? Plenty of good home-brewed, too, to wash it down. If
worthy Master Timewell can arrange that the army be victualled after the
same fashion, I for one shell be beholden to him. A cup of dirty water
and a charred morsel cooked on a ramrod over the camp fire are like to
take the place of these toothsome dainties.'

'Is it not best to have faith?' said the Puritan maiden. 'Shall not the
Almighty feed His soldiers even as Elisha was fed in the wilderness and
Hagar in the desert?'

'Aye,' exclaimed a lanky-haired, swarthy young man who sat upon the
right of Sir Gervas, 'he will provide for us, even as the stream of
water gushed forth out of dry places, even as the quails and the manna
lay thick upon barren soil.'

'So I trust, young sir,' quoth Saxon, 'but we must none the less arrange
a victual-train, with a staff of wains, duly numbered, and an intendant
over each, after the German fashion. Such things should not be left to
chance.'

Pretty Mistress Timewell glanced up with a half startled look at this
remark, as though shocked at the want of faith implied in it. Her
thoughts might have taken the form of words had not her father entered
the room at the moment, the whole company rising and bowing to him as he
advanced to his seat.

'Be seated, friends,' said he, with a wave of his hand; 'we are a homely
folk, Colonel Saxon, and the old-time virtue of respect for our elders
has not entirely forsaken us. I trust, Ruth,' he continued, 'that thou
hast seen to the wants of our guests.'

We all protested that we had never received such attention and
hospitality.

''Tis well, 'tis well,' said the good wool-worker. 'But your plates are
clear and your glasses empty. William, look to it! A good workman
is ever a good trencherman. If a 'prentice of mine cannot clean his
platter, I know that I shall get little from him with carder and teazel.
Thew and sinew need building up. A slice from that round of beef,
William! Touching that same battle of Ober-Graustock, Colonel, what part
was played in the fray by that regiment of Pandour horse, in which, as I
understand, thou didst hold a commission?'

This was a question on which, as may be imagined, Saxon had much to say,
and the pair were soon involved in a heated discussion, in which the
experiences of Roundway Down and Marston Moor were balanced against the
results of a score of unpronounceable fights in the Styrian Alps and
along the Danube. Stephen Timewell in his lusty youth had led first
a troop and then a regiment through the wars of the Parliament, from
Chalgrove Field to the final battle at Worcester, so that his warlike
passages, though less varied and extensive than those of our companion,
were enough to enable him to form and hold strong opinions. These were
in the main the same as those of the soldier of fortune, but when their
ideas differed upon any point, there arose forthwith such a cross-fire
of military jargon, such speech of estacados and palisados, such
comparisons of light horse and heavy, of pikemen and musqueteers,
of Lanzknechte, Leaguers, and on-falls, that the unused ear became
bewildered with the babble. At last, on some question of fortification,
the Mayor drew his outworks with the spoons and knives, on which Saxon
opened his parallels with lines of bread, and pushing them rapidly
up with traverses and covered ways, he established himself upon the
re-entering angle of the Mayor's redoubt. This opened up a fresh
question as to counter-mines, with the result that the dispute raged
with renewed vigour.

Whilst this friendly strife was proceeding between the elders, Sir
Gervas Jerome and Mistress Ruth had fallen into conversation at the
other side of the table. I have seldom seen, my dear children, so
beautiful a face as that of this Puritan damsel; and it was beautiful
with that sort of modest and maidenly comeliness where the features
derive their sweetness from the sweet soul which shines through them.
The perfectly-moulded body appeared to be but the outer expression of
the perfect spirit within. Her dark-brown hair swept back from a broad
and white forehead, which surmounted a pair of well-marked eyebrows and
large blue thoughtful eyes. The whole cast of her features was gentle
and dove-like, yet there was a firmness in the mouth and delicate
prominence of the chin which might indicate that in times of trouble and
danger the little maid would prove to be no unworthy descendant of the
Roundhead soldier and Puritan magistrate. I doubt not that where more
loud-tongued and assertive dames might be cowed, the Mayor's soft-voiced
daughter would begin to cast off her gentler disposition, and to show
the stronger nature which underlay it. It amused me much to listen to
the efforts which Sir Gervas made to converse with her, for the damsel
and he lived so entirely in two different worlds, that it took all his
gallantry and ready wit to keep on ground which would be intelligible to
her.

'No doubt you spend much of your time in reading, Mistress Ruth,' he
remarked. 'It puzzles me to think what else you can do so far from
town?'

'Town!' said she in surprise. 'What is Taunton but a town?'

'Heaven forbid that I should deny it,' replied Sir Gervas, 'more
especially in the presence of so many worthy burghers, who have the name
of being somewhat jealous of the honour of their native city. Yet the
fact remains, fair mistress, that the town of London so far transcends
all other towns that it is called, even as I called it just now, _the_
town.'

'Is it so very large, then?' she cried, with pretty wonder. 'But new
louses are building in Taunton, outside the old walls, and beyond
Shuttern, and some even at the other side of the river. Perhaps in time
it may be as large.'

'If all the folks in Taunton were to be added to London,' said Sir
Gervas, 'no one there would observe that there had been any increase.'

'Nay, there you are laughing at me. That is against all reason,' cried
the country maiden.

'Your grandfather will bear out my words,' said Sir Gervas. 'But to
return to your reading, I'll warrant that there is not a page of
Scudery and her "Grand Cyrus" which you have not read. You are familiar,
doubtless, with every sentiment in Cowley, or Waller, or Dryden?'

'Who are these?' she asked. 'At what church do they preach?'

'Faith!' cried the baronet, with a laugh, 'honest John preaches at the
church of Will Unwin, commonly known as Will's, where many a time it
is two in the morning before he comes to the end of his sermon. But why
this question? Do you think that no one may put pen to paper unless they
have also a right to wear a gown and climb up to a pulpit? I had thought
that all of your sex had read Dryden. Pray, what are your own favourite
books?'

'There is Alleine's "Alarm to the Unconverted,"' said she. 'It is a
stirring work, and one which hath wrought much good. Hast thou not found
it to fructify within thee?'

'I have not read the book you name,' Sir Gervas confessed.

'Not read it?' she cried, with raised eyebrows. 'Truly I had thought
that every one had read the "Alarm." What dost thou think, then, of
"Faithful Contendings"?'

'I have not read it.'

'Or of Baxter's Sermons?' she asked.

'I have not read them.'

'Of Bull's "Spirit Cordial," then?'

'I have not read it.'

Mistress Ruth Timewell stared at him in undisguised wonder. 'You may
think me ill-bred to say it, sir,' she remarked, 'but I cannot but
marvel where you have been, or what you have done all your life. Why,
the very children in the street have read these books.'

'In truth, such works come little in our way in London,' Sir Gervas
answered. 'A play of George Etherege's, or a jingle of Sir John
Suckling's is lighter, though mayhap less wholesome food for the mind.
A man in London may keep pace with the world of letters without
much reading, for what with the gossip of the coffee-houses and the
news-letters that fall in his way, and the babble of poets or wits
at the assemblies, with mayhap an evening or two in the week at the
playhouse, with Vanbrugh or Farquhar, one can never part company for
long with the muses. Then, after the play, if a man is in no humour for
a turn of luck at the green table at the Groom Porter's, he may stroll
down to the Coca Tree if he be a Tory, or to St. James's if he be a
Whig, and it is ten to one if the talk turn not upon the turning of
alcaics, or the contest between blank verse or rhyme. Then one may,
after an arriere supper, drop into Will's or Slaughter's and find Old
John, with Tickell and Congreve and the rest of them, hard at work
on the dramatic unities, or poetical justice, or some such matter. I
confess that my own tastes lay little in that line, for about that hour
I was likely to be worse employed with wine-flask, dice-box, or--'

'Hem! hem!' cried I warningly, for several of the Puritans were
listening with faces which expressed anything but approval.

'What you say of London is of much interest to me,' said the Puritan
maiden, 'though these names and places have little meaning to my
ignorant ears. You did speak, however, of the playhouse. Surely no
worthy man goes near those sinks of iniquity, the baited traps of the
Evil One? Has not the good and sanctified Master Bull declared from
the pulpit that they are the gathering-place of the froward, the chosen
haunts of the perverse Assyrians, as dangerous to the soul as any
of those Papal steeple-houses wherein the creature is sacrilegiously
confounded with the Creator?'

'Well and truly spoken, Mistress Timewell,' cried the lean young
Puritan upon the right, who had been an attentive listener to the whole
conversation. 'There is more evil in such houses than even in the cities
of the plain. I doubt not that the wrath of the Lord will descend
upon them, and destroy them, and wreck them utterly, together with the
dissolute men and abandoned women who frequent them.'

'Your strong opinions, friend,' said Sir Gervas quietly, 'are borne out
doubtless by your full knowledge of the subject. How often, prythee,
have you been in these playhouses which you are so ready to decry?'

'I thank the Lord that I have never been so far tempted from the
straight path as to set foot within one,' the Puritan answered, 'nor
have I ever been in that great sewer which is called London. I trust,
however, that I with others of the faithful may find our way thither
with our tucks at our sides ere this business is finished, when we shall
not be content, I'll warrant, with shutting these homes of vice, as
Cromwell did, but we shall not leave one stone upon another, and shall
sow the spot with salt, that it may be a hissing and a byword amongst
the people.'

'You are right, John Derrick,' said the Mayor, who had overheard the
latter part of his remarks. 'Yet methinks that a lower tone and a more
backward manner would become you better when you are speaking with your
master's guests. Touching these same playhouses, Colonel, when we have
carried the upper hand this time, we shall not allow the old tares to
check the new wheat. We know what fruit these places have borne in the
days of Charles, the Gwynnes, the Palmers, and the whole base crew of
foul lecherous parasites. Have you ever been in London, Captain Clarke?'

'Nay, sir; I am country born and bred.'

'The better man you,' said our host. 'I have been there twice. The first
time was in the days of the Rump, when Lambert brought in his division
to overawe the Commons. I was then quartered at the sign of the Four
Crosses in Southwark, then kept by a worthy man, one John Dolman, with
whom I had much edifying speech concerning predestination. All was
quiet and sober then, I promise you, and you might have walked from
Westminster to the Tower in the dead of the night without hearing aught
save the murmur of prayer and the chanting of hymns. Not a ruffler or
a wench was in the streets after dark, nor any one save staid citizens
upon their business, or the halberdiers of the watch. The second visit
which I made was over this business of the levelling of the ramparts,
when I and neighbour Foster, the glover, were sent at the head of a
deputation from this town to the Privy Council of Charles. Who could
have credited that a few years would have made such a change? Every evil
thing that had been stamped underground had spawned and festered until
its vermin brood flooded the streets, and the godly wore themselves
driven to shun the light of day. Apollyon had indeed triumphed for a
while. A quiet man could not walk the highways without being elbowed
into the kennel by swaggering swashbucklers, or accosted by painted
hussies. Padders and michers, laced cloaks, jingling spurs, slashed
boots, tall plumes, bullies and pimps, oaths and blasphemies--I promise
you hell was waxing fat. Even in the solitude of one's coach one was not
free from the robber.'

'How that, sir?' asked Reuben.

'Why marry, in this wise. As I was the sufferer I have the best right
to tell the tale. Ye must know that after our reception--which was
cold enough, for we were about as welcome to the Privy Council as the
hearth-tax man is to the village housewife--we were asked, more as
I guess from derision than from courtesy, to the evening levee at
Buckingham Palace. We would both fain have been excused from going but
we feared that our refusal might give undue offence, and so hinder the
success of our mission. My homespun garments ware somewhat rough for
such an occasion, yet I determined to appear in them, with the addition
of a new black baize waistcoat faced with silk, and a good periwig, for
which I gave three pounds ten shillings in the Haymarket.'

The young Puritan opposite turned up his eyes and murmured something
about 'sacrificing to Dagon,' which fortunately for him was inaudible to
the high-spirited old man.

'It was but a worldly vanity,' quoth the Mayor; 'for, with all
deference, Sir Gervas Jerome, a man's own hair arranged with some taste,
and with perhaps a sprinkling of powder, is to my mind the fittest
ornament to his head. It is the contents and not the case which
availeth. Having donned this frippery, good Master Foster and I hired
a calash and drove to the Palace. We were deep in grave and, I trust,
profitable converse speeding through the endless streets, when of a
sudden I felt a sharp tug at my head, and my hat fluttered down on to my
knees. I raised my hands, and lo! they came upon my bare pate. The wig
had vanished. We were rolling down Fleet Street at the moment, and there
was no one in the calash save neighbour Foster, who sat as astounded as
I. We looked high and low, on the seats and beneath them, but not a sign
of the periwig was there. It was gone utterly and without a trace.'

'Whither then?' we asked with one voice.

'That was the question which we set ourselves to solve. For a moment I
do assure ye that we bethought us that it might be a judgment upon us
for our attention to such carnal follies. Then it crossed my mind
that it might be the doing of some malicious sprite, as the Drummer of
Tedworth, or those who occasioned the disturbances no very long time
since at the old Gast House at Little Burton here in Somersetshire.
(Note F. Appendix.) With this thought we hallooed to the coachman, and
told him what had occurred to us. The fellow came down from his
perch, and having heard our story, he burst straightway into much foul
language, and walking round to the back of his calash, showed us that
a slit had been made in the leather wherewith it was fashioned. Through
this the thief had thrust his hand and had drawn my wig through the
hole, resting the while on the crossbar of the coach. It was no uncommon
thing, he said, and the wig-snatchers were a numerous body who waited
beside the peruke-maker's shops, and when they saw a customer come forth
with a purchase which was worth their pains they would follow him, and,
should he chance to drive, deprive him of it in this fashion. Be that as
it may, I never saw my wig again, and had to purchase another before I
could venture into the royal presence.'

'A strange adventure truly,' exclaimed Saxon. 'How fared it with you for
the remainder of the evening?'

'But scurvily, for Charles's face, which was black enough at all
times, was blackest of all to us; nor was his brother the Papist more
complaisant. They had but brought us there that they might dazzle us
with their glitter and gee-gaws, in order that we might bear a fine
report of them back to the West with us. There were supple-backed
courtiers, and strutting nobles, and hussies with their shoulders bare,
who should for all their high birth have been sent to Bridewell as
readily as any poor girl who ever walked at the cart's tail. Then there
were the gentlemen of the chamber, with cinnamon and plum-coloured
coats, and a brave show of gold lace and silk and ostrich feather.
Neighbour Foster and I felt as two crows might do who have wandered
among the peacocks. Yet we bare in mind in whose image we were
fashioned, and we carried ourselves, I trust, as independent English
burghers. His Grace of Buckingham had his flout at us, and Rochester
sneered, and the women simpered; but we stood four square, my friend
and I, discussing, as I well remember, the most precious doctrines of
election and reprobation, without giving much heed either to those who
mocked us, or to the gamesters upon our left, or to the dancers upon
our right. So we stood throughout the evening, until, finding that they
could get little sport from us, my Lord Clarendon, the Chancellor, gave
us the word to retire, which we did at our leisure after saluting the
King and the company.'

'Nay, that I should never have done!' cried the young Puritan, who had
listened intently to his elder's narrative. 'Would it not have been
more fitting to have raised up your hands and called down vengeance upon
them, as the holy man of old did upon the wicked cities?'

'More fitting, quotha!' said the Mayor impatiently. 'It is most fitting
that youth should be silent until his opinion is asked on such matters.
God's wrath comes with leaden feet, but it strikes with iron hands. In
His own good time He has judged when the cup of these men's iniquities
is overflowing. It is not for us to instruct Him. Curses have, as the
wise man said, a habit of coming home to roost. Bear that in mind,
Master John Derrick, and be not too liberal with them.'

The young apprentice, for such he was, bowed his head sullenly to the
rebuke, whilst the Mayor, after a short pause, resumed his story.

'Being a fine night,' said he, 'we chose to walk back to our lodgings;
but never shall I forget the wicked scenes wherewith we were encountered
on the way. Good Master Bunyan, of Elstow, might have added some
pages to his account of Vanity Fair had he been with us. The women,
be-patched, be-ruddled, and brazen; the men swaggering, roistering,
cursing--the brawling, the drabbing, and the drunkenness! It was a fit
kingdom to be ruled over by such a court. At last we had made our way to
more quiet streets, and were hoping that our adventures were at an end,
when of a sudden there came a rush of half-drunken cavaliers from a side
street, who set upon the passers-by with their swords, as though we had
fallen into an ambuscade of savages in some Paynim country. They were,
as I surmise, of the same breed as those of whom the excellent John
Milton wrote: "The sons of Belial, flown with insolence and wine." Alas!
my memory is not what it was, for at one time I could say by rote whole
books of that noble and godly poem.'

'And, pray, how fared ye with these rufflers, sir?' I asked.

'They beset us, and some few other honest citizens who were wending
their ways homewards, and waving their naked swords they called upon us
to lay down our arms and pay homage. "To whom?" I asked. They pointed
to one of their number who was more gaudily dressed and somewhat
drunker than the rest. "This is our most sovereign liege," they cried.
"Sovereign over whom?" I asked. "Over the Tityre Tus," they answered.
"Oh, most barbarous and cuckoldy citizen, do you not recognise that you
have fallen into the hands of that most noble order?" "This is not your
real monarch," said I, "for he is down beneath us chained in the pit,
where some day he will gather his dutiful subjects around him." "Lo, he
hath spoken treason!" they cried, on which, without much more ado, they
set upon us with sword and dagger. Neighbour Foster and I placed our
backs against a wall, and with our cloaks round our left arms we made
play with our tucks, and managed to put in one or two of the old Wigan
Lane raspers. In particular, friend Foster pinked the King in such wise
that his Majesty ran howling down the street like a gored bull-pup. We
were beset by numbers, however, and might have ended our mission then
and there had not the watch appeared upon the scene, struck up our
weapons with their halberds, and so arrested the whole party. Whilst the
fray lasted the burghers from the adjoining houses were pouring water
upon us, as though we were cats on the tiles, which, though it did
not cool our ardour in the fight, left us in a scurvy and unsavoury
condition. In this guise we were dragged to the round-house, where we
spent the night amidst bullies, thieves, and orange wenches, to whom I
am proud to say that both neighbour Foster and myself spoke some words
of joy and comfort. In the morning we were released, and forthwith shook
the dust of London from our feet; nor do I ever wish to return thither,
unless it be at the head of our Somersetshire regiments, to see King
Monmouth don the crown which he had wrested in fair fight from the
Popish perverter.'

As Master Stephen Timewell ended his tale a general shuffling and rising
announced the conclusion of the meal. The company filed slowly out in
order of seniority, all wearing the same gloomy and earnest expression,
with grave gait and downcast eyes. These Puritan ways were, it is true,
familiar to me from childhood, yet I had never before seen a large
household conforming to them, or marked their effect upon so many young
men.

'You shall bide behind for a while,' said the Mayor, as we were about
to follow the others. 'William, do you bring a flask of the old green
sealed sack. These creature comforts I do not produce before my lads,
for beef and honest malt is the fittest food for such. On occasion,
however, I am of Paul's opinion, that a flagon of wine among friends is
no bad thing for mind or for body. You can away now, sweetheart, if you
have aught to engage you.'

'Do you go out again?' asked Mistress Ruth.

'Presently, to the town-hall. The survey of arms is not yet complete.'

'I shall have your robes ready, and also the rooms of our guests,' she
answered, and so, with a bright smile to us, tripped away upon her duty.

'I would that I could order our town as that maiden orders this house,'
said the Mayor. 'There is not a want that is not supplied before it is
felt. She reads my thoughts and acts upon them ere my lips have time to
form them. If I have still strength to spend in the public service, it
is because my private life is full of restful peace. Do not fear the
sack, sirs. It cometh from Brooke and Hellier's of Abchurch Lane, and
may be relied upon.'

'Which showeth that one good thing cometh out of London,' remarked Sir
Gervas.

'Aye, truly,' said the old man, smiling. 'But what think ye of my young
men, sir? They must needs be of a very different class to any with
whom you are acquainted, if, as I understand, you have frequented court
circles.'

'Why, marry, they are good enough young men, no doubt,' Sir Gervas
answered lightly. 'Methinks, however, that there is a want of sap about
them. It is not blood, but sour buttermilk that flows in their veins.'

'Nay, nay,' the Mayor responded warmly. 'There you do them an injustice.
Their passions and feelings are under control, as the skilful rider
keeps his horse in hand; but they are as surely there as is the speed
and endurance of the animal. Did you observe the godly youth who sat
upon your right, whom I had occasion to reprove more than once for
over-zeal? He is a fit example of how a man may take the upper hand of
his feelings, and keep them in control.'

'And how has he done so?' I asked.

'Why, between friends,' quoth the Mayor, 'it was but last Lady-day that
he asked the hand of my granddaughter Ruth in marriage. His time is
nearly served, and his father, Sam Derrick, is an honourable craftsman,
so that the match would have been no unfitting one. The maiden turned
against him, however--young girls will have their fancies--and the
matter came to an end. Yet here he dwells under the same roof-tree, at
her elbow from morn to night, with never a sign of that passion which
can scarce have died out so soon. Twice my wool warehouse hath been
nigh burned to the ground since then, and twice he hath headed those who
fought the flames. There are not many whose suit hath been rejected who
would bear themselves in so resigned and patient a fashion.'

'I am prepared to find that your judgment is the correct one,' said Sir
Gervas Jerome. 'I have learned to distrust too hasty dislikes, and bear
in mind that couplet of John Dryden--

          "Errors, like straws, upon the surface flow.
           He who would search for pearls must dive below."'

'Or worthy Dr. Samuel Butler,' said Saxon, 'who, in his immortal poem of
"Hudibras," says--

          "The fool can only see the skin:
           The wise man tries to peep within."'

'I wonder, Colonel Saxon,' said our host severely, 'that you should
speak favourably of that licentious poem, which is composed, as I have
heard, for the sole purpose of casting ridicule upon the godly. I should
as soon have expected to hear you praise the wicked and foolish work of
Hobbes, with his mischievous thesis, "A Deo rex, a rege lex."'

'It is true that I contemn and despise the use which Butler hath made of
his satire,' said Saxon adroitly; 'yet I may admire the satire itself,
just as one may admire a damascened blade without approving of the
quarrel in which it is drawn.'

'These distinctions are, I fear, too subtle for my old brain,' said the
stout old Puritan. 'This England of ours is divided into two camps, that
of God and that of Antichrist. He who is not with us is against us, nor
shall any who serve under the devil's banner have anything from me save
my scorn and the sharp edge of my sword.'

'Well, well,' said Saxon, filling up his glass, 'I am no Laodicean or
time-server. The cause shall not find me wanting with tongue or with
sword.'

'Of that I am well convinced, my worthy friend,' the Mayor answered,
'and if I have spoken over sharply you will hold me excused. But I
regret to have evil tidings to announce to you. I have not told the
commonalty lest it cast them down, but I know that adversity will be
but the whetstone to give your ardour a finer edge. Argyle's rising has
failed, and he and his companions are prisoners in the hands of the man
who never knew what pity was.'

We all started in our chairs at this, and looked at one another aghast,
save only Sir Gervas Jerome, whose natural serenity was, I am well
convinced, proof against any disturbance. For you may remember, my
children, that I stated when I first took it in hand to narrate to you
these passages of my life, that the hopes of Monmouth's party rested
very much upon the raid which Argyle and the Scottish exiles had
made upon Ayrshire, where it was hoped that they would create such a
disturbance as would divert a good share of King James's forces, and so
make our march to London less difficult. This was the more confidently
expected since Argyle's own estates lay upon that side of Scotland,
where he could raise five thousand swordsmen among his own clansmen.
The western counties abounded, too, in fierce zealots who were ready to
assert the cause of the Covenant, and who had proved themselves in many
a skirmish to be valiant warriors. With the help of the Highlanders and
of the Covenanters it seemed certain that Argyle would be able to hold
his own, the more so since he took with him to Scotland the English
Puritan Rumbold, and many others skilled in warfare. This sudden news
of his total defeat and downfall was therefore a heavy blow, since it
turned the whole forces of the Government upon ourselves.

'Have you the news from a trusty source?' asked Decimus Saxon, after a
long silence.

'It is beyond all doubt or question,' Master Stephen Timewell answered.
'Yet I can well understand your surprise, for the Duke had trusty
councillors with him. There was Sir Patrick Hume of Polwarth--'

'All talk and no fight,' said Saxon.

'And Richard Rumbold.'

'All fight and no talk,' quoth our companion. 'He should, methinks, have
rendered a better account of himself.'

'Then there was Major Elphinstone.'

'A bragging fool!' cried Saxon.'

'And Sir John Cochrane.'

'A captious, long-tongued, short-witted sluggard,' said the soldier of
fortune. 'The expedition was doomed from the first with such men at
its head. Yet I had thought that could they have done nought else, they
might at least have flung themselves into the mountain country, where
these bare-legged caterans could have held their own amid their native
clouds and mists. All taken, you say! It is a lesson and a warning
to us. I tell you that unless Monmouth infuses more energy into his
councils, and thrusts straight for the heart instead of fencing and
foining at the extremities, we shall find ourselves as Argyle and
Rumbold. What mean these two days wasted at Axminster at a time when
every hour is of import? Is he, every time that he brushes a party
of militia aside, to stop forty-eight hours and chant "Te Deums" when
Churchill and Feversham are, as I know, pushing for the West with every
available man, and the Dutch grenadiers are swarming over like rats into
a granary?'

'You are very right, Colonel Saxon,' the Mayor answered. 'And I trust
that when the King comes here we may stir him up to more prompt action.
He has much need of more soldierly advisers, for since Fletcher hath
gone there is hardly a man about him who hath been trained to arms.'

'Well,' said Saxon moodily, 'now that Argyle hath gone under we are face
to face with James, with nothing but our own good swords to trust to.'

'To them and to the justice of our cause. How like ye the news, young
sirs? Has the wine lost its smack on account of it? Are ye disposed to
flinch from the standard of the Lord?'

'For my own part I shall see the matter through,' said I.

'And I shall bide where Micah Clarke bides,' quoth Reuben Lockarby.

'And to me,' said Sir Gervas, 'it is a matter of indifference, so long
as I am in good company and there is something stirring.'

'In that case,' said the Mayor, 'we had best each turn to his own work,
and have all ready for the King's arrival. Until then I trust that ye
will honour my humble roof.'

'I fear that I cannot accept your kindness,' Saxon answered. 'When I am
in harness I come and go early and late. I shall therefore take up my
quarters in the inn, which is not very well furnished with victual,
and yet can supply me with the simple fare, which with a black Jack of
October and a pipe of Trinidado is all I require.'

As Saxon was firm in this resolution the Mayor forbore to press it upon
him, but my two friends gladly joined with me in accepting the worthy
wool-worker's offer, and took up our quarters for the time under his
hospitable roof.



Chapter XIX. Of a Brawl in the Night

Decimus Saxon refused to avail himself of Master Timewell's house and
table for the reason, as I afterwards learned, that, the Mayor being a
firm Presbyterian, he thought it might stand him in ill stead with the
Independents and other zealots were he to allow too great an intimacy
to spring up between them. Indeed, my dears, from this time onward this
cunning man framed his whole life and actions in such a way as to make
friends of the sectaries, and to cause them to look upon him as their
leader. For he had a firm belief that in all such outbreaks as that in
which we were engaged, the most extreme party is sure in the end to gain
the upper hand. 'Fanatics,' he said to me one day, 'mean fervour, and
fervour means hard work, and hard work means power.' That was the centre
point of all his plotting and scheming.

And first of all he set himself to show how excellent a soldier he was,
and he spared neither time nor work to make this apparent. From morn
till midday, and from afternoon till night, we drilled and drilled until
in very truth the shouting of the orders and the clatter of the arms
became wearisome to our ears. The good burghers may well have
thought that Colonel Saxon's Wiltshire foot were as much part of the
market-place as the town cross or the parish stocks. There was much to
be done in very little time, so much that many would have thought it
hopeless to attempt it. Not only was there the general muster of the
regiment, but we had each to practise our own companies in their several
drills, and to learn as best we could the names and the wants of the
men. Yet our work was made easier to us by the assurance that it was not
thrown away, for at every gathering our bumpkins stood more erect,
and handled their weapons more deftly. From cock-crow to sun-down the
streets resounded with 'Poise your muskets! Order your muskets! Rest
your muskets! Handle your primers!' and all the other orders of the old
manual exercise.

As we became more soldierly we increased in numbers, for our smart
appearance drew the pick of the new-comers into our ranks. My own
company swelled until it had to be divided, and others enlarged in
proportion. The baronet's musqueteers mustered a full hundred, skilled
for the most part in the use of the gun. Altogether we sprang from
three hundred to four hundred and fifty, and our drill improved until we
received praise from all sides on the state of our men.

Late in the evening I was riding slowly back to the house of Master
Timewell when Reuben clattered after me, and besought me to turn back
with him to see a noteworthy sight. Though feeling little in the mood
for such things, I turned Covenant and rode with him down the length of
High Street, and into the suburb which is known as Shuttern, where my
companion pulled up at a bare barn-like building, and bade me look in
through the window.

The interior, which consisted of a single great hall, the empty
warehouse in which wool had used to be stored, was all alight with lamps
and candles. A great throng of men, whom I recognised as belonging to
my own company, or that of my companion, lay about on either side, some
smoking, some praying, and some burnishing their arms. Down the middle a
line of benches had been drawn up, on which there were seated astraddle
the whole hundred of the baronet's musqueteers, each engaged in plaiting
into a queue the hair of the man who sat in front of him. A boy walked
up and down with a pot of grease, by the aid of which with some whipcord
the work was going forward merrily. Sir Gervas himself with a great
flour dredger sat perched upon a bale of wool at the head of the line,
and as quickly as any queue was finished he examined it through his
quizzing glass, and if it found favour in his eyes, daintily powdered it
from his dredger, with as much care and reverence as though it were some
service of the Church. No cook seasoning a dish could have added
his spices with more nicety of judgment than our friend displayed in
whitening the pates of his company. Glancing up from his labours he saw
our two smiling faces looking in at him through the window, but his work
was too engrossing to allow him to leave it, and we rode off at last
without having speech with him.

By this time the town was very quiet and still, for the folk in those
parts were early bed-goers, save when some special occasion kept them
afoot. We rode slowly together through the silent streets, our horses'
hoofs ringing out sharp against the cobble stones, talking about such
light matters as engage the mind of youth. The moon was shining very
brightly above us, silvering the broad streets, and casting a fretwork
of shadows from the peaks and pinnacles of the churches. At Master
Timewell's courtyard I sprang from my saddle, but Reuben, attracted by
the peace and beauty of the scene, rode onwards with the intention of
going as far as the town gate.

I was still at work upon my girth buckles, undoing my harness, when of
a sudden there came from the street a shouting and a rushing, with the
clinking of blades, and my comrade's voice calling upon me for help.
Drawing my sword I ran out. Some little way down there was a clear
space, white with the moonshine, in the centre of which I caught a
glimpse of the sturdy figure of my friend springing about with an
activity for which I had never given him credit, and exchanging sword
thrusts with three or four men who were pressing him closely. On the
ground there lay a dark figure, and behind the struggling group Reuben's
mare reared and plunged in sympathy with her master's peril. As I rushed
down, shouting and waving my sword, the assailants took flight down
a side street, save one, a tall sinewy swordsman, who rushed in upon
Reuben, stabbing furiously at him, and cursing him the while for a
spoil-sport. To my horror I saw, as I ran, the fellow's blade slip
inside my friend's guard, who threw up his arms and fell prostrate,
while the other with a final thrust dashed off down one of the narrow
winding lanes which lead from East Street to the banks of the Tone.

'For Heaven's sake where are you hurt?' I cried, throwing myself upon my
knees beside his prostrate body. 'Where is your injury, Reuben?'

'In the wind, mostly,' quoth he, blowing like a smithy bellows;
'likewise on the back of my pate. Give me your hand, I pray.'

'And are you indeed scathless?' I cried, with a great lightening of
the heart as I helped him to his feet. 'I thought that the villain had
stabbed you.'

'As well stab a Warsash crab with a bodkin,' said he. 'Thanks to good
Sir Jacob Clancing, once of Snellaby Hall and now of Salisbury Plain,
their rapiers did no more than scratch my plate of proof. But how is it
with the maid?'

'The maid?' said I.

'Aye, it was to save her that I drew. She was beset by these night
walkers. See, she rises! They threw her down when I set upon them.'

'How is it with you, Mistress?' I asked; for the prostrate figure
had arisen and taken the form of a woman, young and graceful to all
appearance, with her face muffled in a mantle. 'I trust that you have
met with no hurt.'

'None, sir,' she answered, in a low, sweet voice, 'but that I have
escaped is due to the ready valour of your friend, and the guiding
wisdom of Him who confutes the plots of the wicked. Doubtless a true man
would have rendered this help to any damsel in distress, and yet it may
add to your satisfaction to know that she whom you have served is no
stranger to you.' With these words she dropped her mantle and turned her
face towards us in the moonlight.

'Good lack! it is Mistress Timewell!' I cried, in amazement.

'Let us homewards,' she said, in firm, quick tones. 'The neighbours are
alarmed, and there will be a rabble collected anon. Let us escape from
the babblement.'

Windows had indeed begun to clatter up in every direction, and loud
voices to demand what was amiss. Far away down the street we could
see the glint of lanthorns swinging to and fro as the watch hurried
thitherwards. We slipped along in the shadow, however, and found
ourselves safe within the Mayor's courtyard without let or hindrance.

'I trust, sir, that you have really met with no hurt,' said the maiden
to my companion.

Reuben had said not a word since she had uncovered her face, and bore
the face of a man who finds himself in some pleasant dream and is vexed
only by the fear lest he wake up from it. 'Nay, I am not hurt,' he
answered, 'but I would that you could tell us who these roving blades
may be, and where they may be found.'

'Nay, nay,' said she, with uplifted finger, 'you shall not follow the
matter further. As to the men, I cannot say with certainty who they
may have been. I had gone forth to visit Dame Clatworthy, who hath the
tertian ague, and they did beset me on my return. Perchance they are
some who are not of my grandfather's way of thinking in affairs of
State, and who struck at him through me. But ye have both been so kind
that ye will not refuse me one other favour which I shall ask ye?'

We protested that we could not, with our hands upon our sword-hilts.

'Nay, keep them for the Lord's quarrel,' said she, smiling at the
action. 'All that I ask is that ye will say nothing if this matter to my
grandsire. He is choleric, and a little matter doth set him in a flame,
so old as he is. I would not have his mind turned from the public needs
to a private trifle of this sort. Have I your promises?'

'Mine,' said I, bowing.

'And mine,' said Lockarby.

'Thanks, good friends. Alack! I have dropped my gauntlet in the street.
But it is of no import. I thank God that no harm has come to any one. My
thanks once more, and may pleasant dreams await ye.' She sprang up the
steps and was gone in an instant.

Reuben and I unharnessed our horses and saw them cared for in silence.
We then entered the house and ascended to our chambers, still without a
word. Outside his room door my friend paused.

'I have heard that long man's voice before, Micah,' said he.

'And so have I,' I answered. 'The old man must beware of his 'prentices.
I have half a mind to go back for the little maiden's gauntlet.'

A merry twinkle shot through the cloud which hid gathered on Reuben's
brow. He opened his left hand and showed me the doe-skin glove crumpled
up in his palm.

'I would not barter it for all the gold in her grandsire's coffers,'
said he, with a sudden outflame, and then half-laughing, half-blushing
at his own heat, he whisked in and left me to my thoughts.

And so I learned for the first time, my dears, that my good comrade had
been struck by the little god's arrows. When a man's years number one
score, love springs up in him, as the gourd grew in the Scriptures, in a
single night. I have told my story ill if I have not made you understand
that my friend was a frank, warm-hearted lad of impulse, whose reason
seldom stood sentry over his inclinations. Such a man can no more draw
away from a winning maid than the needle can shun the magnet. He loves
as the mavis sings or the kitten plays. Now, a slow-witted, heavy fellow
like myself, in whose veins the blood has always flowed somewhat coolly
and temperately, may go into love as a horse goes into a shelving
stream, step by step, but a man like Reuben is kicking his heels upon
the bank one moment, and is over ears in the deepest pool the nest.

Heaven only knows what match it was that had set the tow alight. I can
but say that from that day on my comrade was sad and cloudy one hour,
gay and blithesome the next. His even flow of good spirits had deserted
him, and he became as dismal as a moulting chicken, which has ever
seemed to me to be one of the strangest outcomes of what poets have
called the joyous state of love. But, indeed, pain and pleasure are so
very nearly akin in this world, that it is as if they were tethered
in neighbouring stalls, and a kick would at any time bring down the
partition. Here is a man who is as full of sighs as a grenade is of
powder, his face is sad, his brow is downcast, his wits are wandering;
yet if you remark to him that it is an ill thing that he should be
in this state, he will answer you, as like as not, that he would not
exchange it for all the powers and principalities. Tears to him are
golden, and laughter is but base coin. Well, my dears, it is useless
for me to expound to you that which I cannot myself understand. If, as I
have heard, it is impossible to get the thumb-marks of any two men to
be alike, how can we expect their inmost thoughts and feelings to tally?
Yet this I can say with all truth, that when I asked your grandmother's
hand I did not demean myself as if I were chief mourner at a funeral.
She will bear me out that I walked up to her with a smile upon my face,
though mayhap there was a little flutter at my heart, and I took her
hand and I said--but, lack-a-day, whither have I wandered? What has all
this to do with Taunton town and the rising of 1685?

On the night of Wednesday, June 17, we learned that the King, as
Monmouth was called throughout the West, was lying less than ten miles
off with his forces, and that he would make his entry into the loyal
town of Taunton the next morning. Every effort was made, as ye may well
guess, to give him a welcome which should be worthy of the most Whiggish
and Protestant town in England. An arch of evergreens had already
been built up at the western gate, bearing the motto, 'Welcome to King
Monmouth!' and another spanned the entrance to the market-place from the
upper window of the White Hart Inn, with 'Hail to the Protestant Chief!'
in great scarlet letters. A third, if I remember right, bridged the
entrance to the Castle yard, but the motto on it has escaped me. The
cloth and wool industry is, as I have told you, the staple trade of
the town, and the merchants had no mercy on their wares, but used them
freely to beautify the streets. Rich tapestries, glossy velvets, and
costly brocades fluttered from the windows or lined the balconies. East
Street, High Street, and Fore Street were draped from garret to basement
with rare and beautiful fabrics, while gay flags hung from the roofs
on either side, or fluttered in long festoons from house to house.
The royal banner of England floated from the lofty tower of St. Mary
Magdalene, while the blue ensign of Monmouth waved from the sister
turret of St. James. Late into the night there was planing and
hammering, working and devising, until when the sun rose upon Thursday,
June 18, it shone on as brave a show of bunting and evergreen as ever
graced a town. Taunton had changed as by magic from a city into a flower
garden.

Master Stephen Timewell had busied himself in these preparations, but he
had borne in mind at the same time that the most welcome sight which
he could present to Monmouth's eyes was the large body of armed men who
were prepared to follow his fortunes. There were sixteen hundred in the
town, two hundred of which were horse, mostly well armed and equipped.
These were disposed in such a way that the King should pass them in his
progress. The townsmen lined the market-place three deep from the
Castle gate to the entrance to the High Street; from thence to Shuttern,
Dorsetshire, and Frome peasants were drawn up on either side of the
street; while our own regiment was stationed at the western gate. With
arms well burnished, serried ranks, and fresh sprigs of green in every
bonnet, no leader could desire a better addition to his army. When
all were in their places, and the burghers and their wives had arrayed
themselves in their holiday gear, with gladsome faces and baskets of
new-cut flowers, all was ready for the royal visitor's reception.

'My orders are,' said Saxon, riding up to us as we sat our horses reside
our companions, 'that I and my captains should fall in with the King's
escort as he passes, and so accompany him to the market-place. Your men
shall present arms, and shall then stand their ground until we return.'

We all three drew our swords and saluted.

'If ye will come with me, gentlemen, and take position to the right of
the gate here,' said he, 'I may be able to tell ye something of these
folk as they pass. Thirty years of war in many climes should give me the
master craftsman's right to expound to his apprentices.'

We all very gladly followed his advice, and passed out through the gate,
which was now nothing more than a broad gap amongst the mounds which
marked the lines of the old walls. 'There is no sign of them yet,' I
remarked, as we pulled up upon a convenient hillock. 'I suppose that
they must come by this road which winds through the valley before us.'

'There are two sorts of bad general,' quoth Saxon, 'the man who is too
fast and the man who is too slow. His Majesty's advisers will never be
accused of the former failing, whatever other mistakes they may fall
into. There was old Marshal Grunberg, with whom I did twenty-six months'
soldiering in Bohemia. He would fly through the country pell-mell,
horse, foot, and artillery, as if the devil were at his heels. He might
make fifty blunders, but the enemy had never time to take advantage. I
call to mind a raid which we made into Silesia, when, after two days or
so of mountain roads, his Oberhauptmann of the staff told him that it
was impossible for the artillery to keep up. "Lass es hinter!" says he.
So the guns were left, and by the evening of the next day the foot were
dead-beat. "They cannot walk another mile!" says the Oberhauptmann.
"Lassen Sie hinter!" says he. So on we went with the horse--I was in his
Pandour regiment, worse luck! But after a skirmish or two, what with the
roads and what with the enemy, our horses were foundered and useless.
"The horses are used up!" says the Oberhauptmann. "Lassen Sie hinter!"
he cries; and I warrant that he would have pushed on to Prague with his
staff, had they allowed him. "General Hinterlassen" we called him after
that.'

'A dashing commander, too,' cried Sir Gervas. 'I would fain have served
under him.'

'Aye, and he had a way of knocking his recruits into shape which would
scarce be relished by our good friends here in the west country,' said
Saxon. 'I remember that after the leaguer of Salzburg, when we had taken
the castle or fortalice of that name, we were joined by some thousand
untrained foot, which had been raised in Dalmatia in the Emperor's
employ. As they approached our lines with waving of hands and blowing of
bugles, old Marshal Hinterlassen discharged a volley of all the cannon
upon the walls at them, killing three score and striking great panic
into the others. "The rogues must get used to standing fire sooner
or later," said he, "so they may as well commence their education at
once."'

'He was a rough schoolmaster,' I remarked. 'He might have left that part
of the drill to the enemy.'

'Yet his soldiers loved him,' said Saxon. 'He was not a man, when a city
had been forced, to inquire into every squawk of a woman, or give ear to
every burgess who chanced to find his strong-box a trifle the lighter.
But as to the slow commanders, I have known none to equal Brigadier
Baumgarten, also of the Imperial service. He would break up his
winter-quarters and sit down before some place of strength, where he
would raise a sconce here, and sink a sap there, until his soldiers were
sick of the very sight of the place. So he would play with it, as a cat
with a mouse, until at last it was about to open its gates, when,
as like as not, he would raise the leaguer and march back into his
winter-quarters. I served two campaigns under him without honour, sack,
plunder, or emolument, save a beggarly stipend of three gulden a day,
paid in clipped money, six months in arrear. But mark ye the folk upon
yonder tower! They are waving their kerchiefs as though something were
visible to them.'

'I can see nothing,' I answered, shading my eyes and gazing down the
tree-sprinkled valley which rose slowly in green uplands to the grassy
Blackdown hills.

'Those on the housetops are waving and pointing,' said Reuben. 'Methinks
I can myself see the flash of steel among yonder woods.'

'There it is,' cried Saxon, extending his gauntleted hand, 'on the
western bank of the Tone, hard by the wooden bridge. Follow my finger,
Clarke, and see if you cannot distinguish it.'

'Yes, truly,' I exclaimed, 'I see a bright shimmer coming and going. And
there to the left, where the road curves over the hill, mark you that
dense mass of men! Ha! the head of the column begins to emerge from the
trees.'

There was not a cloud in the sky, but the great heat had caused a haze
to overlie the valley, gathering thickly along the winding course of
the river, and hanging in little sprays and feathers over the woodlands
which clothe its banks. Through this filmy vapour there broke from time
to time fierce sparkles of brilliant light as the sun's rays fell upon
breastplate or headpiece. Now and again the gentle summer breeze
wafted up sudden pulses of martial music to our ears, with the blare of
trumpets and the long deep snarl of the drums. As we gazed, the van of
the army began to roll out from the cover of the trees and to darken the
white dusty roads. The long line slowly extended itself, writhing out of
the forest land like a dark snake with sparkling scales, until the whole
rebel army--horse, foot, and ordnance--were visible beneath us. The
gleam of the weapons, the waving of numerous banners, the plumes of the
leaders, and the deep columns of marching men, made up a picture which
stirred the very hearts of the citizens, who, from the housetops and
from the ruinous summit of the dismantled walls, were enabled to gaze
down upon the champions of their faith. If the mere sight of a passing
regiment will cause a thrill in your bosoms, you can fancy how it is
when the soldiers upon whom you look are in actual arms for your own
dearest and most cherished interests, and have just come out victorious
from a bloody struggle. If every other man's hand was against us, these
at least were on our side, and our hearts went out to them as to friends
and brothers. Of all the ties that unite men in this world, that of a
common danger is the strongest.

It all appeared to be most warlike and most imposing to my inexperienced
eyes, and I thought as I looked at the long array that our cause was as
good as won. To my surprise, however, Saxon pished and pshawed under his
breath, until at last, unable to contain his impatience, he broke out in
hot discontent.

'Do but look at that vanguard as they breast the slope,' he cried.
'Where is the advance party, or Vorreiter, as the Germans call them?
Where, too, is the space which should be left between the fore-guard and
the main battle? By the sword of Scanderbeg, they remind me more of a
drove of pilgrims, as I have seen them approaching the shrine of St.
Sebaldus of Nurnberg with their banners and streamers. There in
the centre, amid that cavalcade of cavaliers, rides our new monarch
doubtless. Pity he hath not a man by him who can put this swarm of
peasants into something like campaign order. Now do but look at those
four pieces of ordnance trailing along like lame sheep behind the flock.
Caracco, I would that I were a young King's officer with a troop of
light horse on the ridge yonder! My faith, how I should sweep down yon
cross road like a kestrel on a brood of young plover! Then heh for cut
and thrust, down with the skulking cannoniers, a carbine fire to cover
us, round with the horses, and away go the rebel guns in a cloud of
dust! How's that, Sir Gervas?'

'Good sport, Colonel,' said the baronet, with a touch of colour in his
white cheeks. 'I warrant that you did keep your Pandours on the trot.'

'Aye, the rogues had to work or hang--one or t'other. But methinks our
friends here are scarce as numerous as reported. I reckon them to be a
thousand horse, and mayhap five thousand two hundred foot. I have been
thought a good tally-man on such occasions. With fifteen hundred in the
town that would bring us to close on eight thousand men, which is no
great force to invade a kingdom and dispute a crown.'

'If the West can give eight thousand, how many can all the counties of
England afford?' I asked. 'Is not that the fairer way to look at it?'

'Monmouth's popularity lies mostly in the West,' Saxon answered. 'It
was the memory of that which prompted him to raise his standard in these
counties.'

'His standards, rather,' quoth Reuben. 'Why, it looks as though they had
hung their linen up to dry all down the line.'

'True! They have more ensigns than ever I saw with so small a force,'
Saxon answered, rising in his stirrups. 'One or two are blue, and the
rest, as far as I can see for the sun shining upon them, are white, with
some motto or device.'

Whilst we had been conversing, the body of horse which formed the
vanguard of the Protestant army had approached within a quarter of a
mile or less of the town, when a loud, clear bugle-call brought them to
a halt. In each successive regiment or squadron the signal was repeated,
so that the sound passed swiftly down the long array until it died away
in the distance. As the coil of men formed up upon the white road, with
just a tremulous shifting motion along the curved and undulating line,
its likeness to a giant serpent occurred again to my mind.

'I could fancy it a great boa,' I remarked, 'which was drawing its coils
round the town.'

'A rattlesnake, rather,' said Reuben, pointing to the guns in the rear.
'It keeps all its noise in its tail.'

'Here comes its head, if I mistake not,' quoth Saxon. 'It were best
perhaps that we stand at the side of the gate.'

As he spoke a group of gaily dressed cavaliers broke away from the main
body and rode straight for the town. Their leader was a tall, slim,
elegant young man, who sat his horse with the grace of a skilled rider,
and who was remarkable amongst those around him for the gallantry of his
bearing and the richness of his trappings. As he galloped towards the
gate a roar of welcome burst from the assembled multitude, which was
taken up and prolonged by the crowds behind, who, though unable to see
what was going forward, gathered from the shouting that the King was
approaching.



Chapter XX. Of the Muster of the Men of the West

Monmouth was at that time in his thirty-sixth year, and was remarkable
for those superficial graces which please the multitude and fit a man to
lead in a popular cause. He was young, well-spoken, witty, and skilled
in all martial and manly exercises. On his progress in the West he had
not thought it beneath him to kiss the village maidens, to offer prizes
at the rural sports, and to run races in his boots against the fleetest
of the barefooted countrymen. (Note G., Appendix) His nature was vain
and prodigal, but he excelled in that showy magnificence and careless
generosity which wins the hearts of the people. Both on the Continent
and at Bothwell Bridge, in Scotland, he had led armies with success, and
his kindness and mercy to the Covenanters after his victory had caused
him to be as much esteemed amongst the Whigs as Dalzell and Claverhouse
were hated. As he reined up his beautiful black horse at the gate of the
city, and raised his plumed montero cap to the shouting crowd, the grace
and dignity of his bearing were such as might befit the knight-errant
in a Romance who is fighting at long odds for a crown which a tyrant has
filched from him.

He was reckoned well-favoured, but I cannot say that I found him so. His
face was, I thought, too long and white for comeliness, yet his features
were high and noble, with well-marked nose and clear, searching eyes. In
his mouth might perchance be noticed some trace of that weakness which
marred his character, though the expression was sweet and amiable. He
wore a dark purple roquelaure riding-jacket, faced and lapelled with
gold lace, through the open front of which shone a silver breastplate.
A velvet suit of a lighter shade than the jacket, a pair of high yellow
Cordovan boots, with a gold-hilted rapier on one side, and a poniard
of Parma on the other, each hung from the morocco-leather sword-belt,
completed his attire. A broad collar of Mechlin lace flowed over his
shoulders, while wristbands of the same costly material dangled from his
sleeves. Again and again he raised his cap and bent to the saddle-bow in
response to the storm of cheering. 'A Monmouth! A Monmouth!' cried
the people; 'Hail to the Protestant chief!' 'Long live the noble King
Monmouth!' while from every window, and roof, and balcony fluttering
kerchief or waving hat brightened the joyous scene. The rebel van caught
fire at the sight and raised a great deep-chested shout, which was taken
up again and again by the rest of the army, until the whole countryside
was sonorous.

In the meanwhile the city elders, headed by our friend the Mayor,
advanced from the gate in all the dignity of silk and fur to pay homage
to the King. Sinking upon one knee by Monmouth's stirrup, he kissed the
hand which was graciously extended to him.

'Nay, good Master Mayor,' said the King, in a clear, strong voice, 'it
is for my enemies to sink before me, and not for my friends. Prythee,
what is this scroll which you do unroll?'

'It is an address of welcome and of allegiance, your Majesty, from your
loyal town of Taunton.'

'I need no such address,' said King Monmouth, looking round. 'It is
written all around me in fairer characters than ever found themselves
upon parchment. My good friends have made me feel that I was welcome
without the aid of clerk or scrivener. Your name, good Master Mayor, is
Stephen Timewell, as I understand?'

'The same, your Majesty.'

'Too curt a name for so trusty a man,' said the King, drawing his sword
and touching him upon the shoulder with it. 'I shall make it longer by
three letters. Rise up, Sir Stephen, and may I find that there are many
other knights in my dominions as loyal and as stout.'

Amidst the huzzahs which broke out afresh at this honour done to the
town, the Mayor withdrew with the councilmen to the left side of the
gate, whilst Monmouth with his staff gathered upon the right. At a
signal a trumpeter blew a fanfare, the drums struck up a point of war,
and the insurgent army, with serried ranks and waving banners, resumed
its advance upon the town. As it approached, Saxon pointed out to us the
various leaders and men of note who surrounded the King, giving us their
names and some few words as to their characters.

'That is Lord Grey of Wark,' said he; 'the little middle-aged lean man
at the King's bridle arm. He hath been in the Tower once for treason.
'Twas he who fled with the Lady Henrietta Berkeley, his wife's sister. A
fine leader truly for a godly cause! The man upon his left, with the
red swollen face and the white feather in his cap, is Colonel Holmes.
I trust that he will never show the white feather save on his head. The
other upon the high chestnut horse is a lawyer, though, by my soul, he
is a better man at ordering a battalion than at drawing a bill of costs.
He is the republican Wade who led the foot at the skirmish at Bridport,
and brought them off with safety. The tall heavy-faced soldier in the
steel bonnet is Anthony Buyse, the Brandenburger, a soldado of fortune,
and a man of high heart, as are most of his countrymen. I have fought
both with him and against him ere now.'

'Mark ye the long thin man behind him?' cried Reuben. 'He hath drawn his
sword, and waves it over his head. 'Tis a strange time and place for the
broadsword exercise. He is surely mad.'

'Perhaps you are not far amiss,' said Saxon. 'Yet, by my hilt, were it
not for that man there would be no Protestant army advancing upon us
down yonder road. 'Tis he who by dangling the crown before Monmouth's
eyes beguiled him away from his snug retreat in Brabant. There is not
one of these men whom he hath not tempted into this affair by some bait
or other. With Grey it was a dukedom, with Wade the woolsack, with Buyse
the plunder of Cheapside. Every one hath his own motive, but the clues
to them all are in the hands of yonder crazy fanatic, who makes the
puppets dance as he will. He hath plotted more, lied more, and suffered
less than any Whig in the party.'

'It must be that Dr. Robert Ferguson of whom I have heard my father
speak,' said I.

'You are right. 'Tis he. I have but seen him once in Amsterdam, and yet
I know him by his shock wig and crooked shoulders. It is whispered
that of late his overweening conceit hath unseated his reason. See, the
German places his hand upon his shoulder and persuades him to sheathe
his weapon. King Monmouth glances round too, and smiles as though he
were the Court buffoon with a Geneva cloak instead of the motley. But
the van is upon us. To your companies, and mind that ye raise your
swords to the salute while the colours of each troop go by.'

Whilst our companion had been talking, the whole Protestant army had
been streaming towards the town, and the head of the fore-guard was
abreast with the gateway. Four troops of horse led the way, badly
equipped and mounted, with ropes instead of bridles, and in some cases
squares of sacking in place of saddles. The men were armed for the most
part with sword and pistol, while a few had the buff-coats, plates, and
headpieces taken at Axminster, still stained sometimes with the blood of
the last wearer. In the midst of them rode a banner-bearer, who carried
a great square ensign hung upon a pole, which was supported upon a
socket let into the side of the girth. Upon it was printed in golden
letters the legend, 'Pro libertate et religione nostra.' These
horse-soldiers were made up of yeomen's and farmers' sons, unused to
discipline, and having a high regard for themselves as volunteers, which
caused them to cavil and argue over every order. For this cause, though
not wanting in natural courage, they did little service during the war,
and were a hindrance rather than a help to the army.

Behind the horse came the foot, walking six abreast, divided into
companies of varying size, each company bearing a banner which gave the
name of the town or village from which it had been raised. This manner
of arranging the troops had been chosen because it had been found to be
impossible to separate men who were akin and neighbours to each other.
They would fight, they said, side by side, or they would not fight at
all. For my own part, I think that it is no bad plan, for when it comes
to push of pike, a man stands all the faster when he knows that he
hath old and tried friends on either side of him. Many of these country
places I came to know afterwards from the talk of the men, and many
others I have travelled through, so that the names upon the banners have
come to have a real meaning with me. Homer hath, I remember, a chapter
or book wherein he records the names of all the Grecian chiefs and
whence they came, and how many men they brought to the common muster. It
is pity that there is not some Western Homer who could record the names
of these brave peasants and artisans, and recount what each did or
suffered in upholding a noble though disastrous cause. Their places of
birth at least shall not be lost as far as mine own feeble memory can
carry me.

The first foot regiment, if so rudely formed a band could be so called,
consisted of men of the sea, fishers and coastmen, clad in the
heavy blue jerkins and rude garb of their class. They were bronzed,
weather-beaten tarpaulins, with hard mahogany faces, variously armed
with birding pieces, cutlasses, or pistols. I have a notion that it
was not the first time that those weapons had been turned against
King James's servants, for the Somerset and Devon coasts were famous
breeding-places for smugglers, and many a saucy lugger was doubtless
lying up in creek or in bay whilst her crew had gone a-soldiering to
Taunton. As to discipline, they had no notion of it, but rolled along in
true blue-water style, with many a shout and halloo to each other or to
the crowd. From Star Point to Portland Roads there would be few nets
for many weeks to come, and fish would swim the narrow seas which should
have been heaped on Lyme Cobb or exposed for sale in Plymouth market.
Each group, or band, of these men of the sea bore with it its own
banner, that of Lyme in the front, followed by Topsham, Colyford,
Bridport, Sidmouth, Otterton, Abbotsbury, and Charmouth, all southern
towns, which are on or near the coast. So they trooped past us, rough
and careless, with caps cocked, and the reek of their tobacco rising
up from them like the steam from a tired horse. In number they may have
been four hundred or thereabouts.

The peasants of Rockbere, with flail and scythe, led the next column,
followed by the banner of Honiton, which was supported by two hundred
stout lacemakers from the banks of the Otter. These men showed by the
colour of their faces that their work kept them within four walls, yet
they excelled their peasant companions in their alert and soldierly
bearing. Indeed, with all the troops, we observed that, though the
countrymen were the stouter and heartier, the craftsmen were the most
ready to catch the air and spirit of the camp. Behind the men of Honiton
came the Puritan clothworkers of Wellington, with their mayor upon
a white horse beside their standard-bearer, and a band of twenty
instruments before him. Grim-visaged, thoughtful, sober men, they were
for the most part clad in grey suits and wearing broad-brimmed hats.
'For God and faith' was the motto of a streamer which floated from
amongst them. The clothworkers formed three strong companies, and the
whole regiment may have numbered close on six hundred men.

The third regiment was headed by five hundred foot from Taunton, men
of peaceful and industrious life, but deeply imbued with those great
principles of civil and religious liberty which were three years later
to carry all before them in England. As they passed the gates they were
greeted by a thunderous welcome from their townsmen upon the walls and
at the windows. Their steady, solid ranks, and broad, honest burgher
faces, seemed to me to smack of discipline and of work well done. Behind
them came the musters of Winterbourne, Ilminster, Chard, Yeovil, and
Collumpton, a hundred or more pikesmen to each, bringing the tally of
the regiment to a thousand men.

A squadron of horse trotted by, closely followed by the fourth regiment,
bearing in its van the standards of Beaminster, Crewkerne, Langport,
and Chidiock, all quiet Somersetshire villages, which had sent out their
manhood to strike a blow for the old cause. Puritan ministers, with
their steeple hats and Geneva gowns, once black, but now white with
dust, marched sturdily along beside their flocks. Then came a strong
company of wild half-armed shepherds from the great plains which extend
from the Blackdowns on the south to the Mendips on the north--very
different fellows, I promise you, from the Corydons and Strephons of
Master Waller or Master Dryden, who have depicted the shepherd as ever
shedding tears of love, and tootling upon a plaintive pipe. I fear that
Chloe or Phyllis would have met with rough wooing at the hands of these
Western savages. Behind them were musqueteers from Dorchester, pikemen
from Newton Poppleford, and a body of stout infantry from among the
serge workers of Ottery St. Mary. This fourth regiment numbered rather
better than eight hundred, but was inferior in arms and in discipline to
that which preceded it.

The fifth regiment was headed by a column of fen men from the dreary
marches which stretch round Athelney. These men, in their sad and sordid
dwellings, had retained the same free and bold spirit which had made
them in past days the last resource of the good King Alfred and the
protectors of the Western shires from the inroads of the Danes, who
were never able to force their way into their watery strongholds. Two
companies of them, towsy-headed and bare-legged, but loud in hymn and
prayer, had come out from their fastnesses to help the Protestant cause.
At their heels came the woodmen and lumberers of Bishop's Lidiard, big,
sturdy men in green jerkins, and the white-smocked villagers of Huish
Champflower. The rear of the regiment was formed by four hundred men in
scarlet coats, with white cross-belts and well-burnished muskets.
These were deserters from the Devonshire Militia, who had marched with
Albemarle from Exeter, and who had come over to Monmouth on the field
at Axminster. These kept together in a body, but there were many other
militiamen, both in red and in yellow coats, amongst the various bodies
which I have set forth. This regiment may have numbered seven hundred
men.

The sixth and last column of foot was headed by a body of peasants
bearing 'Minehead' upon their banner, and the ensign of the three
wool-bales and the sailing ship, which is the sign of that ancient
borough. They had come for the most part from the wild country which
lies to the north of Dunster Castle and skirts the shores of the Bristol
Channel. Behind them were the poachers and huntsmen of Porlock Quay, who
had left the red deer of Exmoor to graze in peace whilst they followed
a nobler quarry. They were followed by men from Dulverton, men from
Milverton, men from Wiveliscombe and the sunny slopes of the Quantocks,
swart, fierce men from the bleak moors of Dunkerry Beacon, and tall,
stalwart pony rearers and graziers from Bampton. The banners of
Bridgewater, of Shepton Mallet, and of Nether Stowey swept past us, with
that of the fishers of Clovelly and the quarrymen of the Blackdowns. In
the rear were three companies of strange men, giants in stature, though
somewhat bowed with labour, with long tangled beards, and unkempt hair
hanging over their eyes. These were the miners from the Mendip hills and
from the Oare and Bagworthy valleys, rough, half-savage men, whose eyes
rolled up at the velvets and brocades of the shouting citizens, or fixed
themselves upon their smiling dames with a fierce intensity which scared
the peaceful burghers. So the long line rolled in until three squadrons
of horse and four small cannon, with the blue-coated Dutch cannoniers as
stiff as their own ramrods, brought up the rear. A long train of carts
and of waggons which had followed the army were led into the fields
outside the walls and there quartered.

When the last soldier had passed through the Shuttern Gate, Monmouth and
his leaders rode slowly in, the Mayor walking by the King's charger.
As we saluted they all faced round to us, and I saw a quick flush of
surprise and pleasure come over Monmouth's pale face as he noted our
close lines and soldierly bearing.

'By my faith, gentlemen,' he said, glancing round at his staff, 'our
worthy friend the Mayor must have inherited Cadmus's dragon teeth. Where
raised ye this pretty crop, Sir Stephen? How came ye to bring them
to such perfection too, even, I declare, to the hair powder of the
grenadiers?'

'I have fifteen hundred in the town,' the old wool-worker answered
proudly; 'though some are scarce as disciplined.

These men come from Wiltshire, and the officers from Hampshire. As to
their order, the credit is due not to me, but to the old soldier Colonel
Decimus Saxon, whom they have chosen as their commander, as well as to
the captains who serve under him.'

'My thanks are due to you, Colonel,' said the King, turning to Saxon,
who bowed and sank the point of his sword to the earth, 'and to you
also, gentlemen. I shall not forget the warm loyalty which brought you
from Hampshire in so short a time. Would that I could find the same
virtue in higher places! But, Colonel Saxon, you have, I gather, seen
much service abroad. What think you of the army which hath just passed
before you?'

'If it please your Majesty,' Saxon answered, 'it is like so much
uncarded wool, which is rough enough in itself, and yet may in time come
to be woven into a noble garment.'

'Hem! There is not much leisure for the weaving,' said Monmouth. 'But
they fight well. You should have seen them fall on at Axminster! We hope
to see you and to hear your views at the council table. But how is this?
Have I not seen this gentleman's face before?'

'It is the Honourable Sir Gervas Jerome of the county of Surrey,' quoth
Saxon.

'Your Majesty may have seen me at St. James's,' said the baronet,
raising his hat, 'or in the balcony at Whitehall. I was much at Court
during the latter years of the late king.'

'Yes, yes. I remember the name as well as the face,' cried Monmouth.
'You see, gentlemen,' he continued, turning to his staff, 'the courtiers
begin to come in at last. Were you not the man who did fight Sir Thomas
Killigrew behind Dunkirk House? I thought as much. Will you not attach
yourself to my personal attendants?'

'If it please your Majesty,' Sir Gervas answered, 'I am of opinion
that I could do your royal cause better service at the head of my
musqueteers.'

'So be it! So be it!' said King Monmouth. Setting spurs to his horse, he
raised his hat in response to the cheers of the troops and cantered down
the High Street under a rain of flowers, which showered from roof and
window upon him, his staff, and his escort. We had joined in his train,
as commanded, so that we came in for our share of this merry crossfire.
One rose as it fluttered down was caught by Reuben, who, I observed,
pressed it to his lips, and then pushed it inside his breastplate.
Glancing up, I caught sight, of the smiling face of our host's daughter
peeping down at us from a casement.

'Well caught, Reuben!' I whispered. 'At trick-track or trap and ball you
were ever our best player.'

'Ah, Micah,' said he, 'I bless the day that ever I followed you to the
wars. I would not change places with Monmouth this day.'

'Has it gone so far then!' I exclaimed. 'Why, lad, I thought that you
were but opening your trenches, and you speak as though you had carried
the city.'

'Perhaps I am over-hopeful,' he cried, turning from hot to cold, as a
man doth when he is in love, or hath the tertian ague, or other bodily
trouble. 'God knows that I am little worthy of her, and yet--'

'Set not your heart too firmly upon that which may prove to be beyond
your reach,' said I. 'The old man is rich, and will look higher.'

'I would he were poor!' sighed Reuben, with all the selfishness of a
lover. 'If this war last I may win myself some honour or title. Who
knows? Others have done it, and why not I!'

'Of our three from Havant,' I remarked, 'one is spurred onwards by
ambition, and one by love. Now, what am I to do who care neither for
high office nor for the face of a maid? What is to carry me into the
fight?'

'Our motives come and go, but yours is ever with you,' said Reuben.
'Honour and duty are the two stars, Micah, by which you have ever
steered your course.'

'Faith, Mistress Ruth has taught you to make pretty speeches,' said I,
'but methinks she ought to be here amid the beauty of Taunton.'

As I spoke we were riding into the market-place, which was now crowded
with our troops. Round the cross were grouped a score of maidens clad in
white muslin dresses with blue scarfs around their waists. As the King
approached, these little maids, with much pretty nervousness, advanced
to meet him, and handed him a banner which they had worked for him, and
also a dainty gold-clasped Bible. Monmouth handed the flag to one of his
captains, but he raised the book above his head, exclaiming that he
had come there to defend the truths contained within it, at which the
cheerings and acclamations broke forth with redoubled vigour. It had
been expected that he might address the people from the cross, but he
contented himself with waiting while the heralds proclaimed his titles
to the Crown, when he gave the word to disperse, and the troops marched
off to the different centres where food had been provided for them. The
King and his chief officers took up their quarters in the Castle, while
the Mayor and richer burgesses found bed and board for the rest. As to
the common soldiers, many were billeted among the townsfolk, many others
encamped in the streets and Castle grounds, while the remainder took up
their dwelling among the waggons in the fields outside the city, where
they lit up great fires, and had sheep roasting and beer flowing as
merrily as though a march on London were but a holiday outing.



Chapter XXI. Of my Hand-grips with the Brandenburger

King Monmouth had called a council meeting for the evening, and summoned
Colonel Decimus Saxon to attend it, with whom I went, bearing with me
the small package which Sir Jacob Clancing had given over to my keeping.
On arriving at the Castle we found that the King had not yet come out
from his chamber, but we were shown into the great hall to await him, a
fine room with lofty windows and a noble ceiling of carved woodwork. At
the further end the royal arms had been erected without the bar sinister
which Monmouth had formerly worn. Here were assembled the principal
chiefs of the army, with many of the inferior commanders, town officers,
and others who had petitions to offer. Lord Grey of Wark stood silently
by the window, looking out over the countryside with a gloomy face. Wade
and Holmes shook their heads and whispered in a corner. Ferguson strode
about with his wig awry, shouting out exhortations and prayers in a
broad Scottish accent. A few of the more gaily dressed gathered round
the empty fireplace, and listened to a tale from one of their number
which appeared to be shrouded in many oaths, and which was greeted with
shouts of laughter. In another corner a numerous group of zealots, clad
in black or russet gowns, with broad white bands and hanging mantles,
stood round some favourite preacher, and discussed in an undertone
Calvinistic philosophy and its relation to statecraft. A few plain
homely soldiers, who were neither sectaries nor courtiers, wandered up
and down, or stared out through the windows at the busy encampment upon
the Castle Green. To one of these, remarkable for his great size and
breadth of shoulder, Saxon led me, and touching him on the sleeve, he
held out his hand as to an old friend. 'Mein Gott!' cried the German
soldier of fortune, for it was the same man whom my companion had
pointed out in the morning, 'I thought it was you, Saxon, when I saw you
by the gate, though you are even thinner than of old. How a man could
suck up so much good Bavarian beer as you have done, and yet make so
little flesh upon it, is more than I can verstehen. How have all things
gone with you?'

'As of old,' said Saxon. 'More blows than thalers, and greater need of
a surgeon than of a strong-box. When did I see you last, friend? Was
it not at the onfall at Nurnberg, when I led the right and you the left
wing of the heavy horse?'

'Nay,' said Buyse. 'I have met you in the way of business since then.
Have you forgot the skirmish on the Rhine bank, when you did flash your
snapphahn at me? Sapperment! Had some rascally schelm not stabbed my
horse I should have swept your head off as a boy cuts thistles mit a
stick.'

'Aye, aye,' Saxon answered composedly, 'I had forgot it. You were taken,
if I remember aright, but did afterwards brain the sentry with your
fetters, and swam the Rhine under the fire of a regiment. Yet, I think
that we did offer you the same terms that you were having with the
others.'

'Some such base offer was indeed made me,' said the German sternly. 'To
which I answered that, though I sold my sword, I did not sell my honour.
It is well that cavaliers of fortune should show that an engagement is
with them--how do ye say it?--unbreakable until the war is over. Then by
all means let him change his paymaster. Warum nicht?'

'True, friend, true!' replied Saxon. 'These beggarly Italians and Swiss
have made such a trade of the matter, and sold themselves so freely,
body and soul, to the longest purse, that it is well that we should be
nice upon points of honour. But you remember the old hand-grip which no
man in the Palatinate could exchange with you? Here is my captain, Micah
Clarke. Let him see how warm a North German welcome may be.'

The Brandenburger showed his white teeth in a grin as he held out his
broad brown hand to me. The instant that mine was enclosed in it he
suddenly bent his whole strength upon it, and squeezed my fingers
together until the blood tingled in the nails, and the whole hand was
limp and powerless.

'Donnerwetter!' he cried, laughing heartily at my start of pain and
surprise. 'It is a rough Prussian game, and the English lads have not
much stomach for it.'

'Truly, sir,' said I, 'it is the first time that I have seen the
pastime, and I would fain practise it under so able a master.'

'What, another!' he cried. 'Why, you must be still pringling from the
first. Nay, if you will I shall not refuse you, though I fear it may
weaken your hold upon your sword-hilt.'

He held out his hand as he spoke, and I grasped it firmly, thumb to
thumb, keeping my elbow high so as to bear all my force upon it. His own
trick was, as I observed, to gain command of the other hand by a great
output of strength at the onset. This I prevented by myself putting out
all my power. For a minute or more we stood motionless, gazing into each
other's faces. Then I saw a bead of sweat trickle down his forehead, and
I knew that he was beaten. Slowly his grip relaxed, and his hand grew
limp and slack while my own tightened ever upon it, until he was forced
in a surly, muttering voice to request that I should unhand him.

'Teufel und hexerei!' he cried, wiping away the blood which oozed from
under his nails, 'I might as well put my fingers in a rat-trap. You
are the first man that ever yet exchanged fair hand-grips with Anthony
Buyse.'

'We breed brawn in England as well as in Brandenburg,' said Saxon, who
was shaking with laughter over the German soldier's discomfiture. 'Why,
I have seen that lad pick up a full-size sergeant of dragoons and throw
him into a cart as though he had been a clod of earth.'

'Strong he is,' grumbled Buyse, still wringing his injured hand, 'strong
as old Gotz mit de iron grip. But what good is strength alone in the
handling of a weapon? It is not the force of a blow, but the way in
which it is geschlagen, that makes the effect. Your sword now is heavier
than mine, by the look of it, and yet my blade would bite deeper. Eh? Is
not that a more soldierly sport than kinderspiel such as hand-grasping
and the like?'

'He is a modest youth,' said Saxon. 'Yet I would match his stroke
against yours.'

'For what?' snarled the German.

'For as much wine as we can take at a sitting.

'No small amount, either,' said Buyse; 'a brace of gallons at the least.
Well, be it so. Do you accept the contest?'

'I shall do what I may,' I answered, 'though I can scarce hope to strike
as heavy a blow as so old and tried a soldier.'

'Henker take your compliments,' he cried gruffly. 'It was with sweet
words that you did coax my fingers into that fool-catcher of yours. Now,
here is my old headpiece of Spanish steel. It has, as you can see, one
or two dints of blows, and a fresh one will not hurt it. I place it here
upon this oaken stool high enough to be within fair sword-sweep. Have at
it, Junker, and let us see if you can leave your mark upon it!'

'Do you strike first, sir,' said I, 'since the challenge is yours.'

'I must bruise my own headpiece to regain my soldierly credit,' he
grumbled. 'Well, well, it has stood a cut or two in its day.' Drawing
his broadsword, he waved back the crowd who had gathered around us,
while he swung the great weapon with tremendous force round his head,
and brought it down with a full, clean sweep on to the smooth cap of
steel. The headpiece sprang high into the air and then clattered down
upon the oaken floor with a long, deep line bitten into the solid metal.

'Well struck!' 'A brave stroke!' cried the spectators. 'It is proof
steel thrice welded, and warranted to turn a sword-blade,' one remarked,
raising up the helmet to examine it, and then replacing it upon the
stool.

'I have seen my father cut through proof steel with this very sword,'
said I, drawing the fifty-year-old weapon. 'He put rather more of his
weight into it than you have done. I have heard him say that a good
stroke should come from the back and loins rather than from the mere
muscles of the arm.'

'It is not a lecture we want, but a beispiel or example,' sneered the
German. 'It is with your stroke that we have to do, and not with the
teaching of your father.'

'My stroke,' said I, 'is in accordance with his teaching;' and,
whistling round the sword, I brought it down with all my might and
strength upon the German's helmet. The good old Commonwealth blade shore
through the plate of steel, cut the stool asunder, and buried its point
two inches deep in the oaken floor. 'It is but a trick,' I explained. 'I
have practised it in the winter evenings at home.'

'It is not a trick that I should care to have played upon me,' said Lord
Grey, amid a general murmur of applause and surprise. 'Od's bud, man,
you have lived two centuries too late. What would not your thews have
been worth before gunpowder put all men upon a level!'

'Wunderbar!' growled Buyse, 'wunderbar! I am past my prime, young sir,
and may well resign the palm of strength to you. It was a right noble
stroke. It hath cost me a runlet or two of canary, and a good old
helmet; but I grudge it not, for it was fairly done. I am thankful
that my head was not darin. Saxon, here, used to show us some brave
schwertspielerei, but he hath not the weight for such smashing blows as
this.'

'My eye is still true and my hand firm, though both are perhaps a trifle
the worse for want of use,' said Saxon, only too glad at the chance
of drawing the eyes of the chiefs upon him. 'At backsword, sword and
dagger, sword and buckler, single falchion and case of falchions, mine
old challenge still holds good against any comer, save only my brother
Quartus, who plays as well as I do, but hath an extra half-inch in reach
which gives him the vantage.'

'I studied sword-play under Signor Contarini of Paris,' said Lord Grey.
'Who was your master?'

'I have studied, my lord, under Signer Stern Necessity of Europe,' quoth
Saxon. 'For five-and-thirty years my life has depended from day to day
upon being able to cover myself with this slip of steel. Here is a
small trick which showeth some nicety of eye: to throw this ring to the
ceiling and catch it upon a rapier point. It seems simple, perchance,
and yet is only to be attained by some practice.'

'Simple!' cried Wade the lawyer, a square-faced, bold-eyed man. 'Why,
the ring is but the girth of your little finger. A man might do it once
by good luck, but none could ensure it.'

'I will lay a guinea a thrust on it,' said Saxon; and tossing the little
gold circlet up into the air, he flashed out his rapier and made a pass
at it. The ring rasped down the steel blade and tinkled against the
hilt, fairly impaled. By a sharp motion of the wrist he shot it up
to the ceiling again, where it struck a carved rafter and altered its
course; but again, with a quick step forward, he got beneath it and
received it on his sword-point. 'Surely there is some cavalier present
who is as apt at the trick as I am,' he said, replacing the ring upon
his finger.

'I think, Colonel, that I could venture upon it,' said a voice; and
looking round, we found that Monmouth had entered the room and was
standing quietly on the outskirts of the throng, unperceived in
the general interest which our contention had excited. 'Nay, nay,
gentlemen,' he continued pleasantly, as we uncovered and bowed with
some little embarrassment; 'how could my faithful followers be better
employed than by breathing themselves in a little sword-play? I prythee
lend me your rapier, Colonel.' He drew a diamond ring from his finger,
and spinning it up into the air, he transfixed it as deftly as Saxon
had done. 'I practised the trick at The Hague, where, by my faith, I had
only too many hours to devote to such trifles. But how come these steel
links and splinters of wood to be littered over the floor?'

'A son of Anak hath appaired amang us,' said Ferguson, turning his
face, all scarred and reddened with the king's evil, in my direction. 'A
Goliath o' Gath, wha hath a stroke like untae a weaver's beam. Hath he
no the smooth face o' a bairn and the thews' o' Behemoth?'

'A shrewd blow indeed,' King Monmouth remarked, picking up half the
stool. 'How is our champion named?'

'He is my captain, your Majesty,' Saxon answered, resheathing the sword
which the King had handed to him; 'Micah Clarke, a man of Hampshire
birth.'

'They breed a good old English stock in those parts,' said Monmouth;
'but how comes it that you are here, sir? I summoned this meeting for my
own immediate household, and for the colonels of the regiments. If every
captain is to be admitted into our councils, we must hold our meetings
on the Castle Green, for no apartment could contain us.'

'I ventured to come here, your Majesty,' I replied, 'because on my way
hither I received a commission, which was that I should deliver this
small but weighty package into your hands. I therefore thought it my
duty to lose no time in fulfilling my errand.'

'What is in it?' he asked.

'I know not,' I answered.

Doctor Ferguson whispered a few words into the King's ear, who laughed
and held out his hand for the packet.

'Tut! tut!' said he. 'The days of the Borgias and the Medicis are over,
Doctor. Besides, the lad is no Italian conspirator, but hath honest blue
eyes and flaxen hair as Nature's certificate to his character. This
is passing heavy--an ingot of lead, by the feel. Lend me your dagger,
Colonel Holmes. It is stitched round with packthread. Ha! it is a bar
of gold--solid virgin gold by all that is wonderful. Take charge of it,
Wade, and see that it is added to the common fund. This little piece
of metal may furnish ten pikemen. What have we here? A letter and an
enclosure. "To James, Duke of Monmouth"--hum! It was written before we
assumed our royal state. "Sir Jacob Glancing, late of Snellaby Hall,
sends greeting and a pledge of affection. Carry out the good work.
A hundred more such ingots await you when you have crossed Salisbury
Plain." Bravely promised, Sir Jacob! I would that you had sent them.
Well, gentlemen, ye see how support and tokens of goodwill come pouring
in upon us. Is not the tide upon the turn? Can the usurper hope to hold
his own? Will his men stand by him? Within a month or less I shall see
ye all gathered round me at Westminster, and no duty will then be
so pleasing to me as to see that ye are all, from the highest to the
lowest, rewarded for your loyalty to your monarch in this the hour of
his darkness and his danger.'

A murmur of thanks rose up from the courtiers at this gracious speech,
but the German plucked at Saxon's sleeve and whispered, 'He hath his
warm fit upon him. You shall see him cold anon.'

'Fifteen hundred men have joined me here where I did but expect a
thousand at the most,' the King continued. 'If we had high hopes when
we landed at Lyme Cobb with eighty at our back, what should we think now
when we find ourselves in the chief city of Somerset with eight thousand
brave men around us? 'Tis but one other affair like that at Axminster,
and my uncle's power will go down like a house of cards. But gather
round the table, gentlemen, and we shall discuss matters in due form.'

'There is yet a scrap of paper which you have not read, sire,' said
Wade, picking up a little slip which had been enclosed in the note.

'It is a rhyming catch or the posy of a ring,' said Monmouth, glancing
at it. 'What are we to make of this?

          "When thy star is in trine,
           Between darkness and shine,
           Duke Monmouth, Duke Monmouth,
           Beware of the Rhine!"

Thy star in trine! What tomfoolery is this?'

'If it please your Majesty,' said I, 'I have reason to believe that the
man who sent you this message is one of those who are deeply skilled
in the arts of divination, and who pretend from the motions of the
celestial bodies to foretell the fates of men.'

'This gentleman is right, sir,' remarked Lord Grey. '"Thy star in trine"
is an astrological term, which signifieth when your natal planet shall
be in a certain quarter of the heavens. The verse is of the nature of a
prophecy. The Chaldeans and Egyptians of old are said to have attained
much skill in the art, but I confess that I have no great opinion of
those latter-day prophets who busy themselves in answering the foolish
questions of every housewife.'

          'And tell by Venus and the moon,
           Who stole a thimble or a spoon.'
muttered Saxon, quoting from his favourite poem.

'Why, here are our Colonels catching the rhyming complaint,' said the
King, laughing. 'We shall be dropping the sword and taking to the harp
anon, as Alfred did in these very parts. Or I shall become a king of
bards and trouveurs, like good King Rene of Provence. But, gentlemen,
if this be indeed a prophecy, it should, methinks, bode well for our
enterprise. It is true that I am warned against the Rhine, but there is
little prospect of our fighting this quarrel upon its banks.'

'Worse luck!' murmured the German, under his breath.

'We may, therefore, thank this Sir Jacob and his giant messenger for
his forecast as well as for his gold. But here comes the worthy Mayor of
Taunton, the oldest of our councillors and the youngest of our knights.
Captain Clarke, I desire you to stand at the inside of the door and to
prevent intrusion. What passes amongst us will, I am well convinced, be
safe in your keeping.'

I bowed and took up my post as ordered, while the council-men and
commanders gathered round the great oaken table which ran down the
centre of the hall. The mellow evening light was streaming through the
three western windows, while the distant babble of the soldiers upon the
Castle Green sounded like the sleepy drone of insects. Monmouth paced
with quick uneasy steps up and down the further end of the room until
all were seated, when he turned towards them and addressed them.

'You will have surmised, gentlemen,' he said, 'that I have called you
together to-day that I might have the benefit of your collective wisdom
in determining what our next steps should be. We have now marched some
forty miles into our kingdom, and we have met wherever we have gone with
the warm welcome which we expected. Close upon eight thousand men follow
our standards, and as many more have been turned away for want of
arms. We have twice met the enemy, with the effect that we have armed
ourselves with their muskets and field-pieces. From first to last there
hath been nothing which has not prospered with us. We must look to it
that the future be as successful as the past. To insure this I have
called ye together, and I now ask ye to give me your opinions of our
situation, leaving me after I have listened to your views to form our
plan of action. There are statesmen among ye, and there are soldiers
among ye, and there are godly men among ye who may chance to get a flash
of light when statesman and soldier are in the dark. Speak fearlessly,
then, and let me know what is in your minds.'

From my central post by the door I could see the lines of faces on
either side of the board, the solemn close-shaven Puritans, sunburned
soldiers, and white-wigged moustachioed courtiers. My eyes rested
particularly upon Ferguson's scorbutic features, Saxon's hard aquiline
profile, the German's burly face, and the peaky thoughtful countenance
of the Lord of Wark.

'If naebody else will gie an opeenion,' cried the fanatical Doctor,
'I'll een speak mysel' as led by the inward voice. For have I no worked
in the cause and slaved in it, much enduring and suffering mony things
at the honds o' the froward, whereby my ain speerit hath plentifully
fructified? Have I no been bruised as in a wine-press, and cast oot wi'
hissing and scorning into waste places?'

'We know your merits and your sufferings, Doctor,' said the King. 'The
question before us is as to our course of action.'

'Was there no a voice heard in the East?' cried the old Whig. 'Was there
no a soond as o' a great crying, the crying for a broken covenant and a
sinful generation? Whence came the cry? Wha's was the voice? Was it no
that o' the man Robert Ferguson, wha raised himsel' up against the great
ones in the land, and wouldna be appeased?'

'Aye, aye, Doctor,' said Monmouth impatiently. 'Speak to the point, or
give place to another.'

'I shall mak' mysel' clear, your Majesty. Have we no heard that Argyle
is cutten off? And why was he cutten off? Because he hadna due faith
in the workings o' the Almighty, and must needs reject the help o' the
children o' light in favour o' the bare-legged spawn o' Prelacy, wha are
half Pagan, half Popish. Had he walked in the path o' the Lord he wudna
be lying in the Tolbooth o' Edinburgh wi' the tow or the axe before
him. Why did he no gird up his loins and march straight onwards wi'
the banner o' light, instead o' dallying here and biding there like a
half-hairted Didymus? And the same or waur will fa' upon us if we dinna
march on intae the land and plant our ensigns afore the wicked toun o'
London--the toun where the Lord's wark is tae be done, and the tares tae
be separated frae the wheat, and piled up for the burning.'

'Your advice, in short, is that we march on!' said Monmouth.

'That we march on, your Majesty, and that we prepare oorselves tae be
the vessels o' grace, and forbear frae polluting the cause o' the Gospel
by wearing the livery o' the devil'--here he glared at a gaily attired
cavalier at the other side of the table--'or by the playing o' cairds,
the singing o' profane songs and the swearing o' oaths, all which are
nichtly done by members o' this army, wi' the effect o' giving much
scandal tae God's ain folk.'

A hum of assent and approval rose up from the more Puritan members of
the council at this expression of opinion, while the courtiers glanced
at each other and curled their lips in derision. Monmouth took two or
three turns and then called for another opinion.

'You, Lord Grey,' he said, 'are a soldier and a man of experience. What
is your advice? Should we halt here or push forward towards London?'

'To advance to the East would, in my humble judgment, be fatal to us,'
Grey answered, speaking slowly, with the manner of a man who has thought
long and deeply before delivering an opinion. 'James Stuart is strong
in horse, and we have none. We can hold our own amongst hedgerows or in
broken country, but what chance could we have in the middle of Salisbury
Plain? With the dragoons round us we should be like a flock of sheep
amid a pack of wolves. Again, every step which we take towards London
removes us from our natural vantage ground, and from the fertile country
which supplies our necessities, while it strengthens our enemy by
shortening the distance he has to convey his troops and his victuals.
Unless, therefore, we hear of some great outbreak elsewhere, or of some
general movement in London in our favour, we would do best to hold our
ground and wait an attack.'

'You argue shrewdly and well, my Lord Grey,' said the King. 'But how
long are we to wait for this outbreak which never comes, and for this
support which is ever promised and never provided? We have now been
seven long days in England, and during that time of all the House of
Commons no single man hath come over to us, and of the lords none gave
my Lord Grey, who was himself an exile. Not a baron or an earl, and only
one baronet, hath taken up arms for me. Where are the men whom Danvers
and Wildman promised me from London? Where are the brisk boys of the
City who were said to be longing for me? Where are the breakings out
from Berwick to Portland which they foretold? Not a man hath moved
save only these good peasants. I have been deluded, ensnared,
trapped--trapped by vile agents who have led me into the shambles.' He
paced up and down, wringing his hands and biting his lips, with despair
stamped upon his face. I observed that Buyse smiled and whispered
something to Saxon--a hint, I suppose, that this was the cold fit of
which he spoke.

'Tell me, Colonel Buyse,' said the King, mastering his emotion by a
strong effort. 'Do you, as a soldier, agree with my Lord Grey?'

'Ask Saxon, your Majesty,' the German answered. 'My opinion in a
Raths-Versammlung is, I have observed, ever the same as his.'

'Then we turn to you, Colonel Saxon,' said Monmouth. 'We have in this
council a party who are in favour of an advance and a party who wish
to stand their ground. Their weight and numbers are, methinks, nearly
equal. If you had the casting vote how would you decide?' All eyes were
bent upon our leader, for his martial bearing, and the respect shown to
him by the veteran Buyse, made it likely that his opinion might really
turn the scale. He sat for a few moments in silence with his hands
before his face.

'I will give my opinion, your Majesty,' he said at last. 'Feversham and
Churchill are making for Salisbury with three thousand foot, and they
have pushed on eight hundred of the Blue Guards, and two or three
dragoon regiments. We should, therefore, as Lord Grey says, have to
fight on Salisbury Plain, and our foot armed with a medley of weapons
could scarce make head against their horse. All is possible to the Lord,
as Dr. Ferguson wisely says. We are as grains of dust in the hollow of
His hand. Yet He hath given us brains wherewith to choose the better
course, and if we neglect it we must suffer the consequence of our
folly.'

Ferguson laughed contemptuously, and breathed out a prayer, but many of
the other Puritans nodded their heads to acknowledge that this was not
an unreasonable view to take of it.

'On the other hand, sire,' Saxon continued, 'it appears to me that to
remain here is equally impossible. Your Majesty's friends throughout
England would lose all heart if the army lay motionless and struck no
blow. The rustics would flock off to their wives and homes. Such an
example is catching. I have seen a great army thaw away like an icicle
in the sunshine. Once gone, it is no easy matter to collect them again.
To keep them we must employ them. Never let them have an idle minute.
Drill them. March them. Exercise them. Work them. Preach to them. Make
them obey God and their Colonel. This cannot be done in snug quarters.
They must travel. We cannot hope to end this business until we get
to London. London, then, must be our goal. But there are many ways of
reaching it. You have, sire, as I have heard, many friends at Bristol
and in the Midlands. If I might advise, I should say let us march round
in that direction. Every day that passes will serve to swell your forces
and improve your troops, while all will feel something is astirring.
Should we take Bristol--and I hear that the works are not very
strong--it would give us a very good command of shipping, and a rare
centre from which to act. If all goes well with us, we could make
our way to London through Gloucestershire and Worcestershire. In the
meantime I might suggest that a day of fast and humiliation be called to
bring down a blessing on the cause.'

This address, skilfully compounded of worldly wisdom and of spiritual
zeal, won the applause of the whole council, and especially that of King
Monmouth, whose melancholy vanished as if by magic.

'By my faith, Colonel,' said he, 'you make it all as clear as day.
Of course, if we make ourselves strong in the West, and my uncle is
threatened with disaffection elsewhere, he will have no chance to hold
out against us. Should he wish to fight us upon our own ground, he must
needs drain his troops from north, south, and east, which is not to be
thought of. We may very well march to London by way of Bristol.'

'I think that the advice is good,' Lord Grey observed; 'but I should
like to ask Colonel Saxon what warrant he hath for saying that Churchill
and Feversham are on their way, with three thousand regular foot and
several regiments of horse?'

'The word of an officer of the Blues with whom I conversed at
Salisbury,' Saxon answered. 'He confided in me, believing me to be one
of the Duke of Beaufort's household. As to the horse, one party pursued
us on Salisbury Plain with bloodhounds, and another attacked us not
twenty miles from here and lost a score of troopers and a cornet.'

'We heard something of the brush,' said the King. 'It was bravely done.
But if these men are so close we have no great time for preparation.'

'Their foot cannot be here before a week,' said the Mayor. 'By that time
we might be behind the walls of Bristol.'

'There is one point which might be urged,' observed Wade the lawyer. 'We
have, as your Majesty most truly says, met with heavy discouragement in
the fact that no noblemen and few commoners of repute have declared for
us. The reason is, I opine, that each doth wait for his neighbour to
make a move. Should one or two come over the others would soon follow.
How, then, are we to bring a duke or two to our standards?'

'There's the question, Master Wade,' said Monmouth, shaking his head
despondently.

'I think that it might be done,' continued the Whig lawyer. 'Mere
proclamations addressed to the commonalty will not catch these gold
fish. They are not to be angled for with a naked hook. I should
recommend that some form of summons or writ be served upon each of them,
calling upon them to appear in our camp within a certain date under pain
of high treason.'

'There spake the legal mind,' quoth King Monmouth, with a laugh. 'But
you have omitted to tell us how the said writ or summons is to be
conveyed to these same delinquents.'

'There is the Duke of Beaufort,' continued Wade, disregarding the King's
objection. 'He is President of Wales, and he is, as your Majesty knows,
lieutenant of four English counties. His influence overshadows the whole
West. He hath two hundred horses in his stables at Badminton, and a
thousand men, as I have heard, sit down at his tables every day. Why
should not a special effort be made to gain over such a one, the more so
as we intend to march in his direction?'

'Henry, Duke of Beaufort, is unfortunately already in arms against his
sovereign,' said Monmouth gloomily.

'He is, sire, but he may be induced to turn in your favour the weapon
which he hath raised against you. He is a Protestant. He is said to be a
Whig. Why should we not send a message to him? Flatter his pride. Appeal
to his religion. Coax and threaten him. Who knows? He may have private
grievances of which we know nothing, and may be ripe for such a move.'

'Your counsel is good, Wade,' said Lord Grey, 'but methinks his Majesty
hath asked a pertinent question. Your messenger would, I fear, find
himself swinging upon one of the Badminton oaks if the Duke desired to
show his loyalty to James Stuart. Where are we to find a man who is wary
enough and bold enough for such a mission, without risking one of our
leaders, who could be ill-spared at such a time?'

'It is true,' said the King. 'It were better not to venture it at all
than to do it in a clumsy and halting fashion. Beaufort would think that
it was a plot not to gain him over, but to throw discredit upon him. But
what means our giant at the door by signing to us?'

'If it please your Majesty,' I asked, 'have I permission to speak?'

'We would fain hear you, Captain,' he answered graciously. 'If your
understanding is in any degree correspondent to your strength, your
opinion should be of weight.'

'Then, your Majesty,' said I, 'I would offer myself as a fitting
messenger in this matter. My father bid me spare neither life nor limb
in this quarrel, and if this honourable council thinks that the Duke
may be gained over, I am ready to guarantee that the message shall be
conveyed to him if man and horse can do it.'

'I'll warrant that no better herald could be found,' cried Saxon. 'The
lad hath a cool head and a staunch heart.'

'Then, young sir, we shall accept your loyal and gallant offer,' said
Monmouth. 'Are ye all agreed, gentlemen, upon the point?' A murmur of
assent rose from the company.

'You shall draw up the paper, Wade. Offer him money, a seniority amongst
the dukes, the perpetual Presidentship of Wales--what you will, if you
can but shake him. If not, sequestration, exile, and everlasting infamy.
And, hark ye! you can enclose a copy of the papers drawn up by Van
Brunow, which prove the marriage of my mother, together with the
attestations of the witnesses. Have them ready by to-morrow at daybreak,
when the messenger may start.' (Note H, Appendix.)

'They shall be ready, your Majesty,' said Wade.

'In that case, gentlemen,' continued King Monmouth, 'I may now dismiss
ye to your posts. Should anything fresh arise I shall summon ye again,
that I may profit by your wisdom. Here we shall stay, if Sir Stephen
Timewell will have us, until the men are refreshed and the recruits
enrolled. We shall then make our way Bristolwards, and see what luck
awaits us in the North. If Beaufort comes over all will be well.
Farewell, my kind friends! I need not tell ye to be diligent and
faithful.'

The council rose at the King's salutation, and bowing to him they began
to file out of the Castle hall. Several of the members clustered round
me with hints for my journey or suggestions as to my conduct.

'He is a proud, froward man,' said one. 'Speak humbly to him or he will
never hearken to your message, but will order you to be scourged out of
his presence.'

'Nay, nay!' cried another. 'He is hot, but he loves a man that is a
man. Speak boldly and honestly to him, and he is more like to listen to
reason.'

'Speak as the Lord shall direct you,' said a Puritan. 'It is His message
which you bear as well as the King's.'

'Entice him out alone upon some excuse,' said Buyse, 'then up and away
mit him upon your crupper. Hagelsturm! that would be a proper game.'

'Leave him alone,' cried Saxon. 'The lad hath as much sense as any of
ye. He will see which way the cat jumps. Come, friend, let us make our
way back to our men.'

'I am sorry, indeed, to lose you,' he said, as we threaded our way
through the throng of peasants and soldiers upon the Castle Green. 'Your
company will miss you sorely. Lockarby must see to the two. If all goes
well you should be back in three or four days. I need not tell you that
there is a real danger. If the Duke wishes to prove to James that
he would not allow himself to be tampered with, he can only do it by
punishing the messenger, which as lieutenant of a county he hath power
to do in times of civil commotion. He is a hard man if all reports be
true. On the other hand, if you should chance to succeed it may lay the
foundations of your fortunes and be the means of saving Monmouth. He
needs help, by the Lord Harry! Never have I seen such a rabble as this
army of his. Buyse says that they fought lustily at this ruffle at
Axminster, but he is of one mind with me, that a few whiffs of shot and
cavalry charges would scatter them over the countryside. Have you any
message to leave?'

'None, save my love to my mother,' said I.

'It is well. Should you fall in any unfair way, I shall not forget his
Grace of Beaufort, and the next of his gentlemen who comes in my way
shall hang as high as Haman. And now you had best make for your chamber,
and have as good a slumber as you may, since to-morrow at cock-crow
begins your new mission.'



Chapter XXII. Of the News from Havant

Having given my orders that Covenant should be saddled and bridled by
daybreak, I had gone to my room and was preparing for a long night's
rest, when Sir Gervas, who slept in the same apartment, came dancing in
with a bundle of papers waving over his head.

'Three guesses, Clarke!' he cried. 'What would you most desire?'

'Letters from Havant,' said I eagerly.

'Right,' he answered, throwing them into my lap. 'Three of them, and not
a woman's hand among them. Sink me, if I can understand what you have
been doing all your life.

          "How can youthful heart resign
           Lovely woman, sparkling wine?"

But you are so lost in your news that you have not observed my
transformation.'

'Why, wherever did you get these?' I asked in astonishment, for he
was attired in a delicate plum-coloured suit with gold buttons and
trimmings, set off by silken hosen and Spanish leather shoes with roses
on the instep.

'It smacks more of the court than of the camp,' quoth Sir Gervas,
rubbing his hands and glancing down at himself with some satisfaction.
'I am also revictualled in the matter of ratafia and orange-flower
water, together with two new wigs, a bob and a court, a pound of the
Imperial snuff from the sign of the Black Man, a box of De Crepigny's
hair powder, my foxskin muff, and several other necessaries. But I
hinder you in your reading.'

'I have seen enough to tell me that all is well at home,' I answered,
glancing over my father's letter. 'But how came these things?'

'Some horsemen have come in from Petersfield, bearing them with them. As
to my little box, which a fair friend of mine in town packed for me,
it was to be forwarded to Bristol, where I am now supposed to be, and
should be were it not for my good fortune in meeting your party. It
chanced to find its way, however, to the Bruton inn, and the good woman
there, whom I had conciliated, found means to send it after me. It is a
good rule to go upon, Clarke, in this earthly pilgrimage, always to
kiss the landlady. It may seem a small thing, and yet life is made up
of small things. I have few fixed principles, I fear, but two there are
which I can say from my heart that I never transgress. I always carry a
corkscrew, and I never forget to kiss the landlady.'

'From what I have seen of you,' said I, laughing, 'I could be warranty
that those two duties are ever fulfilled.'

'I have letters, too,' said he, sitting on the side of the bed and
turning over a sheaf of papers. '"Your broken-hearted Araminta." Hum!
The wench cannot know that I am ruined or her heart would speedily be
restored. What's this? A challenge to match my bird Julius against my
Lord Dorchester's cockerel for a hundred guineas. Faith! I am too busy
backing the Monmouth rooster for the champion stakes. Another asking me
to chase the stag at Epping. Zounds! had I not cleared off I should
have been run down myself, with a pack of bandog bailiffs at my heels.
A dunning letter from my clothier. He can afford to lose this bill.
He hath had many a long one out of me. An offer of three thousand from
little Dicky Chichester. No, no, Dicky, it won't do. A gentleman can't
live upon his friends. None the less grateful. How now? From Mrs.
Butterworth! No money for three weeks! Bailiffs in the house! Now, curse
me, if this is not too bad!'

'What is the matter?' I asked, glancing up from my own letters. The
baronet's pale face had taken a tinge of red, and he was striding
furiously up and down the bedroom with a letter crumpled up in his hand.

'It is a burning shame, Clarke,' he cried. 'Hang it, she shall have my
watch. It is by Tompion, of the sign of the Three Crowns in Paul's
Yard, and cost a hundred when new. It should keep her for a few months.
Mortimer shall measure swords with me for this. I shall write villain
upon him with my rapier's point.'

'I have never seen you ruffled before,' said I.

'No,' he answered, laughing. 'Many have lived with me for years and
would give me a certificate for temper. But this is too much. Sir Edward
Mortimer is my mother's younger brother, Clarke, but he is not many
years older than myself. A proper, strait-laced, soft-voiced lad he has
ever been, and, as a consequence, he throve in the world, and joined
land to land after the scriptural fashion. I had befriended him from my
purse in the old days, but he soon came to be a richer man than I, for
all that he gained he kept, whereas all I got--well, it went off like
the smoke of the pipe which you are lighting. When I found that all was
up with me I received from Mortimer an advance, which was sufficient to
take me according to my wish over to Virginia, together with a horse and
a personal outfit. There was some chance, Clarke, of the Jerome acres
going to him should aught befall me, so that he was not averse to
helping me off to a land of fevers and scalping knives. Nay, never shake
your head, my dear country lad, you little know the wiles of the world.'

'Give him credit for the best until the worst is proved,' said I,
sitting up in bed smoking, with my letters littered about in front of
me.

'The worst _is_ proved,' said Sir Gervas, with a darkening face. 'I
have, as I said, done Mortimer some turns which he might remember,
though it did not become me to remind him of them. This Mistress
Butterworth is mine old wet-nurse, and it hath been the custom of the
family to provide for her. I could not bear the thought that in the ruin
of my fortune she should lose the paltry guinea or so a week which stood
between her and hunger. My only request to Mortimer, therefore, made on
the score of old friendship, was that he should continue this pittance,
I promising that should I prosper I would return whatever he should
disburse. The mean-hearted villain wrung my hand and swore that it
should be so. How vile a thing is human nature, Clarke! For the sake of
this paltry sum he, a rich man, hath broken his pledge, and left this
poor woman to starve. But he shall answer to me for it. He thinks that
I am on the Atlantic. If I march back to London with these brave boys
I shall disturb the tenor of his sainted existence. Meanwhile I shall
trust to sun-dials, and off goes my watch to Mother Butterworth. Bless
her ample bosoms! I have tried many liquors, but I dare bet that the
first was the most healthy. But how of your own letters? You have been
frowning and smiling like an April day.'

'There is one from my father, with a few words attached from my mother,'
said I. 'The second is from an old friend of mine, Zachariah Palmer, the
village carpenter. The third is from Solomon Sprent, a retired seaman,
for whom I have an affection and respect.'

'You have a rare trio of newsmen. I would I knew your father, Clarke, he
must, from what you say, be a stout bit of British oak. I spoke even now
of your knowing little of the world, but indeed it may be that in your
village you can see mankind without the varnish, and so come to learn
more of the good of human nature. Varnish or none, the bad will ever
peep through. Now this carpenter and seaman show themselves no doubt for
what they are. A man might know my friends of the court for a lifetime,
and never come upon their real selves, nor would it perhaps repay the
search when you had come across it. Sink me, but I wax philosophical,
which is the old refuge of the ruined man. Give me a tub, and I shall
set up in the Piazza of Covent Garden, and be the Diogenes of London. I
would not be wealthy again, Micah! How goes the old lilt?--

          "Our money shall never indite us
           Or drag us to Goldsmith Hall,
           No pirates or wrecks can affright us.
           We that have no estates
           Fear no plunder or rates,
           Nor care to lock gates.
           He that lies on the ground cannot fall!"

That last would make a good motto for an almshouse.'

'You will have Sir Stephen up,' said I warningly, for he was carolling
away at the pitch of his lungs.

'Never fear! He and his 'prentices were all at the broad-sword exercise
in the hall as I came by. It is worth something to see the old fellow
stamp, and swing his sword, and cry, "Ha!" on the down-cut. Mistress
Ruth and friend Lockarby are in the tapestried room, she spinning and he
reading aloud one of those entertaining volumes which she would have me
read. Methinks she hath taken his conversion in hand, which may end in
his converting her from a maid into a wife. And so you go to the Duke of
Beaufort! Well, I would that I could travel with you, but Saxon will not
hear of it, and my musqueteers must be my first care. God send you safe
back! Where is my jasmine powder and the patch-box? Read me your letters
if there be aught in them of interest. I have been splitting a flask
with our gallant Colonel at his inn, and he hath told me enough of your
home at Havant to make me wish to know more.'

'This one is somewhat grave,' said I.

'Nay, I am in the humour for grave things. Have at it, if it contain the
whole Platonic philosophy.'

''Tis from the venerable carpenter who hath for many years been my
adviser and friend. He is one who is religious without being sectarian,
philosophic without being a partisan, and loving without being weak.'

'A paragon, truly!' exclaimed Sir Gervas, who was busy with his eyebrow
brush.

'This is what he saith,' I continued, and proceeded to read the very
letter which I now read to you.

'"Having heard from your father, my dear lad, that there was some chance
of being able to send a letter to you, I have written this, and am
now sending it under the charge of the worthy John Packingham, of
Chichester, who is bound for the West. I trust that you are now safe
with Monmouth's army, and that you have received honourable appointment
therein. I doubt not that you will find among your comrades some who
are extreme sectaries, and others who are scoffers and disbelievers.
Be advised by me, friend, and avoid both the one and the other. For the
zealot is a man who not only defends his own right of worship, wherein
he hath justice, but wishes to impose upon the consciences of others,
by which he falls into the very error against which he fights. The mere
brainless scoffer is, on the other hand, lower than the beast of
the field, since he lacks the animal's self-respect and humble
resignation."'

'My faith!' cried the Baronet, 'the old gentleman hath a rough side to
his tongue.'

'"Let us take religion upon its broadest base, for the truth must be
broader than aught which we can conceive. The presence of a table doth
prove the existence of a carpenter, and so the presence of a universe
proves the existence of a universe Maker, call Him by what name
you will. So far the ground is very firm beneath us, without either
inspiration, teaching, or any aid whatever. Since, then, there _must_ be
a world Maker, let us judge of His nature by His work. We cannot observe
the glories of the firmament, its infinite extent, its beauty, and the
Divine skill wherewith every plant and animal hath its wants cared for,
without seeing that He is full of wisdom, intelligence, and power. We
are still, you will perceive, upon solid ground, without having to call
to our aid aught save pure reason."'

'"Having got so far, let us inquire to what end the universe was made,
and we put upon it. The teaching of all nature shows that it must be to
the end of improvement and upward growth, the increase in real virtue,
in knowledge, and in wisdom. Nature is a silent preacher which holds
forth upon week-days as on Sabbaths. We see the acorn grow into the oak,
the egg into the bird, the maggot into the butterfly. Shall we doubt,
then, that the human soul, the most precious of all things, is also
upon the upward path? And how can the soul progress save through the
cultivation of virtue and self-mastery? What other way is there? There
is none. We may say with confidence, then, that we are placed here to
increase in knowledge and in virtue."'

'"This is the core of all religion, and this much needs no faith in
the acceptance. It is as true and as capable of proof as one of those
exercises of Euclid which we have gone over together. On this common
ground men have raised many different buildings. Christianity, the creed
of Mahomet, the creed of the Easterns, have all the same essence. The
difference lies in the forms and the details. Let us hold to our own
Christian creed, the beautiful, often-professed, and seldom-practised
doctrine of love, but let us not despise our fellow-men, for we are all
branches from the common root of truth."'

'"Man comes out of darkness into light. He tarries awhile and then
passes into darkness again. Micah, lad, the days are passing, mine as
well as thine. Let them not be wasted. They are few in number. What says
Petrarch?' To him that enters, life seems infinite; to him that
departs, nothing.' Let every day, every hour, be spent in furthering the
Creator's end--in getting out whatever power for good there is in you.
What is pain, or work, or trouble? The cloud that passes over the sun.
But the result of work well done is everything. It is eternal. It lives
and waxes stronger through the centuries. Pause not for rest. The rest
will come when the hour of work is past."'

'"May God protect and guard you! There is no great news. The Portsmouth
garrison hath marched to the West. Sir John Lawson, the magistrate, hath
been down here threatening your father and others, but he can do little
for want of proofs. Church and Dissent are at each other's throats as
ever. Truly the stern law of Moses is more enduring than the sweet words
of Christ. Adieu, my dear lad! All good wishes from your grey-headed
friend, ZACHARIAH PALMER."'

'Od's fish!' cried Sir Gervas, as I folded up the letter, 'I have heard
Stillingfleet and Tenison, but I never listened to a better sermon. This
is a bishop disguised as a carpenter. The crozier would suit his hand
better than the plane. But how of our seaman friend? Is he a tarpaulin
theologian--a divine among the tarry-breeks?'

'Solomon Sprent is a very different man, though good enough in his way,'
said I. 'But you shall judge him from his letter.'

'"Master Clarke. Sir,--When last we was in company I had run in under
the batteries on cutting-out service, while you did stand on and off in
the channel and wait signals. Having stopped to refit and to overhaul my
prize, which proved to be in proper trim alow and aloft--"'

'What the devil doth he mean?' asked Sir Gervas.

'It is a maid of whom he talks--Phoebe Dawson, the sister of the
blacksmith. He hath scarce put foot on land for nigh forty years, and
can as a consequence only speak in this sea jargon, though he fancies
that he uses as pure King's English as any man in Hampshire.'

'Proceed, then,' quoth the Baronet.

'"Having also read her the articles of war, I explained to her the
conditions under which we were to sail in company on life's voyage,
namely:"'

'"First. She to obey signals without question as soon as received."'

'"Second. She to steer by my reckoning."'

'"Third. She to stand by me as true consort in foul weather, battle, or
shipwreck."'

'"Fourth. She to run under my guns if assailed by picaroons,
privateeros, or garda-costas."'

'"Fifth. Me to keep her in due repair, dry-dock her at intervals,
and see that she hath her allowance of coats of paint, streamers, and
bunting, as befits a saucy pleasure boat."'

'"Sixth. Me to take no other craft in tow, and if any be now attached,
to cut their hawsers."'

'"Seventh. Me to revictual her day by day."'

'"Eighth. Should she chance to spring a leak, or be blown on her beam
ends by the winds of misfortune, to stand by her and see her pumped out
or righted."'

'"Ninth. To fly the Protestant ensign at the peak during life's voyage,
and to lay our course for the great harbour, in the hope that moorings
and ground to swing may be found for two British-built crafts when laid
up for eternity."'

'"'Twas close on eight-bells before these articles were signed and
sealed. When I headed after you I could not so much as catch a glimpse
of your topsail. Soon after I heard as you had gone a-soldiering,
together with that lean, rakish, long-sparred, picaroon-like craft which
I have seen of late in the village. I take it unkind of you that you
have not so much as dipped ensign to me on leaving. But perchance
the tide was favourable, and you could not tarry. Had I not been
jury-rigged, with one of my spars shot away, I should have dearly loved
to have strapped on my hanger and come with you to smell gunpowder once
more. I would do it now, timber-toe and all, were it not for my consort,
who might claim it as a breach of the articles, and so sheer off. I must
follow the light on her poop until we are fairly joined."'

'"Farewell, mate! In action, take an old sailor's advice. Keep the
weather-gauge and board! Tell that to your admiral on the day of battle.
Whisper it in his ear. Say to him, 'Keep the weather-gauge and board!'
Tell him also to strike quick, strike hard, and keep on striking. That's
the word of Christopher Mings, and a better man has not been launched,
though he did climb in through the hawse-pipe.--Yours to command,
SOLOMON SPRENT."'

Sir Gervas had been chuckling to himself during the reading of this
epistle, but at the last part we both broke out a-laughing.

'Land or sea, he will have it that battles are fought in ships,'
said the Baronet. 'You should have had that sage piece of advice for
Monmouth's council to-day. Should he ever ask your opinion it must be,
"Keep the weather-gauge and board!"'

'I must to sleep,' said I, laying aside my pipe. 'I should be on the
road by daybreak.'

'Nay, I prythee, complete your kindness by letting me have a glimpse of
your respected parent, the Roundhead.'

''Tis but a few lines,' I answered. 'He was ever short of speech. But
if they interest you, you shall hear them. "I am sending this by a godly
man, my dear son, to say that I trust that you are bearing yourself as
becomes you. In all danger and difficulty trust not to yourself, but
ask help from on high. If you are in authority, teach your men to sing
psalms when they fall on, as is the good old custom. In action give
point rather than edge. A thrust must beat a cut. Your mother and the
others send their affection to you. Sir John Lawson hath been down
here like a ravening wolf, but could find no proof against me. John
Marchbank, of Bedhampton, is cast into prison. Truly Antichrist reigns
in the land, but the kingdom of light is at hand. Strike lustily for
truth and conscience.--Your loving father, JOSEPH CLARKE."'

'"Postscriptum (from my mother).--I trust that you will remember what I
have said concerning your hosen and also the broad linen collars, which
you will find in the bag. It is little over a week since you left, yet
it seems a year. When cold or wet, take ten drops of Daffy's elixir in a
small glass of strong waters. Should your feet chafe, rub tallow on the
inside of your boots. Commend me to Master Saxon and to Master Lockarby,
if he be with you. His father was mad at his going, for he hath a great
brewing going forward, and none to mind the mash-tub. Ruth hath baked a
cake, but the oven hath played her false, and it is lumpy in the inside.
A thousand kisses, dear heart, from your loving mother, M. C."'

'A right sensible couple,' quoth Sir Gervas, who, having completed his
toilet, had betaken him to his couch. 'I now begin to understand your
manufacture, Clarke. I see the threads that are used in the weaving of
you. Your father looks to your spiritual wants. Your mother concerns
herself with the material. Yet the old carpenter's preaching is,
methinks, more to your taste. You are a rank latitudinarian, man. Sir
Stephen would cry fie upon you, and Joshua Pettigrue abjure you! Well,
out with the light, for we should both be stirring at cock-crow. That is
our religion at present.'

'Early Christians,' I suggested, and we both laughed as we settled down
to sleep.



Chapter XXIII. Of the Snare on the Weston Road

Just after sunrise I was awoke by one of the Mayor's servants, who
brought word that the Honourable Master Wade was awaiting me downstairs.
Having dressed and descended, I found him seated by the table in the
sitting-room with papers and wafer-box, sealing up the missive which I
was to carry. He was a small, worn, grey-faced man, very erect in his
bearing and sudden in his speech, with more of the soldier than of the
lawyer in his appearance.

'So,' said he, pressing his seal above the fastening of the string, 'I
see that your horse is ready for you outside. You had best make your way
round by Nether Stowey and the Bristol Channel, for we have heard that
the enemy's horse guard the roads on the far side of Wells. Here is your
packet.'

I bowed and placed it in the inside of my tunic.

'It is a written order as suggested in the council. The Duke's reply may
be written, or it may be by word of mouth. In either case guard it well.
This packet contains also a copy of the depositions of the clergyman at
The Hague, and of the other witnesses who saw Charles of England marry
Lucy Walters, the mother of his Majesty. Your mission is one of such
importance that the whole success of our enterprise may turn upon it.
See that you serve the paper upon Beaufort in person, and not through
any intermediary, or it might not stand in a court of law.'

I promised to do so if possible.

'I should advise you also,' he continued, 'to carry sword and pistol as
a protection against the chance dangers of the road, but to discard your
head-piece and steel-front as giving you too warlike an aspect for a
peaceful messenger.'

'I had already come to that resolve,' said I.

'There is nothing more to be said, Captain,' said the lawyer, giving me
his hand. 'May all good fortune go with you. Keep a still tongue and a
quick ear. Watch keenly how all things go. Mark whose face is gloomy and
whose content. The Duke may be at Bristol, but you had best make for his
seat at Badminton. Our sign of the day is Tewkesbury.'

Thanking my instructor for his advice I went out and mounted Covenant,
who pawed and champed at his bit in his delight at getting started
once more. Few of the townsmen were stirring, though here and there
a night-bonneted head stared out at me through a casement. I took the
precaution of walking the horse very quietly until we were some distance
from the house, for I had told Reuben nothing of my intended journey,
and I was convinced that if he knew of it neither discipline, nor even
his new ties of love, would prevent him from coming with me. Covenant's
iron-shod feet rang sharply, in spite of my care, upon the cobblestones,
but looking back I saw that the blinds of my faithful friend's room
were undrawn, and that all seemed quiet in the house. I shook my bridle,
therefore, and rode at a brisk trot through the silent streets, which
were still strewn with faded flowers and gay with streamers. At the
north gate a guard of half a company was stationed, who let me pass upon
hearing the word. Once beyond the old walls I found myself out on the
country side, with my face to the north and a clear road in front of me.

It was a blithesome morning. The sun was rising over the distant hills,
and heaven and earth were ruddy and golden. The trees in the wayside
orchards were full of swarms of birds, who chattered and sang until the
air was full of their piping. There was lightsomeness and gladness in
every breath. The wistful-eyed red Somerset kine stood along by the
hedgerows, casting great shadows down the fields and gazing at me as
I passed. Farm horses leaned over wooden gates, and snorted a word of
greeting to their glossy-coated brother. A great herd of snowy-fleeced
sheep streamed towards us over the hillside and frisked and gambolled in
the sunshine. All was innocent life, from the lark which sang on high
to the little shrew-mouse which ran amongst the ripening corn, or the
martin which dashed away at the sound of my approach. All alive and all
innocent. What are we to think, my dear children, when we see the beasts
of the field full of kindness and virtue and gratitude? Where is this
superiority of which we talk?

From the high ground to the north I looked back upon the sleeping town,
with the broad edging of tents and waggons, which showed how suddenly
its population had outgrown it. The Royal Standard still fluttered
from the tower of St. Mary Magdalene, while close by its beautiful
brother-turret of St. James bore aloft the blue flag of Monmouth. As
I gazed the quick petulant roll of a drum rose up on the still morning
air, with the clear ringing call of the bugles summoning the troops from
their slumbers. Beyond the town, and on either side of it, stretched a
glorious view of the Somersetshire downs, rolling away to the distant
sea, with town and hamlet, castle turret and church tower, wooded coombe
and stretch of grain-land--as fair a scene as the eye could wish to rest
upon. As I wheeled my horse and sped upon my way I felt, my dears, that
this was a land worth fighting for, and that a man's life was a small
thing if he could but aid, in however trifling a degree, in working out
its freedom and its happiness. At a little village over the hill I fell
in with an outpost of horse, the commander of which rode some distance
with me, and set me on my road to Nether Stowey. It seemed strange to
my Hampshire eyes to note that the earth is all red in these parts--very
different to the chalk and gravel of Havant. The cows, too, are mostly
red. The cottages are built neither of brick nor of wood, but of some
form of plaster, which they call cob, which is strong and smooth so
long as no water comes near it. They shelter the walls from the rain,
therefore, by great overhanging thatches. There is scarcely a steeple in
the whole country-side, which also seems strange to a man from any other
part of England. Every church hath a square tower, with pinnacles upon
the top, and they are mostly very large, with fine peals of bells.

My course ran along by the foot of the beautiful Quantock Hills, where
heavy-wooded coombes are scattered over the broad heathery downs, deep
with bracken and whortle-bushes. On either side of the track steep
winding glens sloped downwards, lined with yellow gorse, which blazed
out from the deep-red soil like a flame from embers. Peat-coloured
streams splashed down these valleys and over the road, through which
Covenant ploughed fetlock deep, and shied to see the broad-backed trout
darting from between his fore feet.

All day I rode through this beautiful country, meeting few folk, for
I kept away from the main roads. A few shepherds and farmers, a
long-legged clergyman, a packman with his mule, and a horseman with a
great bag, whom I took to be a buyer of hair, are all that I can recall.
A black jack of ale and the heel of a loaf at a wayside inn were all my
refreshments. Near Combwich, Covenant cast a shoe, and two hours were
wasted before I found a smithy in the town and had the matter set right.
It was not until evening that I at last came out upon the banks of the
Bristol Channel, at a place called Shurton Bars, where the muddy Parret
makes its way into the sea. At this point the channel is so broad that
the Welsh mountains can scarcely be distinguished. The shore is flat
and black and oozy, flecked over with white patches of sea-birds, but
further to the east there rises a line of hills, very wild and rugged,
rising in places into steep precipices. These cliffs run out into the
sea, and numerous little harbours and bays are formed in their broken
surface, which are dry half the day, but can float a good-sized boat at
half-tide. The road wound over these bleak and rocky hills, which are
sparsely inhabited by a wild race of fishermen, or shepherds, who came
to their cabin doors on hearing the clatter of my horse's hoofs, and
shot some rough West-country jest at me as I passed. As the night drew
in the country became bleaker and more deserted. An occasional light
twinkling in the distance from some lonely hillside cottage was the only
sign of the presence of man. The rough track still skirted the sea, and
high as it was, the spray from the breakers drifted across it. The salt
prinkled on my lips, and the air was filled with the hoarse roar of the
surge and the thin piping of curlews, who flitted past in the darkness
like white, shadowy, sad-voiced creatures from some other world. The
wind blew in short, quick, angry puffs from the westward, and far out on
the black waters a single glimmer of light rising and falling, tossing
up, and then sinking out of sight, showed how fierce a sea had risen in
the channel.

Riding through the gloaming in this strange wild scenery my mind
naturally turned towards the past. I thought of my father and my mother,
of the old carpenter and of Solomon Sprent. Then I pondered over Decimus
Saxon, his many-faced character having in it so much to be admired and
so much to be abhorred. Did I like him or no? It was more than I could
say. From him I wandered off to my faithful Reuben, and to his love
passage with the pretty Puritan, which in turn brought me to Sir Gervas
and the wreck of his fortunes. My mind then wandered to the state of the
army and the prospects of the rising, which led me to my present mission
with its perils and its difficulties. Having turned over all these
things in my mind I began to doze upon my horse's back, overcome by the
fatigue of the journey and the drowsy lullaby of the waves. I had just
fallen into a dream in which I saw Reuben Lockarby crowned King of
England by Mistress Ruth Timewell, while Decimus Saxon endeavoured to
shoot him with a bottle of Daffy's elixir, when in an instant,
without warning, I was dashed violently from my horse, and left lying
half-conscious on the stony track.

So stunned and shaken was I by the sudden fall, that though I had a dim
knowledge of shadowy figures bending over me, and of hoarse laughter
sounding in my ears, I could not tell for a few minutes where I was nor
what had befallen me. When at last I did make an attempt to recover my
feet I found that a loop of rope had been slipped round my arms and my
legs so as to secure them. With a hard struggle I got one hand free, and
dashed it in the face of one of the men who were holding me down; but
the whole gang of a dozen or more set upon me at once, and while some
thumped and kicked at me, others tied a fresh cord round my elbows, and
deftly fastened it in such a way as to pinion me completely. Finding
that in my weak and dazed state all efforts were of no avail, I lay
sullen and watchful, taking no heed of the random blows which were still
showered upon me. So dark was it that I could neither see the faces of
my attackers, nor form any guess as to who they might be, or how they
had hurled me from my saddle. The champing and stamping of a horse hard
by showed me that Covenant was a prisoner as well as his master.

'Dutch Pete's got as much as he can carry,' said a rough, harsh voice.
'He lies on the track as limp as a conger.'

'Ah, poor Pete!' muttered another. 'He'll never deal a card or drain a
glass of the right Cognac again.'

'There you lie, mine goot vriend,' said the injured man, in weak,
quavering tones. 'And I will prove that you lie if you have a flaschen
in your pocket.'

'If Pete were dead and buried,' the first speaker said, 'a word about
strong waters would bring him to. Give him a sup from your bottle,
Dicon.'

There was a great gurgling and sucking in the darkness, followed by a
gasp from the drinker. 'Gott sei gelobt,' he exclaimed in a stronger
voice, 'I have seen more stars than ever were made. Had my kopf not
been well hooped he would have knocked it in like an ill-staved cask. He
shlags like the kick of a horse.'

As he spoke the edge of the moon peeped over a cliff and threw a flood
of cold clear light upon the scene. Looking up I saw that a strong rope
had been tied across the road from one tree trunk to another about eight
feet above the ground. This could not be seen by me, even had I been
fully awake, in the dusk; but catching me across the breast as Covenant
trotted under it, it had swept me off and dashed me with great force to
the ground. Either the fall or the blows which I had received had cut me
badly, for I could feel the blood trickling in a warm stream past my
ear and down my neck. I made no attempt to move, however, but waited in
silence to find out who these men were into whose hands I had fallen.
My one fear was lest my letters should be taken away from me, and my
mission rendered of no avail. That in this, my first trust, I should be
disarmed without a blow and lose the papers which had been confided to
me, was a chance which made me flush and tingle with shame at the very
thought.

The gang who had seized me were rough-bearded fellows in fur caps and
fustian jackets, with buff belts round their waists, from which hung
short straight whinyards. Their dark sun-dried faces and their great
boots marked them as fishermen or seamen, as might be guessed from their
rude sailor speech. A pair knelt on either side with their hands upon
my arms, a third stood behind with a cocked pistol pointed at my head,
while the others, seven or eight in number, were helping to his feet the
man whom I had struck, who was bleeding freely from a cut over the eye.

'Take the horse up to Daddy Mycroft's,' said a stout, black-bearded man,
who seemed to be their leader. 'It is no mere dragooner hack,(Note
I. Appendix) but a comely, full-blooded brute, which will fetch sixty
pieces at the least. Your share of that, Peter, will buy salve and
plaster for your cut.'

'Ha, houndsfoot!' cried the Dutchman, shaking his fist at me. 'You
would strike Peter, would you? You would draw Peter's blood, would you?
Tausend Teufel, man! if you and I were together upon the hillside we
should see vich vas the petter man.'

'Slack your jaw tackle, Pete,' growled one of his comrades. 'This fellow
is a limb of Satan for sure, and doth follow a calling that none but a
mean, snivelling, baseborn son of a gun would take to. Yet I warrant,
from the look of him, that he could truss you like a woodcock if he had
his great hands upon you. And you would howl for help as you did last
Martinmas, when you did mistake Cooper Dick's wife for a gauger.'

'Truss me, would he? Todt und Holle!' cried the other, whom the blow
and the brandy had driven to madness. 'We shall see. Take that, thou
deyvil's spawn, take that!' He ran at me, and kicked me as hard as he
could with his heavy sea-boots.

Some of the gang laughed, but the man who had spoken before gave
the Dutchman a shove that sent him whirling. 'None of that,' he said
sternly. 'We'll have British fair-play on British soil, and none of your
cursed longshore tricks. I won't stand by and see an Englishman
kicked, d'ye see, by a tub-bellied, round-starned, schnapps-swilling,
chicken-hearted son of an Amsterdam lust-vrouw. Hang him, if the skipper
likes. That's all above board, but by thunder, if it's a fight that you
will have, touch that man again.'

'All right, Dicon,' said their leader soothingly. 'We all know that
Pete's not a fighting man, but he's the best cooper on the coast, eh,
Pete? There is not his equal at staving, hooping, and bumping. He'll
take a plank of wood and turn it into a keg while another man would be
thinking of it.'

'Oh, you remember that, Captain Murgatroyd,' said the Dutchman sulkily.
'But you see me knocked about and shlagged, and bullied, and called
names, and what help have I? So help me, when the _Maria_ is in the
Texel next, I'll take to my old trade, I will, and never set foot on her
again.'

'No fear,' the Captain answered, laughing. 'While the _Maria_ brings in
five thousand good pieces a year, and can show her heels to any cutter
on the coast, there is no fear of greedy Pete losing his share of her.
Why, man, at this rate you may have a lust-haus of your own in a year or
two, with a trimmed lawn, and the trees all clipped like peacocks, and
the flowers in pattern, and a canal by the door, and a great bouncing
house-wife just like any Burgomeister. There's many such a fortune been
made out of Mechlin and Cognac.'

'Aye, and there's many a broken kopf got over Mechlin and Cognac,'
grumbled my enemy. 'Donner! There are other things beside lust-houses
and flower-beds. There are lee-shores and nor'-westers, beaks and
preventives.'

'And there's where the smart seaman has the pull over the herring buss,
or the skulking coaster that works from Christmas to Christmas with all
the danger and none of the little pickings. But enough said! Up with the
prisoner, and let us get him safely into the bilboes.'

I was raised to my feet and half carried, half dragged along in the
midst of the gang. My horse had already been led away in the opposite
direction. Our course lay off the road, down a very rocky and rugged
ravine which sloped away towards the sea. There seemed to be no trace of
a path, and I could only stumble along over rocks and bushes as best I
might in my fettered and crippled state. The blood, however, had
dried over my wounds, and the cool sea breeze playing upon my forehead
refreshed me, and helped me to take a clearer view of my position.

It was plain from their talk that these men were smugglers. As such,
they were not likely to have any great love for the Government, or
desire to uphold King James in any way. On the contrary, their goodwill
would probably be with Monmouth, for had I not seen the day before a
whole regiment of foot in his army, raised from among the coaster folk?
On the other hand, their greed might be stronger than their loyalty, and
might lead them to hand me over to justice in the hope of reward. On the
whole it would be best, I thought, to say nothing of my mission, and to
keep my papers secret as long as possible.

But I could not but wonder, as I was dragged along, what had led these
men to lie in wait for me as they had done. The road along which I had
travelled was a lonely one, and yet a fair number of travellers bound
from the West through Weston to Bristol must use it. The gang could
not lie in perpetual guard over it. Why had they set a trap on this
particular night, then? The smugglers were a lawless and desperate body,
but they did not, as a rule, descend to foot-paddery or robbery. As long
as no one interfered with them they were seldom the first to break the
peace. Then, why had they lain in wait for me, who had never injured
them? Could it possibly be that I had been betrayed? I was still turning
over these questions in my mind when we all came to a halt, and the
Captain blew a shrill note on a whistle which hung round his neck.

The place where we found ourselves was the darkest and most rugged spot
in the whole wild gorge. On either side great cliffs shot up, which
arched over our heads, with a fringe of ferns and bracken on either lip,
so that the dark sky and the few twinkling stars were well-nigh hid.
Great black rocks loomed vaguely out in the shadowy light, while in
front a high tangle of what seemed to be brushwood barred our road. At a
second whistle, however, a glint of light was seen through the branches,
and the whole mass was swung to one side as though it moved upon a
hinge. Beyond it a dark winding passage opened into the side of the
hill, down which we went with our backs bowed, for the rock ceiling was
of no great height. On every side of us sounded the throbbing of the
sea.

Passing through the entrance, which must have been dug with great labour
through the solid rock, we came out into a lofty and roomy cave, lit
up by a fire at one end, and by several torches. By their smoky yellow
glare I could see that the roof was, at least, fifty feet above us, and
was hung by long lime-crystals, which sparkled and gleamed with great
brightness. The floor of the cave was formed of fine sand, as soft and
velvety as a Wilton carpet, sloping down in a way which showed that the
cave must at its mouth open upon the sea, which was confirmed by the
booming and splashing of the waves, and by the fresh salt air which
filled the whole cavern. No water could be seen, however, as a sharp
turn cut off our view of the outlet.

In this rock-girt space, which may have been sixty paces long and
thirty across, there were gathered great piles of casks, kegs and cases;
muskets, cutlasses, staves, cudgels, and straw were littered about upon
the floor. At one end a high wood fire blazed merrily, casting strange
shadows along the walls, and sparkling like a thousand diamonds among
the crystals on the roof. The smoke was carried away through a great
cleft in the rocks. Seated on boxes, or stretched on the sand round the
fire, there were seven or eight more of the band, who sprang to their
feet and ran eagerly towards us as we entered.

Have ye got him?' they cried. 'Did he indeed come? Had he attendants?'

'He is here, and he is alone,' the Captain answered. 'Our hawser fetched
him off his horse as neatly as ever a gull was netted by a cragsman.
What have ye done in our absence, Silas!'

'We have the packs ready for carriage,' said the man addressed, a
sturdy, weather-beaten seaman of middle age. 'The silk and lace are done
in these squares covered over with sacking. The one I have marked "yarn"
and the other "jute"--a thousand of Mechlin to a hundred of the shiny.
They will sling over a mule's back. Brandy, schnapps, Schiedam, and
Hamburg Goldwasser are all set out in due order. The 'baccy is in the
flat cases over by the Black Drop there. A plaguey job we had carrying
it all out, but here it is ship-shape at last, and the lugger floats
like a skimming dish, with scarce ballast enough to stand up to a
five-knot breeze.'

'Any signs of the _Fairy Queen_?' asked the smuggler.

'None. Long John is down at the water's edge looking out for her
flash-light. This wind should bring her up if she has rounded
Combe-Martin Point. There was a sail about ten miles to the
east-nor'-east at sundown. She might have been a Bristol schooner, or
she might have been a King's fly-boat.'

'A King's crawl-boat,' said Captain Murgatroyd, with a sneer. 'We cannot
hang the gauger until Venables brings up the _Fairy Queen_, for after
all it was one of his hands that was snackled. Let him do his own dirty
work.'

'Tausend Blitzen!' cried the ruffian Dutchman, 'would it not be a kindly
grass to Captain Venables to chuck the gauger down the Black Drop ere he
come? He may have such another job to do for us some day.'

'Zounds, man, are you in command or am I?' said the leader angrily.
'Bring the prisoner forward to the fire! Now, hark ye, dog of a
land-shark; you are as surely a dead man as though you were laid out
with the tapers burning. See here'--he lifted a torch, and showed by
its red light a great crack in the floor across the far end of the
cave--'you can judge of the Black Drop's depth!' he said, raising an
empty keg and tossing it over into the yawning gulf. For ten seconds
we stood silent before a dull distant clatter told that it had at last
reached the bottom.

'It will carry him half-way to hell before the breath leaves him,' said
one.

'It's an easier death than the Devizes gallows!' cried a second.

'Nay, he shall have the gallows first!' a third shouted. 'It is but his
burial that we are arranging.'

'He hath not opened his mouth since we took him,' said the man who was
called Dicon. 'Is he a mute, then? Find your tongue, my fine fellow, and
let us hear what your name is. It would have been well for you if you
had been born dumb, so that you could not have sworn our comrade's life
away.'

'I have been waiting for a civil question after all this brawling and
brabbling,' said I. 'My name is Micah Clarke. Now, pray inform me who ye
may be, and by what warrant ye stop peaceful travellers upon the public
highway?'

'This is our warrant,' Murgatroyd answered, touching the hilt of his
cutlass. 'As to who we are, ye know that well enough. Your name is
not Clarke, but Westhouse, or Waterhouse, and you are the same cursed
exciseman who snackled our poor comrade, Cooper Dick, and swore away his
life at Ilchester.'

'I swear that you are mistaken,' I replied. 'I have never in my life
been in these parts before.'

'Fine words! Fine words!' cried another smuggler. 'Gauger or no, you
must jump for it, since you know the secret of our cave.'

'Your secret is safe with me,' I answered. 'But if ye wish to murder me,
I shall meet my fate as a soldier should. I should have chosen to die on
the field of battle, rather than to lie at the mercy of such a pack of
water-rats in their burrow.'

'My faith!' said Murgatroyd. 'This is too tall talk for a gauger. He
bears himself like a soldier, too. It is possible that in snaring the
owl we have caught the falcon. Yet we had certain token that he would
come this way, and on such another horse.'

'Call up Long John,' suggested the Dutchman. 'I vould not give a plug of
Trinidado for the Schelm's word. Long John was with Cooper Dick when he
was taken.'

'Aye,' growled the mate Silas. 'He got a wipe over the arm from the
gauger's whinyard. He'll know his face, if any will.'

'Call him, then,' said Murgatroyd, and presently a long, loose-limbed
seaman came up from the mouth of the cave, where he had been on watch.
He wore a red kerchief round his forehead, and a blue jerkin, the sleeve
of which he slowly rolled up as he came nigh.

'Where is Gauger Westhouse?' he cried; 'he has left his mark on my arm.
Rat me, if the scar is healed yet. The sun is on our side of the wall
now, gauger. But hullo, mates! Who be this that ye have clapped into
irons? This is not our man!'

'Not our man!' they cried, with a volley of curses.

'Why, this fellow would make two of the gauger, and leave enough over
to fashion a magistrate's clerk. Ye may hang him to make sure, but still
he's not the man.'

'Yes, hang him!' said Dutch Pete. 'Sapperment! is our cave to be the
talk of all the country? Vere is the pretty _Maria_ to go then, vid her
silks and her satins, her kegs and her cases'? Are we to risk our
cave for the sake of this fellow? Besides, has he not schlagged my
kopf--schlagged your cooper's kopf--as if he had hit me mit mine own
mallet? Is that not vorth a hemp cravat?'

'Worth a jorum of rumbo,' cried Dicon. 'By your leave, Captain, I would
say that we are not a gang of padders and michers, but a crew of honest
seamen, who harm none but those who harm us. Exciseman Westhouse hath
slain Cooper Dick, and it is just that he should die for it; but as to
taking this young soldier's life, I'd as soon think of scuttling the
saucy _Maria_, or of mounting the Jolly Roger at her peak.'

What answer would have been given to this speech I cannot tell, for
at that moment a shrill whistle resounded outside the cave, and two
smugglers appeared bearing between them the body of a man. It hung so
limp that I thought at first that he might be dead, but when they threw
him on the sand he moved, and at last sat up like one who is but half
awoken from a swoon. He was a square dogged-faced fellow, with a long
white scar down his cheek, and a close-fitting blue coat with brass
buttons.

'It's Gauger Westhouse!' cried a chorus of voices. 'Yes, it is Gauger
Westhouse,' said the man calmly, giving his neck a wriggle as though he
were in pain. 'I represent the King's law, and in its name I arrest ye
all, and declare all the contraband goods which I see around me to be
confiscate and forfeited, according to the second section of the first
clause of the statute upon illegal dealing. If there are any honest men
in this company, they will assist me in the execution of my duty.' He
staggered to his feet as he spoke, but his spirit was greater than his
strength, and he sank back upon the sand amid a roar of laughter from
the rough seamen.

'We found him lying on the road when we came from Daddy Mycroft's,' said
one of the new-comers, who were the same men who had led away my horse.
'He must have passed just after you left, and the rope caught him under
the chin and threw him a dozen paces. We saw the revenue button on his
coat, so we brought him down. Body o' me, but he kicked and plunged for
all that he was three-quarters stunned.'

'Have ye slacked the hawser?' the Captain asked.

'We cast one end loose and let it hang.'

''Tis well. We must keep him for Captain Venables. But now, as to our
other prisoner: we must overhaul him and examine his papers, for so many
craft are sailing under false colours that we must needs be careful.
Hark ye, Mister Soldier! What brings you to these parts, and what king
do you serve? for I hear there's a mutiny broke out, and two skippers
claim equal rating in the old British ship.'

'I am serving under King Monmouth,' I answered, seeing that the proposed
search must end in the finding of my papers.

'Under King Monmouth!' cried the smuggler. 'Nay, friend, that rings
somewhat false. The good King hath, I hear, too much need of his friends
in the south to let an able soldier go wandering along the sea coast
like a Cornish wrecker in a sou'-wester.'

'I bear despatches,' said I, 'from the King's own hand to Henry Duke
of Beaufort, at his castle at Badminton. Ye can find them in my inner
pocket, but I pray ye not to break the seal, lest it bring discredit
upon my mission.'

'Sir,' cried the gauger, raising himself upon his elbow, 'I do hereby
arrest you on the charge of being a traitor, a promoter of treason, a
vagrant, and a masterless man within the meaning of the fourth statute
of the Act. As an officer of the law I call upon you to submit to my
warrant.'

'Brace up his jaw with your scarf, Jim,' said Murgatroyd. 'When Venables
comes he will soon find a way to check his gab. Yes,' he continued,
looking at the back of my papers, 'it is marked, as you say, "From James
the Second of England, known lately as the Duke of Monmouth, to Henry
Duke of Beaufort, President of Wales, by the hand of Captain Micah
Clarke, of Saxon's regiment of Wiltshire foot." Cast off the lashings,
Dicon. So, Captain, you are a free man once more, and I grieve that we
should have unwittingly harmed you. We are good Lutherans to a man, and
would rather speed you than hinder you on this mission.'

'Could we not indeed help him on his way!' said the mate Silas. 'For
myself, I don't fear a wet jacket or a tarry hand for the cause, and
I doubt not ye are all of my way of thinking. Now with this breeze we
could run up to Bristol and drop the Captain by morning, which would
save him from being snapped up by any land-sharks on the road.'

'Aye, aye,' cried Long John. 'The King's horse are out beyond Weston,
but he could give them the slip if he had the _Maria_ under him.'

'Well,' said Murgatroyd, 'we could get back by three long tacks.
Venables will need a day or so to get his goods ashore. If we are to
sail back in company we shall have time on our hands. How would the plan
suit you, Captain?'

'My horse!' I objected.

'It need not stop us. I can rig up a handy horse-stall with my spare
spars and the grating. The wind has died down. The lugger could be
brought to Dead Man's Edge, and the horse led down to it. Run up to
Daddy's, Jim; and you, Silas, see to the boat. Here is some cold junk
and biscuit--seaman's fare, Captain--and a glass o' the real Jamaica to
wash it down an' thy stomach be not too dainty for rough living.'

I seated myself on a barrel by the fire, and stretched my limbs, which
were cramped and stiffened by their confinement, while one of the seamen
bathed the cut on my head with a wet kerchief, and another laid out some
food on a case in front of me. The rest of the gang had trooped away to
the mouth of the cave to prepare the lugger, save only two or three who
stood on guard round the ill-fated gauger. He lay with his back resting
against the wall of the cave, and his arms crossed over his breast,
glancing round from time to time at the smugglers with menacing eyes, as
a staunch old hound might gaze at a pack of wolves who had overmatched
him. I was turning it over in my own mind whether aught could be done to
help him, when Murgatroyd came over, and dipping a tin pannikin into the
open rum tub, drained it to the success of my mission.

'I shall send Silas Bolitho with you,' said he, 'while I bide here to
meet Venables, who commands my consort. If there is aught that I can do
to repay you for your ill usage--'

'There is but one thing, Captain,' I broke in eagerly. 'It is as much,
or more, for your own sake than mine that I ask it. Do not allow this
unhappy man to be murdered.'

Murgatroyd's face flushed with anger. 'You are a plain speaker, Captain
Clarke,' said he. 'This is no murder. It is justice. What harm do we
here? There is not an old housewife over the whole countryside who does
not bless us. Where is she to buy her souchong, or her strong waters,
except from us! We charge little, and force our goods on no one. We are
peaceful traders. Yet this man and his fellows are ever yelping at our
heels, like so many dogfish on a cod bank. We have been harried, and
chivied, and shot at until we are driven into such dens as this. A month
ago, four of our men were bearing a keg up the hillside to Farmer Black,
who hath dealt with us these five years back. Of a sudden, down came
half a score of horse, led by this gauger, hacked and slashed with their
broad-swords, cut Long John's arm open, and took Cooper Dick prisoner.
Dick was haled to Ilchester Gaol, and hung up after the assizes like
a stoat on a gamekeeper's door. This night we had news that this very
gauger was coming this way, little knowing that we should be on the
look-out for him. Is it a wonder that we should lay a trap for him, and
that, having caught him, we should give him the same justice as he gave
our comrades?'

'He is but a servant, I argued. 'He hath not made the law. It is his
duty to enforce it. It is with the law itself that your quarrel is.'

'You are right,' said the smuggler gloomily. 'It is with Judge Moorcroft
that we have our chief account to square. He may pass this road upon his
circuit. Heaven send he does! But we shall hang the gauger too. He knows
our cave now, and it would be madness to let him go.'

I saw that it was useless to argue longer, so I contented myself with
dropping my pocket-knife on the sand within reach of the prisoner, in
the hope that it might prove to be of some service to him. His guards
were laughing and joking together, and giving little heed to their
charge, but the gauger was keen enough, for I saw his hand close over
it.

I had walked and smoked for an hour or more, when Silas the mate
appeared, and said that the lugger was ready and the horse aboard.
Bidding Murgatroyd farewell, I ventured a few more words in favour of
the gauger, which were received with a frown and an angry shake of the
head. A boat was drawn up on the sand, inside the cave, at the water's
edge. Into this I stepped, as directed, with my sword and pistols, which
had been given back to me, while the crew pushed her off and sprang in
as she glided into deep water.

I could see by the dim light of the single torch which Murgatroyd held
upon the margin, that the roof of the cave sloped sheer down upon us as
we sculled slowly out towards the entrance. So low did it come at last
that there was only a space of a few feet between it and the water, and
we had to bend our heads to avoid the rocks above us. The boatmen gave
two strong strokes, and we shot out from under the overhanging ledge,
and found ourselves in the open with the stars shining murkily above
us, and the moon showing herself dimly and cloudily through a gathering
haze. Right in front of us was a dark blur, which, as we pulled towards
it, took the outline of a large lugger rising and falling with the pulse
of the sea. Her tall thin spars and delicate network of cordage towered
above us as we glided under the counter, while the creaking of blocks
and rattle of ropes showed that she was all ready to glide off upon her
journey. Lightly and daintily she rode upon the waters, like some giant
seafowl, spreading one white pinion after another in preparation for
her flight. The boatmen ran us alongside and steadied the dinghy while I
climbed over the bulwarks on to the deck.

She was a roomy vessel, very broad in the beam, with a graceful curve in
her bows, and masts which were taller than any that I had seen on such
a boat on the Solent. She was decked over in front, but very deep in the
after part, with ropes fixed all round the sides to secure kegs when the
hold should be full. In the midst of this after-deck the mariners had
built a strong stall, in which my good steed was standing, with a bucket
full of oats in front of him. My old friend shoved his nose against my
face as I came aboard, and neighed his pleasure at finding his master
once more. We were still exchanging caresses when the grizzled head of
Silas Bolitho the mate popped out of the cabin hatchway.

'We are fairly on our way now, Captain Clarke,' said he. 'The breeze
has fallen away to nothing, as you can see, and we may be some time in
running down to our port. Are you not aweary?'

'I am a little tired,' I confessed. 'My head is throbbing from the crack
I got when that hawser of yours dashed me from my saddle.'

'An hour or two of sleep will make you as fresh as a Mother Carey's
chicken,' said the smuggler. 'Your horse is well cared for, and you can
leave him without fear. I will set a man to tend him, though, truth to
say, the rogues know more about studding-sails and halliards than they
do of steeds and their requirements. Yet no harm can come to him, so you
had best come down and turn in.'

I descended the steep stairs which led down into the low-roofed cabin of
the lugger. On either side a recess in the wall had been fitted up as a
couch.

'This is your bed,' said he, pointing to one of them. 'We shall call
you if there be aught to report.' I needed no second invitation, but
flinging myself down without undressing, I sank in a few minutes into
a dreamless sleep, which neither the gentle motion of the boat nor the
clank of feet above my head could break off.



Chapter XXIV. Of the Welcome that met me at Badminton

When I opened my eyes I had some ado to recall where I was, but on
sitting up it was brought home to me by my head striking the low ceiling
with a sharp rap. On the other side of the cabin Silas Bolitho was
stretched at full length with a red woollen nightcap upon his head, fast
asleep and snoring. In the centre of the cabin hung a swing-table,
much worn, and stained all over with the marks of countless glasses
and pannikins. A wooden bench, screwed to the floor, completed the
furniture, with the exception of a stand of muskets along one side.
Above and below the berths in which we lay were rows of lockers, in
which, doubtless, some of the more choice laces and silks were stowed.
The vessel was rising and falling with a gentle motion, but from the
flapping of canvas I judged that there was little wind. Slipping quietly
from my couch, so as not to wake the mate, I stole upon deck.

We were, I found, not only becalmed, but hemmed in by a dense fog-bank
which rolled in thick, choking wreaths all round us, and hid the very
water beneath us. We might have been a ship of the air riding upon
a white cloud-bank. Now and anon a little puff of breeze caught the
foresail and bellied it out for a moment, only to let it flap back
against the mast, limp and slack, once more. A sunbeam would at times
break through the dense cloud, and would spangle the dead grey wall with
a streak of rainbow colour, but the haze would gather in again and shut
off the bright invader. Covenant was staring right and left with great
questioning eyes. The crew were gathered along the bulwarks and smoking
their pipes while they peered out into the dense fog.

'God den, Captain,' said Dicon, touching his fur cap. 'We have had a
rare run while the breeze lasted, and the mate reckoned before he turned
in that we were not many miles from Bristol town.'

'In that case, my good fellow,' I answered, 'ye can set me ashore, for I
have not far to go.'

'We must e'en wait till the fog lifts,' said Long John. 'There's only
one place along here, d'ye see, where we can land cargoes unquestioned.
When it clears we shall turn her head for it, but until we can take our
bearings it is anxious work wi' the sands under our lee.'

'Keep a look-out there, Tom Baldock!' cried Dicon to a man in the bows.
'We are in the track of every Bristol ship, and though there's so little
wind, a high-sparred craft might catch a breeze which we miss.'

'Sh!' said Long John suddenly, holding up his hand in warning. 'Sh!'

We listened with all our ears, but there was no sound, save the gentle
wash of the unseen waves against our sides.

'Call the mate!' whispered the seaman. 'There's a craft close by us. I
heard the rattle of a rope upon her deck.'

Silas Bolitho was up in an instant, and we all stood straining our ears,
and peering through the dense fog-bank. We had well-nigh made up our
minds that it was a false alarm, and the mate was turning back in no
very good humour, when a clear loud bell sounded seven times quite
close to us, followed by a shrill whistle and a confused shouting and
stamping.

'It's a King's ship,' growled the mate. 'That's seven bells, and the
bo'sun is turning out the watch below.'

'It was on our quarter,' whispered one.

'Nay, I think it was on our larboard bow,' said another.

The mate held up his hand, and we all listened for some fresh sign
of the whereabouts of our scurvy neighbour. The wind had freshened a
little, and we were slipping through the water at four or five knots
an hour. Of a sudden a hoarse voice was heard roaring at our very side.
''Bout ship!' it shouted. 'Bear a hand on the lee-braces, there! Stand
by the halliards! Bear a hand, ye lazy rogues, or I'll be among ye with
my cane, with a wannion to ye!'

'It is a King's ship, sure enough, and she lies just there,' said Long
John, pointing out over the quarter. 'Merchant adventurers have
civil tongues. It's your blue-coated, gold-braided, swivel-eyed,
quarter-deckers that talk of canes. Ha! did I not tell ye!'

As he spoke, the white screen of vapour rolled up like the curtain in
a playhouse, and uncovered a stately war-ship, lying so close that we
could have thrown a biscuit aboard. Her long, lean, black hull rose
and fell with a slow, graceful rhythm, while her beautiful spars and
snow-white sails shot aloft until they were lost in the wreaths of fog
which still hung around her. Nine bright brass cannons peeped out at us
from her portholes. Above the line of hammocks, which hung like carded
wool along her bulwarks, we could see the heads of the seamen staring
down at us, and pointing us out to each other. On the high poop stood an
elderly officer with cocked hat and trim white wig, who at once whipped
up his glass and gazed at us through it.

'Ahoy, there!' he shouted, leaning over the taffrail. 'What lugger is
that?'

'The _Lucy_,' answered the mate, 'bound from Porlock Quay to Bristol
with hides and tallow. Stand ready to tack!' he added in a lower voice,
'the fog is coming down again.'

'Ye have one of the hides with the horse still in it,' cried the
officer. 'Run down under our counter. We must have a closer look at ye.'

'Aye, aye, sir!' said the mate, and putting his helm hard down the boom
swung across, and the _Maria_ darted off like a scared seabird into the
fog. Looking back there was nothing but a dim loom to show where we had
left the great vessel. We could hear, however, the hoarse shouting of
orders and the bustle of men.

'Look out for squalls, lads!' cried the mate. 'He'll let us have it
now.'

He had scarcely spoken before there were half-a-dozen throbs of flame in
the mist behind, and as many balls sung among our rigging. One cut away
the end of the yard, and left it dangling; another grazed the bowsprit,
and sent a puff of white splinters into the air.

'Warm work, Captain, eh?' said old Silas, rubbing his hands. 'Zounds,
they shoot better in the dark than ever they did in the light. There
have been more shots fired at this lugger than she could carry wore she
loaded with them. And yet they never so much as knocked the paint off
her before. There they go again!'

A fresh discharge burst from the man-of-war, but this time they had lost
all trace of us, and were firing by guess.

'That is their last bark, sir,' said Dicon.

'No fear. They'll blaze away for the rest of the day,' growled another
of the smugglers. 'Why, Lor' bless ye, it's good exercise for the crew,
and the 'munition is the King's, so it don't cost nobody a groat.'

'It's well the breeze freshened,' said Long John. 'I heard the creak o'
davits just after the first discharge. She was lowering her boats, or
I'm a Dutchman.'

'The petter for you if you vas, you seven-foot stock-fish,' cried my
enemy the cooper, whose aspect was not improved by a great strip of
plaster over his eye. 'You might have learned something petter than to
pull on a rope, or to swab decks like a vrouw all your life.'

'I'll set you adrift in one of your own barrels, you skin of lard,' said
the seaman. 'How often are we to trounce you before we knock the sauce
out of you?'

'The fog lifts a little towards the land,' Silas remarked. 'Methinks I
see the loom of St. Austin's Point. It rises there upon the starboard
bow.'

'There it is, sure enough, sir!' cried one of the seamen, pointing to a
dark cape which cut into the mist.

'Steer for the three-fathom creek then,' said the mate. 'When we are on
the other side of the point, Captain Clarke, we shall be able to land
your horse and yourself. You will then be within a few hours' ride of
your destination.'

I led the old seaman aside, and having thanked him for the kindness
which he had shown me, I spoke to him of the gauger, and implored him to
use his influence to save the man.

'It rests with Captain Venables,' said he gloomily. 'If we let him go
what becomes of our cave?'

'Is there no way of insuring his silence?' I asked. 'Well, we might ship
him to the Plantations,' said the mate. 'We could take him to the Texel
with us, and get Captain Donders or some other to give him a lift across
the western ocean.'

'Do so,' said I, 'and I shall take care that King Monmouth shall hear of
the help which ye have given his messenger.'

'Well, we shall be there in a brace of shakes,' he remarked. 'Let us go
below and load your ground tier, for there is nothing like starting well
trimmed with plenty of ballast in the hold.'

Following the sailor's advice I went down with him and enjoyed a rude
but plentiful meal. By the time that we had finished, the lugger had
been run into a narrow creek, with shelving sandy banks on either side.
The district was wild and marshy, with few signs of any inhabitants.
With much coaxing and pushing Covenant was induced to take to the water,
and swam easily ashore, while I followed in the smuggler's dinghy. A
few words of rough, kindly leave-taking were shouted after me; I saw the
dinghy return, and the beautiful craft glided out to sea and faded away
once more into the mists which still hung over the face of the waters.

Truly Providence works in strange ways, my children, and until a
man comes to the autumn of his days he can scarce say what hath been
ill-luck and what hath been good. For of all the seeming misfortunes
which have befallen me during my wandering life, there is not one which
I have not come to look upon as a blessing. And if you once take this
into your hearts, it is a mighty help in enabling you to meet all
troubles with a stiff lip; for why should a man grieve when he hath not
yet determined whether what hath chanced may not prove to be a cause of
rejoicing. Now here ye will perceive that I began by being dashed upon
a stony road, beaten, kicked, and finally well-nigh put to death in
mistake for another. Yet it ended in my being safely carried to my
journey's end, whereas, had I gone by land, it is more than likely that
I should have been cut off at Weston; for, as I heard afterwards, a
troop of horse were making themselves very active in those parts by
blocking the roads and seizing all who came that way.

Being now alone, my first care was to bathe my face and hands in a
stream which ran down to the sea, and to wipe away any trace of my
adventures of the night before. My cut was but a small one, and was
concealed by my hair. Having reduced myself to some sort of order I next
rubbed down my horse as best I could, and rearranged his girth and his
saddle. I then led him by the bridle to the top of a sandhill hard by,
whence I might gain some idea as to my position.

The fog lay thick upon the Channel, but all inland was very clear and
bright. Along the coast the country was dreary and marshy, but at the
other side a goodly extent of fertile plain lay before me, well tilled
and cared for. A range of lofty hills, which I guessed to be the
Mendips, bordered the whole skyline, and further north there lay a
second chain in the blue distance. The glittering Avon wound its way
over the country-side like a silver snake in a flower-bed. Close to its
mouth, and not more than two leagues from where I stood, rose the spires
and towers of stately Bristol, the Queen of the West, which was and
still may be the second city in the kingdom. The forests of masts which
shot up like a pinegrove above the roofs of the houses bore witness to
the great trade both with Ireland and with the Plantations which had
built up so flourishing a city.

As I knew that the Duke's seat was miles on the Gloucestershire side of
the city, and as I feared lest I might be arrested and examined should I
attempt to pass the gates, I struck inland with intent to ride round the
walls and so avoid the peril. The path which I followed led me into a
country lane, which in turn opened into a broad highway crowded with
travellers, both on horseback and on foot. As the troublous times
required that a man should journey with his arms, there was naught in
my outfit to excite remark, and I was able to jog on among the other
horsemen without question or suspicion. From their appearance they were,
I judged, country farmers or squires for the most part, who were riding
into Bristol to hear the news, and to store away their things of price
in a place of safety.

'By your leave, zur!' said a burly, heavy-faced man in a velveteen
jacket, riding up upon my bridle-arm. 'Can you tell me whether his Grace
of Beaufort is in Bristol or at his house o' Badminton?'

I answered that I could not tell, but that I was myself bound for his
presence.

'He was in Bristol yestreen a-drilling o' the train-bands,' said the
stranger; 'but, indeed, his Grace be that loyal, and works that hard for
his Majesty's cause, that he's a' ower the county, and it is but chance
work for to try and to catch him. But if you are about to zeek him,
whither shall you go?'

'I will to Badminton,' I answered, 'and await him there. Can you tell me
the way?'

'What! Not know the way to Badminton!' he cried, with a blank stare of
wonder. 'Whoy, I thought all the warld knew that. You're not fra Wales
or the border counties, zur, that be very clear.'

'I am a Hampshire man,' said I. 'I have come some distance to see the
Duke.'

'Aye, so I should think!' he cried, laughing loudly. 'If you doan't know
the way to Badminton you doan't know much! But I'll go with you, danged
if I doan't, and I'll show you your road, and run my chance o' finding
the Duke there. What be your name?'

'Micah Clarke is my name.'

'And Vairmer Brown is mine--John Brown by the register, but better
knowed as the Vairmer. Tak' this turn to the right off the high-road.
Now we can trot our beasts and not be smothered in other folk's dust.
And what be you going to Beaufort for?'

'On private matters which will not brook discussion,' I answered.

'Lor', now! Affairs o' State belike,' said he, with a whistle. 'Well, a
still tongue saves many a neck. I'm a cautious man myself, and these be
times when I wouldna whisper some o' my thoughts--no, not into the ears
o' my old brown mare here--for fear I'd see her some day standing over
against me in the witness-box.'

'They seem very busy over there,' I remarked, for we were now in full
sight of the walls of Bristol, where gangs of men were working hard with
pick and shovel improving the defences.

'Aye, they be busy sure enough, makin' ready in case the rebels come
this road. Cromwell and his tawnies found it a rasper in my vather's
time, and Monmouth is like to do the same.'

'It hath a strong garrison, too,' said I, bethinking me of Saxon's
advice at Salisbury. 'I see two or three regiments out yonder on the
bare open space.'

'They have four thousand foot and a thousand horse,' the farmer
answered. 'But the foot are only train-bands, and there's no trusting
them after Axminster. They say up here that the rebels run to nigh
twenty thousand, and that they give no quarter. Well, if we must have
civil war, I hope it may be hot and sudden, not spun out for a dozen
years like the last one. If our throats are to be cut, let it be with a
shairp knife, and not with a blunt hedge shears.'

'What say you to a stoup of cider?' I asked, for we were passing an
ivy-clad inn, with 'The Beaufort Arms' printed upon the sign.

'With all my heart, lad,' my companion answered. 'Ho, there! two pints
of the old hard-brewed! That will serve to wash the dust down. The real
Beaufort Arms is up yonder at Badminton, for at the buttery hatch one
may call for what one will in reason and never put hand to pocket.'

'You speak of the house as though you knew it well,' said I.

'And who should know it better?' asked the sturdy farmer, wiping his
lips, as we resumed our journey. 'Why, it seems but yesterday that I
played hide-and-seek wi' my brothers in the old Boteler Castle, that
stood where the new house o' Badminton, or Acton Turville, as some calls
it, now stands. The Duke hath built it but a few years, and, indeed, his
Dukedom itself is scarce older. There are some who think that he would
have done better to stick by the old name that his forebears bore.'

'What manner of man is the Duke?' I asked.

'Hot and hasty, like all of his blood. Yet when he hath time to think,
and hath cooled down, he is just in the main. Your horse hath been in
the water this morning, vriend.'

'Yes,' said I shortly, 'he hath had a bath.'

'I am going to his Grace on the business of a horse,' quoth my
companion. 'His officers have pressed my piebald four-year-old, and
taken it without a "With your leave," or "By your leave," for the use of
the King. I would have them know that there is something higher than
the Duke, or even than the King. There is the English law, which will
preserve a man's goods and his chattels. I would do aught in reason for
King James's service, but my piebald four-year-old is too much.'

'I fear that the needs of the public service will override your
objection,' said I.

'Why it is enough to make a man a Whig,' he cried. 'Even the Roundheads
always paid their vair penny for every pennyworth they had, though they
wanted a vair pennyworth for each penny. I have heard my father say that
trade was never so brisk as in 'forty-six, when they were down this way.
Old Noll had a noose of hemp ready for horse-stealers, were they for
King or for Parliament. But here comes his Grace's carriage, if I
mistake not.'

As he spoke a great heavy yellow coach, drawn by six cream-coloured
Flemish mares, dashed down the road, and came swiftly towards us. Two
mounted lackeys galloped in front, and two others all in light blue and
silver liveries rode on either side.

'His Grace is not within, else there had been an escort behind,' said
the farmer, as we reined our horses aside to let the carriage pass. As
they swept by he shouted out a question as to whether the Duke was at
Badminton, and received a nod from the stately bewigged coachman in
reply.

'We are in luck to catch him,' said Farmer Brown. 'He's as hard to find
these days as a crake in a wheatfield. We should be there in an hour
or less. I must thank you that I did not take a fruitless journey into
Bristol. What did you say your errand was?'

I was again compelled to assure him that the matter was not one of which
I could speak with a stranger, on which he appeared to be huffed, and
rode for some miles without opening his mouth. Groves of trees lined the
road on either side, and the sweet smell of pines was in our nostrils.
Far away the musical pealing of a bell rose and fell on the hot, close
summer air. The shelter of the branches was pleasant, for the sun was
very strong, blazing down out of a cloudless heaven, and raising a haze
from the fields and valleys.

''Tis the bell from Chipping Sodbury,' said my companion at last, wiping
his ruddy face. 'That's Sodbury Church yonder over the brow of the hill,
and here on the right is the entrance of Badminton Park.'

High iron gates, with the leopard and griffin, which are the supporters
of the Beaufort arms, fixed on the pillars which flanked them, opened
into a beautiful domain of lawn and grass land with clumps of trees
scattered over it, and broad sheets of water, thick with wild fowl. At
every turn as we rode up the winding avenue some new beauty caught our
eyes, all of which were pointed out and expounded by Farmer Brown, who
seemed to take as much pride in the place as though it belonged to him.
Here it was a rockery where a thousand bright-coloured stones shone out
through the ferns and creepers which had been trained over them. There
it was a pretty prattling brook, the channel of which had been turned so
as to make it come foaming down over a steep ledge of rocks. Or perhaps
it was some statue of nymph or sylvan god, or some artfully built
arbour overgrown with roses or honeysuckle. I have never seen grounds
so tastefully laid out, and it was done, as all good work in art must
be done, by following Nature so closely that it only differed from her
handiwork in its profusion in so narrow a compass. A few years later our
healthy English taste was spoiled by the pedant gardening of the Dutch
with their straight flat ponds, and their trees all clipped and in a
line like vegetable grenadiers. In truth, I think that the Prince of
Orange and Sir William Temple had much to answer for in working this
change, but things have now come round again, I understand, and we have
ceased to be wiser than Nature in our pleasure-grounds.

As we drew near the house we came on a large extent of level sward on
which a troop of horse were exercising, who were raised, as my companion
informed me, entirely from the Duke's own personal attendants. Passing
them we rode through a grove of rare trees and came out on a broad space
of gravel which lay in front of the house. The building itself was of
great extent, built after the new Italian fashion, rather for comfort
than for defence; but on one wing there remained, as my companion
pointed out, a portion of the old keep and battlements of the feudal
castle of the Botelers, looking as out of place as a farthingale of
Queen Elizabeth joined to a court dress fresh from Paris. The main
doorway was led up to by lines of columns and a broad flight of marble
steps, on which stood a group of footmen and grooms, who took our horses
when we dismounted. A grey-haired steward or major-domo inquired our
business, and on learning that we wished to see the Duke in person, he
told us that his Grace would give audience to strangers in the afternoon
at half after three by the clock. In the meantime he said that the
guests' dinner had just been laid in the hall, and it was his master's
wish that none who came to Badminton should depart hungry. My companion
and I were but too glad to accept the steward's invitation, so having
visited the bath-room and attended to the needs of the toilet, we
followed a footman, who ushered us into a great room where the company
had already assembled.

The guests may have numbered fifty or sixty, old and young, gentle and
simple, of the most varied types and appearance. I observed that many
of them cast haughty and inquiring glances round them, in the pauses
between the dishes, as though each marvelled how he came to be a member
of so motley a crew. Their only common feature appeared to be the
devotion which they showed to the platter and the wine flagon. There was
little talking, for there were few who knew their neighbours. Some were
soldiers who had come to offer their swords and their services to
the King's lieutenant; others were merchants from Bristol, with some
proposal or suggestion anent the safety of their property. There
were two or three officials of the city, who had come out to receive
instructions as to its defence, while here and there I marked the child
of Israel, who had found his way there in the hope that in times of
trouble he might find high interest and noble borrowers. Horse-dealers,
saddlers, armourers, surgeons, and clergymen completed the company,
who were waited upon by a staff of powdered and liveried servants, who
brought and removed the dishes with the silence and deftness of long
training.

The room was a contrast to the bare plainness of Sir Stephen Timewell's
dining-hall at Taunton, for it was richly panelled and highly decorated
all round. The floor was formed of black and white marble, set in
squares, and the walls were of polished oak, and bore a long line of
paintings of the Somerset family, from John of Gaunt downwards. The
ceiling, too, was tastefully painted with flowers and nymphs, so that a
man's neck was stiff ere he had done admiring it. At the further end of
the hall yawned a great fireplace of white marble, with the lions and
lilies of the Somerset arms carved in oak above it, and a long gilt
scroll bearing the family motto, "Mutare vel timere sperno." The massive
tables at which we sat were loaded with silver chargers and candelabra,
and bright with the rich plate for which Badminton was famous. I could
not but think that, if Saxon could clap eyes upon it, he would not be
long in urging that the war be carried on in this direction.

After dinner we were all shown into a small ante-chamber, set round with
velvet settees, where we were to wait till the Duke was ready to see us.
In the centre of this room there stood several cases, glass-topped and
lined with silk, wherein were little steel and iron rods, with brass
tubes and divers other things, very bright and ingenious, though I
could not devise for what end they had been put together. A
gentleman-in-waiting came round with paper and ink-horn, making notes
of our names and of our business. Him I asked whether it might not be
possible for me to have an entirely private audience.

'His Grace never sees in private,' he replied. 'He has ever his chosen
councillors and officers in attendance.'

'But the business is one which is only fit for his own ear,' I urged.

'His Grace holds that there is no business fit only for his own ear,'
said the gentleman. 'You must arrange matters as best you can when
you are shown in to him. I will promise, however, that your request be
carried to him, though I warn you that it cannot be granted.'

I thanked him for his good offices, and turned away with the farmer to
look at the strange little engines within the cases.

'What is it?' I asked. 'I have never seen aught that was like it.'

'It is the work of the mad Marquis of Worcester,' quoth he. 'He was the
Duke's grandfather. He was ever making and devising such toys, but they
were never of any service to himself or to others. Now, look ye here!
This wi' the wheels were called the water-engine, and it was his crazy
thought that, by heating the water in that ere kettle, ye might make the
wheels go round, and thereby travel along iron bars quicker nor a
horse could run. 'Oons! I'd match my old brown mare against all such
contrivances to the end o' time. But to our places, for the Duke is
coming.'

We had scarce taken our seats with the other suitors, when the
folding-doors were flung open, and a stout, thick, short man of fifty,
or thereabouts, came bustling into the room, and strode down it between
two lines of bowing clients. He had large projecting blue eyes, with
great pouches of skin beneath them, and a yellow, sallow visage. At his
heels walked a dozen officers and men of rank, with flowing wigs and
clanking swords. They had hardly passed through the opposite door into
the Duke's own room, when the gentleman with the list called out a name,
and the guests began one after the other to file into the great man's
presence.

'Methinks his Grace is in no very gentle temper,' quoth Farmer Brown.
'Did you not mark how he gnawed his nether lip as he passed?'

'He seemed a quiet gentleman enough,' I answered. 'It would try Job
himself to see all these folk of an afternoon.'

'Hark at that!' he whispered, raising his finger. As he spoke the
sound of the Duke's voice in a storm of wrath was heard from the inner
chamber, and a little sharp-faced man came out and flew through the
ante-chamber as though fright had turned his head.

'He is an armourer of Bristol,' whispered one of my neighbours. 'It is
likely that the Duke cannot come to terms with him over a contract.'

'Nay,' said another. 'He supplied Sir Marmaduke Hyson's troop with
sabres, and it is said that the blades will bend as though they were
lead. Once used they can never be fitted back into the scabbard again.'

'The tall man who goes in now is an inventor,' quoth the first. 'He hath
the secret of some very grievous fire, such as hath been used by the
Greeks against the Turks in the Levant, which he desires to sell for the
better fortifying of Bristol.'

The Greek fire seemed to be in no great request with the Duke, for the
inventor came out presently with his face as red as though it had been
touched by his own compound. The next upon the list was my honest friend
the farmer. The angry tones which greeted him promised badly for the
fate of the four-year-old, but a lull ensued, and the farmer came out
and resumed his seat, rubbing his great red hands with satisfaction.

'Ecod!' he whispered. 'He was plaguy hot at first, but he soon came
round, and he hath promised that if I pay for the hire of a dragooner as
long as the war shall last I shall have back the piebald.'

I had been sitting all this time wondering how in the world I was
to conduct my business amid the swarm of suppliants and the crowd of
officers who were attending the Duke. Had there been any likelihood
of my gaining audience with him in any other way I should gladly have
adopted it, but all my endeavours to that end had been useless. Unless I
took this occasion I might never come face to face with him at all.
But how could he give due thought or discussion to such a matter
before others? What chance was there of his weighing it as it should be
weighed? Even if his feelings inclined him that way, he dared not show
any sign of wavering when so many eyes were upon him. I was tempted to
feign some other reason for my coming, and trust to fortune to give me
some more favourable chance for handing him my papers. But then that
chance might never arrive, and time was pressing. It was said that he
would return to Bristol next morning. On the whole, it seemed best that
I should make the fittest use I could of my present position in the hope
that the Duke's own discretion and self-command might, when he saw the
address upon my despatches, lead to a more private interview.

I had just come to this resolution when my name was read out, on which I
rose and advanced into the inner chamber. It was a small but lofty room,
hung in blue silk with a broad gold cornice. In the centre was a square
table littered over with piles of papers, and behind this sat his Grace
with full-bottomed wig rolling down to his shoulders, very stately and
imposing. He had the same subtle air of the court which I had observed
both in Monmouth and in Sir Gervas, which, with his high bold features
and large piercing eyes, marked him as a leader of men. His private
scrivener sat beside him, taking notes of his directions, while the
others stood behind in a half circle, or took snuff together in the deep
recess of the window.

'Make a note of Smithson's order,' he said, as I entered. 'A hundred
pots and as many fronts and backs to be ready by Tuesday; also six score
snaphances for the musqueteers, and two hundred extra spades for the
workers. Mark that the order be declared null and void unless fulfilled
within the time appointed.'

'It is so marked, your Grace.'

'Captain Micah Clarke,' said the Duke, reading from the list in front of
him. 'What is your wish, Captain?'

'One which it would be better if I could deliver privately to your
Grace,' I answered.

'Ah, you are he who desired private audience? Well, Captain, these are
my council and they are as myself. So we may look upon ourselves as
alone. What I may hear they may hear. Zounds, man, never stammer and
boggle, but out with it!'

My request had roused the interest of the company, and those who were in
the window came over to the table. Nothing could have been worse for the
success of my mission, and yet there was no help for it but to deliver
my despatches. I can say with a clear conscience, without any vainglory,
that I had no fears for myself. The doing of my duty was the one thought
in my mind. And here I may say once for all, my dear children, that I am
speaking of myself all through this statement with the same freedom
as though it were another man. In very truth the strong active lad of
one-and-twenty _was_ another man from the grey-headed old fellow who
sits in the chimney corner and can do naught better than tell old tales
to the youngsters. Shallow water gives a great splash, and so a braggart
has ever been contemptible in my eyes. I trust, therefore, that ye will
never think that your grandad is singing his own praises, or setting
himself up as better than his neighbours. I do but lay the facts, as far
as I can recall them, before ye with all freedom and with all truth.

My short delay and hesitation had sent a hot flush of anger into the
Duke's face, so I drew the packet of papers from my inner pocket and
handed them to him with a respectful bow. As his eyes fell upon the
superscription, he gave a sudden start of surprise and agitation, making
a motion as though to hide them in his bosom. If this were his impulse
he overcame it, and sat lost in thought for a minute or more with the
papers in his hand. Then with a quick toss of the head, like a man who
hath formed his resolution, he broke the seals and cast his eyes over
the contents, which he then threw down upon the table with a bitter
laugh.

'What think ye, gentlemen!' he cried, looking round with scornful eyes;
'what think ye this private message hath proved to be? It is a letter
from the traitor Monmouth, calling upon me to resign the allegiance of
my natural sovereign and to draw my sword in his behalf! If I do this
I am to have his gracious favour and protection. If not, I incur
sequestration, banishment, and ruin. He thinks Beaufort's loyalty is
to be bought like a packman's ware, or bullied out of him by ruffling
words. The descendant of John of Gaunt is to render fealty to the brat
of a wandering playwoman!'

Several of the company sprang to their feet, and a general buzz of
surprise and anger greeted the Duke's words. He sat with bent brows,
beating his foot against the ground, and turning over the papers upon
the table.

'What hath raised his hopes to such mad heights?' he cried. 'How doth
he presume to send such a missive to one of my quality? Is it because he
hath seen the backs of a parcel of rascally militiamen, and because
he hath drawn a few hundred chawbacons from the plough's tail to his
standard, that he ventures to hold such language to the President of
Wales? But ye will be my witnesses as to the spirit in which I received
it?'

'We can preserve your Grace from all danger of slander on that point,'
said an elderly officer, while a murmur of assent from the others
greeted the remark.

'And you!' cried Beaufort, raising his voice and turning his flashing
eyes upon me; 'who are you that dare to bring such a message to
Badminton? You had surely taken leave of your senses ere you did set out
upon such an errand!'

'I am in the hands of God here as elsewhere,' I answered, with some
flash of my father's fatalism. 'I have done what I promised to do, and
the rest is no concern of mine.'

'You shall find it a very close concern of thine,' he shouted, springing
from his chair and pacing up and down the room; 'so close as to put an
end to all thy other concerns in this life. Call in the halberdiers from
the outer hall! Now, fellow, what have you to say for yourself?'

'There is naught to be said,' I answered.

'But something to be done,' he retorted in a fury. 'Seize this man and
secure his hands!'

Four halberdiers who had answered the summons closed in upon me and laid
hands on me. Resistance would have been folly, for I had no wish to harm
the men in the doing of their duty. I had come to take my chance, and
if that chance should prove to be death, as seemed likely enough at
present, it must be met as a thing foreseen. I thought of those old-time
lines which Master Chillingfoot, of Petersfield, had ever held up to our
admiration--

          Non civium ardor prava jubentium
          Non vultus instantis tyranni
          Mente quatit solida.

Here was the 'vultus instantis tyranni,' in this stout, be-wigged,
lace-covered, yellow-faced man in front of me. I had obeyed the poet in
so far that my courage had not been shaken. I confess that this spinning
dust-heap of a world has never had such attractions for me that it would
be a pang to leave it. Never, at least, until my marriage--and that, you
will find, alters your thoughts about the value of your life, and many
other of your thoughts as well. This being so, I stood erect, with my
eyes fixed upon the angry nobleman, while his soldiers were putting the
gyves about my wrists.



Chapter XXV. Of Strange Doings in the Boteler Dungeon

'Take down this fellow's statement,' said the Duke to his scrivener.
'Now, sirrah, it may not be known to you that his gracious Majesty the
King hath conferred plenary powers upon me during these troubled times,
and that I have his warrant to deal with all traitors without either
jury or judge. You do bear a commission, I understand, in the rebellious
body which is here described as Saxon's regiment of Wiltshire Foot?
Speak the truth for your neck's sake.'

'I will speak the truth for the sake of something higher than that, your
Grace,' I answered. 'I command a company in that regiment.'

'And who is this Saxon?'

'I will answer all that I may concerning myself,' said I, 'but not a
word which may reflect upon others.'

'Ha!' he roared, hot with anger. 'Our pretty gentleman must needs stand
upon the niceties of honour after taking up arms against his King. I
tell you, sir, that your honour is in such a parlous state already that
you may well throw it over and look to your safety. The sun is sinking
in the west. Ere it set your life, too, may have set for ever.'

'I am the keeper of my own honour, your Grace,' I answered. 'As to my
life, I should not be standing here this moment if I had any great dread
of losing it. It is right that I should tell you that my Colonel hath
sworn to exact a return for any evil that may befall me, on you or any
of your household who may come into his power. This I say, not as a
threat, but as a warning, for I know him to be a man who is like to be
as good as his word.'

'Your Colonel, as you call him, may find it hard enough to save himself
soon,' the Duke answered with a sneer. 'How many men hath Monmouth with
him?'

I smiled and shook my head.

'How shall we make this traitor find his tongue?' he asked furiously,
turning to his council.

'I should clap on the thumbikins,' said one fierce-faced old soldier.

'I have known a lighted match between the fingers work wonders,' another
suggested. 'Sir Thomas Dalzell hath in the Scottish war been able to
win over several of that most stubborn and hardened race, the Western
Covenanters, by such persuasion.'

'Sir Thomas Dalzell,' said a grey-haired gentleman, clad in black
velvet, 'hath studied the art of war among the Muscovites, in their
barbarous and bloody encounters with the Turks. God forbid that we
Christians of England should seek our examples among the skin-clad
idolaters of a savage country.'

'Sir William would like to see war carried out on truly courteous
principles,' said the first speaker. 'A battle should be like a stately
minuet, with no loss of dignity or of etiquette.'

'Sir,' the other answered hotly, 'I have been in battles when you were
in your baby-linen, and I handled a battoon when you could scarce shake
a rattle. In leaguer or onfall a soldier's work is sharp and stern, but
I say that the use of torture, which the law of England hath abolished,
should also be laid aside by the law of nations.'

'Enough, gentlemen, enough!' cried the Duke, seeing that the dispute was
like to wax warm. 'Your opinion, Sir William, hath much weight with us,
and yours also, Colonel Hearn. We shall discuss this at greater length
in privacy. Halberdiers, remove the prisoner, and let a clergyman be
sent to look to his spiritual needs!'

'Shall we take him to the strong room, your Grace?' asked the Captain of
the guard.

'No, to the old Boteler dungeon,' he replied; and I heard the next name
upon the list called out, while I was led through a side door with a
guard in front and behind me. We passed through endless passages and
corridors, with heavy stop and clank of arms, until we reached the
ancient wing. Here, in the corner turret, was a small, bare room, mouldy
and damp, with a high, arched roof, and a single long slit in the outer
wall to admit light. A small wooden couch and a rude chair formed
the whole of the furniture. Into this I was shown by the Captain, who
stationed a guard at the door, and then came in after me and loosened
my wrists. He was a sad-faced man, with solemn sunken eyes and a
dreary expression, which matched ill with his bright trappings and gay
sword-knot.

'Keep your heart up, friend,' said he, in a hollow voice. 'It is but a
choke and a struggle. A day or two since we had the same job to do, and
the man scarcely groaned. Old Spender, the Duke's marshal, hath as sure
a trick of tying and as good judgment in arranging a drop as hath Dun
of Tyburn. Be of good heart, therefore, for you shall not fall into the
hands of a bungler.'

'I would that I could let Monmouth know that his letters were
delivered,' I exclaimed, seating myself on the side of the bed.

'I' faith, they were delivered. Had you been the penny postman of Mr.
Robert Murray, of whom we heard so much in London last spring, you could
not have handed it in more directly. Why did you not talk the Duke fair?
He is a gracious nobleman, and kind of heart, save when he is thwarted
or angered. Some little talk as to the rebels' numbers and dispositions
might have saved you.'

'I wonder that you, as a soldier, should speak or think of such a
thing,' said I coldly.

'Well, well! Your neck is your own. If it please you to take a leap into
nothing it were pity to thwart you. But his Grace commanded that you
should have the chaplain. I must away to him.'

'I prythee do not bring him,' said I. 'I am one of a dissenting stock,
and I see that there is a Bible in yonder recess. No man can aid me in
making my peace with God.'

'It is well,' he answered, 'for Dean Hewby hath come over from
Chippenham, and he is discoursing with our good chaplain on the need of
self-denial, moistening his throat the while with a flask of the prime
Tokay. At dinner I heard him put up thanks for what he was to receive,
and in the same breath ask the butler how he dared to serve a deacon
of the Church with a pullet without truffle dressing. But, perhaps, you
would desire Dean Hewby's spiritual help? No? Well, what I can do for
you in reason shall be done, since you will not be long upon our hands.
Above all, keep a cheery heart.'

He left the cell, but presently unlocked the door and pushed his dismal
face round the corner. 'I am Captain Sinclair, of the Duke's household,'
he said, 'should you have occasion to ask for me. You had best have
spiritual help, for I do assure you that there hath been something worse
than either warder or prisoner in this cell.'

'What then?' I asked.

'Why, marry, nothing less than the Devil,' he answered, coming in and
closing the door. 'It was in this way,' he went on, sinking his voice:
'Two years agone Hector Marot, the highwayman, was shut up in this very
Boteler dungeon. I was myself on guard in the corridor that night, and
saw the prisoner at ten o'clock sitting on that bed even as you are now.
At twelve I had occasion to look in, as my custom is, with the hope
of cheering his lonely hours, when lo, he was gone! Yes, you may well
stare. Mine eyes had never been off the door, and you can judge what
chance there was of his getting through the windows. Walls and floor are
both solid stone, which might be solid rock for the thickness. When
I entered there was a plaguy smell of brimstone, and the flame of my
lanthorn burned blue. Nay, it is no smiling matter. If the Devil did not
run away with Hector Marot, pray who did? for sure I am that no angel of
grace could come to him as to Peter of old. Perchance the Evil One may
desire a second bird out of the same cage, and so I tell you this that
you may be on your guard against his assaults.'

'Nay, I fear him not,' I answered.

'It is well,' croaked the Captain. 'Be not cast down!' His head
vanished, and the key turned in the creaking lock. So thick were the
walls that I could hear no sound after the door was closed. Save for
the sighing of the wind in the branches of the trees outside the narrow
window, all was as silent as the grave within the dungeon.

Thus left to myself I tried to follow Captain Sinclair's advice as to
the keeping up of my heart, though his talk was far from being of a
cheering nature. In my young days, more particularly among the sectaries
with whom I had been brought most in contact, a belief in the occasional
appearance of the Prince of Darkness, and his interference in bodily
form with the affairs of men, was widespread and unquestioning.
Philosophers in their own quiet chambers may argue learnedly on the
absurdity of such things, but in a dim-lit dungeon, cut off from the
world, with the grey gloaming creeping down, and one's own fate hanging
in the balance, it becomes a very different matter. The escape, if the
Captain's story were true, appeared to border upon the miraculous. I
examined the walls of the cell very carefully. They were formed of great
square stones cunningly fitted together. The thin slit or window was
cut through the centre of a single large block. All over, as high as
the hand could reach, the face of the walls was covered with letters and
legends cut by many generations of captives. The floor was composed of
old foot-worn slabs, firmly cemented together. The closest search failed
to show any hole or cranny where a rat could have escaped, far less a
man.

It is a very strange thing, my dears, to sit down in cold blood, and
think that the chances are that within a few hours your pulses will
have given their last throb, and your soul have sped away upon its final
errand. Strange and very awesome! The man who rideth down into the
press of the battle with his jaw set and his grip tight upon reign and
sword-hilt cannot feel this, for the human mind is such that one emotion
will ever push out another. Neither can the man who draws slow and
catching breaths upon the bed of deadly sickness be said to have
experience of it, for the mind weakened with disease can but submit
without examining too closely that which it submits to. When, however,
a young and hale man sits alone in quiet, and sees present death hanging
over him, he hath such food for thought that, should he survive and live
to be grey-headed, his whole life will be marked and altered by those
solemn hours, as a stream is changed in its course by some rough bank
against which it hath struck. Every little fault and blemish stands
out clear in the presence of death, as the dust specks appear when the
sunbeam shines into the darkened room. I noted them then, and I have, I
trust, noted them ever since.

I was seated with my head bowed upon my breast, deeply buried in this
solemn train of thoughts, when I was startled by hearing a sharp click,
such as a man might give who wished to attract attention. I sprang to my
feet and gazed round in the gathering gloom without being able to tell
whence it came. I had well-nigh persuaded myself that my senses had
deceived me, when the sound was repeated louder than before, and casting
my eyes upwards I saw a face peering in at me through the slit, or part
of a face rather, for I could but see the eye and corner of the cheek.
Standing on my chair I made out that it was none other than the farmer
who had been my companion upon the road.

'Hush, lad!' he whispered, with a warning forefinger pushed through the
narrow crack. 'Speak low, or the guard may chance to hear. What can I do
for you?'

'How did you come to know where I was?' I asked in astonishment.

'Whoy, mun,' he answered, 'I know as much of this 'ere house as Beaufort
does himsel'. Afore Badminton was built, me and my brothers has spent
many a day in climbing over the old Boteler tower. It's not the first
time that I have spoke through this window. But, quick; what can I do
for you?'

'I am much beholden to you, sir,' I answered, 'but I fear that there is
no help which you can give me, unless, indeed, you could convey news to
my friends in the army of what hath befallen me.'

'I might do that,' whispered Farmer Brown. 'Hark ye in your ear, lad,
what I never breathed to man yet. Mine own conscience pricks me at times
over this bolstering up of a Papist to rule over a Protestant nation.
Let like rule like, say I. At the 'lections I rode to Sudbury, and I
put in my vote for Maister Evans, of Turnford, who was in favour o' the
Exclusionists. Sure enough, if that same Bill had been carried, the Duke
would be sitting on his father's throne. The law would have said yes.
Now, it says nay. A wonderful thing is the law with its yea, yea, and
nay, nay, like Barclay, the Quaker man, that came down here in a leather
suit, and ca'd the parson a steepleman. There's the law. It's no use
shootin' at it, or passin' pikes through it, no, nor chargin' at it wi'
a troop of horse. If it begins by saying "nay" it will say "nay" to the
end of the chapter. Ye might as well fight wi' the book o' Genesis. Let
Monmouth get the law changed, and it will do more for him than all the
dukes in England. For all that he's a Protestant, and I would do what I
might to serve him.'

'There is a Captain Lockarby, who is serving in Colonel Saxon's
regiment, in Monmouth's army,' said I. 'Should things go wrong with me,
I would take it as a great kindness if you would bear him my love, and
ask him to break it gently, by word or by letter, to those at Havant.
If I were sure that this would be done, it would be a great ease to my
mind.'

'It shall be done, lad,' said the good farmer. 'I shall send my best man
and fleetest horse this very night, that they may know the straits in
which you are. I have a file here if it would help you.'

'Nay,' I answered, 'human aid can do little to help me here.'

'There used to be a hole in the roof. Look up and see if you can see
aught of it.'

'It arches high above my head,' I answered, looking upwards; 'but there
is no sign of any opening.'

'There was one,' he repeated. 'My brother Roger hath swung himself down
wi' a rope. In the old time the prisoners were put in so, like Joseph
into the pit. The door is but a new thing.'

'Hole or no hole, it cannot help me,' I answered. 'I have no means
of climbing to it. Do not wait longer, kind friend, or you may find
yourself in trouble.'

'Good-bye then, my brave heart,' he whispered, and the honest grey eye
and corner of ruddy cheek disappeared from the casement. Many a time
during the course of the long evening I glanced up with some wild hope
that he might return, and every creak of the branches outside brought me
on to the chair, but it was the last that I saw of Farmer Brown.

This kindly visit, short as it was, relieved my mind greatly, for I had
a trusty man's word that, come what might, my friends should, at least,
have some news of my fate. It was now quite dark, and I was pacing up
and down the little chamber, when the key turned in the door, and the
Captain entered with a rushlight and a great bowl of bread and milk.

'Here is your supper, friend,' said he. 'Take it down, appetite or no,
for it will give you strength to play the man at the time ye wot of.
They say it was beautiful to see my Lord Russell die upon Tower Hill. Be
of good cheer! Folk may say as much of you. His Grace is in a terrible
way. He walketh up and down, and biteth his lip, and clencheth his hands
like one who can scarce contain his wrath. It may not be against you,
but I know not what else can have angered him.'

I made no answer to this Job's comforter, so he presently left me,
placing the bowl upon the chair, with the rushlight beside it. I
finished the food, and feeling the better for it, stretched myself upon
the couch, and fell into a heavy and dreamless sleep. This may have
lasted three or four hours, when I was suddenly awoken by a sound like
the creaking of hinges. Sitting up on the pallet I gazed around me. The
rushlight had burned out and the cell was impenetrably dark. A greyish
glimmer at one end showed dimly the position of the aperture, but all
else was thick and black. I strained my ears, but no further sound fell
upon them. Yet I was certain that I had not been deceived, and that the
noise which had aroused me was within my very chamber. I rose and felt
my way slowly round the room, passing my hand over the walls and door.
Then I paced backwards and forwards to test the flooring. Neither around
me nor beneath me was there any change. Whence did the sound come from,
then? I sat down upon the side of the bed and waited patiently in the
hope of hearing it once again.

Presently it was repeated, a low groaning and creaking as though a door
or shutter long disused was being slowly and stealthily opened. At the
same time a dull yellow light streamed down from above, issuing from a
thin slit in the centre of the arched roof above me. Slowly as I watched
it this slit widened and extended as if a sliding panel were being
pulled out, until a good-sized hole was left, through which I saw a
head, looking down at me, outlined against the misty light behind it.
The knotted end of a rope was passed through this aperture, and came
dangling down to the dungeon floor. It was a good stout piece of hemp,
strong enough to bear the weight of a heavy man, and I found, upon
pulling at it, that it was firmly secured above. Clearly it was the
desire of my unknown benefactor that I should ascend by it, so I went
up hand over hand, and after some difficulty in squeezing my shoulders
through the hole I succeeded in reaching the room above. While I was
still rubbing my eyes after the sudden change from darkness into light,
the rope was swiftly whisked up and the sliding shutter closed once
more. To those who were not in the secret there was nothing to throw
light upon my disappearance.

I found myself in the presence of a stout short man clad in a rude
jerkin and leather breeches, which gave him somewhat the appearance of a
groom. He wore a broad felt hat drawn down very low over his eyes, while
the lower part of his face was swathed round with a broad cravat. In his
hand he bore a horn lanthorn, by the light of which I saw that the
room in which we were was of the same size as the dungeon beneath, and
differed from it only in having a broad casement which looked out upon
the park. There was no furniture in the chamber, but a great beam ran
across it, to which the rope had been fastened by which I ascended.

'Speak low, friend,' said the stranger. 'The walls are thick and the
doors are close, yet I would not have your guardians know by what means
you have been spirited away.'

'Truly, sir,' I answered, 'I can scarce credit that it is other than a
dream. It is wondrous that my dungeon should be so easily broken into,
and more wondrous still that I should find a friend who would be willing
to risk so much for my sake.'

'Look there!' quoth he, holding down his lanthorn so as to cast its
light on the part of the floor where the panel was fitted. Can you not
see how old and crumbled is the stone-work which surrounds it? This
opening in the roof is as old as the dungeon itself, and older far
than the door by which you were led into it. For this was one of those
bottle-shaped cells or oubliettes which hard men of old devised for the
safe keeping of their captives. Once lowered through this hole into the
stone-girt pit a man might eat his heart out, for his fate was sealed.
Yet you see that the very device which once hindered escape has now
brought freedom within your reach.'

'Thanks to your clemency, your Grace,' I answered, looking keenly at my
companion.

'Now out on these disguises!' he cried, peevishly pushing back the
broad-edged hat and disclosing, as I expected, the features of the Duke.
'Even a blunt soldier lad can see through my attempts at concealment.
I fear, Captain, that I should make a bad plotter, for my nature is as
open--well, as thine is. I cannot better the simile.'

'Your Grace's voice once heard is not easily forgot,' said I.

'Especially when it talks of hemp and dungeons,' he answered, with a
smile. 'But if I clapped you into prison, you must confess that I have
made you amends by pulling you out again at the end of my line, like a
minnow out of a bottle. But how came you to deliver such papers in the
presence of my council?'

'I did what I could to deliver them in private,' said I. 'I sent you a
message to that effect.'

'It is true,' he answered; 'but such messages come in to me from every
soldier who wishes to sell his sword, and every inventor who hath a long
tongue and a short purse. How could I tell that the matter was of real
import?'

'I feared to let the chance slip lest it might never return,' said I. 'I
hear that your Grace hath little leisure during these times.'

'I cannot blame you,' he answered, pacing up and down the room. 'But it
was untoward. I might have hid the despatches, yet it would have roused
suspicions. Your errand would have leaked out. There are many who envy
my lofty fortunes, and who would seize upon a chance of injuring me with
King James. Sunderland or Somers would either of them blow the least
rumour into a flame which might prove unquenchable. There was naught for
it, therefore, but to show the papers and to turn a harsh face on the
messenger. The most venomous tongue could not find fault in my conduct.
What course would you have advised under such circumstances?' 'The most
direct,' I answered. 'Aye, aye, Sir. Honesty. Public men have, however,
to pick their steps as best they may, for the straight path would lead
too often to the cliff-edge. The Tower would be too scanty for its
guests were we all to wear our hearts upon our sleeves. But to you in
this privacy I can tell my real thoughts without fear of betrayal or
misconstruction. On paper I will not write one word. Your memory must
be the sheet which bears my answer to Monmouth. And first of all, erase
from it all that you have heard me say in the council-room. Let it be as
though it never were spoken. Is that done?'

'I understand that it did not really represent your Grace's thoughts.'

'Very far from it, Captain. But prythee tell me what expectation of
success is there among the rebels themselves? You must have heard your
Colonel and others discuss the question, or noted by their bearing which
way their thoughts lay. Have they good hopes of holding out against the
King's troops?'

'They have met with naught but success hitherto,' I answered.

'Against the militia. But they will find it another thing when they have
trained troops to deal with. And yet--and yet!--One thing I know, that
any defeat of Feversham's army would cause a general rising throughout
the country. On the other hand, the King's party are active. Every
post brings news of some fresh levy. Albemarle still holds the militia
together in the west. The Earl of Pembroke is in arms in Wiltshire.
Lord Lumley is moving from the east with the Sussex forces. The Earl of
Abingdon is up in Oxfordshire. At the university the caps and gowns are
all turning into head-pieces and steel fronts. James's Dutch regiments
have sailed from Amsterdam. Yet Monmouth hath gained two fights, and why
not a third? They are troubled waters--troubled waters!' The Duke paced
backwards and forwards with brows drawn down, muttering all this to
himself rather than to me, and shaking his head like one in the sorest
perplexity.

'I would have you tell Monmouth,' he said at last, 'that I thank him for
the papers which he hath sent me, and that I will duly read and weigh
them. Tell him also that I wish him well in his enterprise, and would
help him were it not that I am hemmed in by those who watch me closely,
and who would denounce me were I to show my true thoughts. Tell him
that, should he move his army into these parts, I may then openly
declare myself; but to do so now would be to ruin the fortunes of my
house, without in any way helping him. Can you bear him that message?'

'I shall do so, your Grace.

'Tell me,' he asked, 'how doth Monmouth bear himself in this
enterprise?'

'Like a wise and gallant leader,' I answered.

'Strange,' he murmured; 'it was ever the jest at court that he had
scarce energy or constancy enough to finish a game at ball, but would
ever throw his racquet down ere the winning point was scored. His plans
were like a weather-vane, altered by every breeze. He was constant
only in his inconstancy. It is true that he led the King's troops in
Scotland, but all men knew that Claverhouse and Dalzell were the real
conquerors at Bothwell Bridge. Methinks he resembles that Brutus in
Roman history who feigned weakness of mind as a cover to his ambitions.'

The Duke was once again conversing with himself rather than with me, so
that I made no remark, save to observe that Monmouth had won the hearts
of the lower people.

'There lies his strength,' said Beaufort. 'The blood of his mother runs
in his veins. He doth not think it beneath him to shake the dirty paw
of Jerry the tinker, or to run a race against a bumpkin on the village
green. Well, events have shown that he hath been right. These same
bumpkins have stood by him when nobler friends have held aloof. I would
I could see into the future. But you have my message, Captain, and
I trust that, if you change it in the delivery, it will be in the
direction of greater warmth and kindliness. It is time now that you
depart, for within three hours the guard is changed, and your escape
will be discovered.'

'But how depart?' I asked.

'Through here,' he answered, pushing open the casement, and sliding the
rope along the beam in that direction. 'The rope may be a foot or two
short, but you have extra inches to make matters even. When you have
reached the ground, take the gravel path which turns to the right, and
follow it until it leads you to the high trees which skirt the park. The
seventh of these hath a bough which shoots over the boundary wall. Climb
along the bough, drop over upon the other side, and you will find my
own valet waiting with your horse. Up with you, and ride, haste, haste,
post-haste, for the south. By morn you should be well out of danger's
way.'

'My sword?' I asked.

'All your property is there. Tell Monmouth what I have said, and let him
know that I have used you as kindly as was possible.'

'But what will your Grace's council say when they find that I am gone?'
I asked.

'Pshaw, man! Never fret about that! I will off to Bristol at daybreak,
and give my council enough to think of without their having time to
devote to your fate. The soldiers will but have another instance of
the working of the Father of Evil, who hath long been thought to have a
weakness for that cell beneath us. Faith, if all we hear be true, there
have been horrors enough acted there to call up every devil out of the
pit. But time presses. Gently through the casement! So! Remember the
message.'

'Adieu, your Grace!' I answered, and seizing the rope slipped rapidly
and noiselessly to the ground, upon which he drew it up and closed the
casement. As I looked round, my eye fell upon the dark narrow slit which
opened into my cell, and through which honest Farmer Brown had held
converse with me. Half-an-hour ago I had been stretched upon the prison
pallet without a hope or a thought of escape. Now I was out in the open
with no hand to stay me, breathing the air of freedom with the prison
and the gallows cast off from me, as the waking man casts off his evil
dreams. Such changes shake a man's soul, my children. The heart that can
steel itself against death is softened by the assurance of safety. So
I have known a worthy trader bear up manfully when convinced that his
fortunes had been engulfed in the ocean, but lose all philosophy on
finding that the alarm was false, and that they had come safely through
the danger. For my own part, believing as I do that there is nothing of
chance in the affairs of this world, I felt that I had been exposed to
this trial in order to dispose me to serious thought, and that I had
been saved that I might put those thoughts into effect. As an earnest of
my endeavour to do so I knelt down on the green sward, in the shadow of
the Boteler turret, and I prayed that I might come to be of use on
the earth, and that I might be helped to rise above my own wants and
interests, to aid forward whatever of good or noble might be stirring in
my days. It is well-nigh fifty years, my dears, since I bowed my spirit
before the Great Unknown in the moon-tinted park of Badminton, but I
can truly say that from that day to this the aims which I laid down
for myself have served me as a compass over the dark waters of life--a
compass which I may perchance not always follow--for flesh is weak and
frail, but which hath, at least, been ever present, that I might turn to
it in seasons of doubt and of danger.

The path to the right led through groves and past carp ponds for a mile
or more, until I reached the line of trees which skirted the boundary
wall. Not a living thing did I see upon my way, save a herd of
fallow-deer, which scudded away like swift shadows through the
shimmering moonshine. Looking back, the high turrets and gables of the
Boteler wing stood out dark and threatening against the starlit sky.
Having reached the seventh tree, I clambered along the projecting bough
which shot over the park wall, and dropped down upon the other side,
where I found my good old dapple-grey awaiting me in the charge of a
groom. Springing to my saddle, I strapped my sword once more to my side,
and galloped off as fast as the four willing feet could carry me on my
return journey.

All that night I rode hard without drawing bridle, through sleeping
hamlets, by moon-bathed farmhouses, past shining stealthy rivers, and
over birch-clad hills. When the eastern sky deepened from pink into
scarlet, and the great sun pushed his rim over the blue north Somerset
hills, I was already far upon my journey. It was a Sabbath morning, and
from every village rose the sweet tinkling and calling of the bells.
I bore no dangerous papers with me now, and might therefore be more
careless as to my route. At one point I was questioned by a keen-eyed
toll-keeper as to whence I came, but my reply that I was riding direct
from his Grace of Beaufort put an end to his suspicions. Further down,
near Axbridge, I overtook a grazier who was jogging into Wells upon his
sleek cob. With him I rode for some time, and learned that the whole
of North Somerset, as well as south, was now in open revolt, and that
Wells, Shepton Mallet, and Glastonbury were held by armed volunteers
for King Monmouth. The royal forces had all retired west, or east, until
help should come. As I rode through the villages I marked the blue flag
upon the church towers, and the rustics drilling upon the green, without
any sign of trooper or dragoon to uphold the authority of the Stuarts.

My road lay through Shepton Mallet, Piper's Inn, Bridgewater, and North
Petherton, until in the cool of the evening I pulled up my weary horse
at the Cross Hands, and saw the towers of Taunton in the valley beneath
me. A flagon of beer for the rider, and a sieveful of oats for the
steed, put fresh mettle into both of us, and we were jogging on our way
once more, when there came galloping down the side of the hill about
forty cavaliers, as hard as their horses could carry them. So wild was
their riding that I pulled up, uncertain whether they were friend or
foe, until, as they came whirling towards me, I recognised that the two
officers who rode in front of them were none other than Reuben Lockarby
and Sir Gervas Jerome. At the sight of me they flung up their hands, and
Reuben shot on to his horse's neck, where he sat for a moment astride of
the mane, until the brute tossed him back into the saddle.

'It's Micah! It's Micah!' he gasped, with his mouth open, and the tears
hopping down his honest face.

'Od's pitlikins, man, how did you come here?' asked Sir Gervas, poking
me with his forefinger as though to see if I were really of flesh and
blood. 'We were leading a forlorn of horse into Beaufort's country to
beat him up, and to burn his fine house about his ears if you had come
to harm. There has just come a groom from some farmer in those parts who
hath brought us news that you were under sentence of death, on which I
came away with my wig half frizzled, and found that friend Lockarby had
leave from Lord Grey to go north with these troopers. But how have you
fared?'

'Well and ill,' I answered, wringing their kindly hands. 'I had not
thought last night to see another sun rise, and yet ye see that I am
here, sound in life and limb. But all these things will take some time
in the telling.'

'Aye, and King Monmouth will be on thorns to see you. Right about, my
lads, and back for the camp. Never was errand so rapidly and happily
finished as this of ours. It would have fared ill with Badminton had you
been hurt.'

The troopers turned their horses and trotted slowly back to Taunton,
while I rode behind them between my two faithful friends, hearing from
them all that had occurred in my absence, and telling my own adventures
in return. The night had fallen ere we rode through the gates, where I
handed Covenant over to the Mayor's groom, and went direct to the castle
to deliver an account of my mission.



Chapter XXVI. Of the Strife in the Council

King Monmouth's council was assembled at the time of my coming, and my
entrance caused the utmost surprise and joy, as they had just heard news
of my sore danger. Even the royal presence could not prevent several
members, among whom were the old Mayor and the two soldiers of fortune,
from springing to their feet and shaking me warmly by the hand. Monmouth
himself said a few gracious words, and requested that I should be seated
at the board with the others.

'You have earned the right to be of our council,' said he; 'and lest
there should be a jealousy amongst other captains that you should come
among us, I do hereby confer upon you the special title of Scout-master,
which, though it entail few if any duties in the present state of our
force, will yet give you precedence over your fellows. We had heard that
your greeting from Beaufort was of the roughest, and that you were in
sore straits in his dungeons. But you have happily come yourself on the
very heels of him who bore the tidings. Tell us then from the beginning
how things have fared with you.'

I should have wished to have limited my story to Beaufort and his
message, but as the council seemed to be intent upon hearing a full
account of my journey, I told in as short and simple speech as I
could the various passages which had befallen me--the ambuscado of
the smugglers, the cave, the capture of the gauger, the journey in the
lugger, the acquaintance with Farmer Brown, my being cast into prison,
with the manner of my release and the message wherewith I had been
commissioned. To all of this the council hearkened with the uttermost
attention, while a muttered oath ever and anon from a courtier or a
groan and prayer from a Puritan showed how keenly they followed the
various phases of my fortunes. Above all, they gave the greatest heed
to Beaufort's words, and stopped me more than once when I appeared to be
passing over any saying or event before they had due time to weigh
it. When I at last finished they all sat speechless, looking into each
other's faces and waiting for an expression of opinion.

'On my word,' said Monmouth at last, 'this is a young Ulysses, though
his Odyssey doth but take three days in the acting. Scudery might not be
so dull were she to take a hint from these smugglers' caves and sliding
panels. How say you, Grey?'

'He hath indeed had his share of adventure,' the nobleman answered, 'and
hath also performed his mission like a fearless and zealous messenger.
You say that Beaufort gave you nought in writing?'

'Not a word, my lord,' I replied.

'And his private message was that he wished us well, and would join us
if we were in his country?'

'That was the effect, my lord.'

'Yet in his council, as I understand, he did utter bitter things against
us, putting affronts upon the King, and making light of his just claims
upon the fealty of his nobility?'

'He did,' I answered.

'He would fain stand upon both sides of the hedge at once,' said King
Monmouth. 'Such a man is very like to find himself on neither side, but
in the very heart of the briars. It may be as well, however, that we
should move his way, so as to give him the chance of declaring himself.'

'In any case, as your Majesty remembers,' said Saxon, 'we had determined
to march Bristolwards and attempt the town.'

'The works are being strengthened,' said I, 'and there are five thousand
of the Gloucestershire train-bands assembled within. I saw the labourers
at work upon the ramparts as I passed.'

'If we gain Beaufort we shall gain the town,' quoth Sir Stephen
Timewell. 'There are already a strong body of godly and honest folk
therein, who would rejoice to see a Protestant army within their gates.
Should we have to beleaguer it we may count upon some help from within.'

'Hegel und blitzen!' exclaimed the German soldier, with an impatience
which even the presence of the King could not keep in bounds; 'how can
we talk of sieges and leaguers when we have not a breaching-piece in the
army?'

'The Lard will find us the breaching-pieces,' cried Ferguson, in his
strange, nasal voice. 'Did the Lard no breach the too'ers o' Jericho
withoot the aid o' gunpooder? Did the Lard no raise up the man Robert
Ferguson and presairve him through five-and-thairty indictments and
twa-and-twenty proclamations o' the godless? What is there He canna do?
Hosannah! Hosannah!'

'The Doctor is right,' said a square-faced, leather-skinned English
Independent. 'We talk too much o' carnal means and worldly chances,
without leaning upon that heavenly goodwill which should be to us as a
staff on stony and broken paths. Yes, gentlemen,' he continued, raising
his voice and glancing across the table at some of the courtiers, 'ye
may sneer at words of piety, but I say that it is you and those like you
who will bring down God's anger upon this army.'

'And I say so too,' cried another sectary fiercely.

'And I,' 'And I,' shouted several, with Saxon, I think, among them.

'Is it your wish, your Majesty, that we should be insulted at your very
council board?' cried one of the courtiers, springing to his feet with
a flushed face. 'How long are we to be subject to this insolence because
we have the religion of a gentleman, and prefer to practise it in the
privacy of our hearts rather than at the street corners with these
pharisees?'

'Speak not against God's saints,' cried a Puritan, in a loud stern
voice. 'There is a voice within me which tells me that it were better to
strike thee dead--yea, even in the presence of the King--than to allow
thee to revile those who have been born again.'

Several had sprung to their feet on either side. Hands were laid upon
sword-hilts, and glances as stern and as deadly as rapier thrusts were
flashing backwards and forwards; but the more neutral and reasonable
members of the council succeeded in restoring peace, and in persuading
the angry disputants to resume their seats.

'How now, gentlemen?' cried the King, his face dark with anger, when
silence was at last restored. 'Is this the extent of my authority that
ye should babble and brawl as though my council-chamber were a Fleet
Street pot-house? Is this your respect for my person? I tell ye that I
would forfeit my just claims for ever, and return to Holland, or devote
my sword to the cause of Christianity against the Turk, rather than
submit to such indignity. If any man he proved to have stirred up strife
amongst the soldiers or commonalty on the score of religion I shall
know how to deal with him. Let each preach to his own, but let him not
interfere with the flock of his neighbour. As to you, Mr. Bramwell,
and you, Mr. Joyce, and you also, Sir Henry Nuttall, we shall hold ye
excused from attending these meetings until ye have further notice from
us. Ye may now separate, each to your quarters, and to-morrow morning
we shall, with the blessing of God, start for the north to see what luck
may await our enterprise in those parts.'

The King bowed as a sign that the formal meeting was over, and taking
Lord Grey aside, he conversed with him anxiously in a recess. The
courtiers, who numbered in their party several English and foreign
gentlemen, who had come over together with some Devonshire and Somerset
country squires, swaggered out of the room in a body, with much clinking
of spurs and clanking of swords. The Puritans drew gravely together and
followed after them, walking not with demure and downcast looks, as was
their common use, but with grim faces and knitted brows, as the Jews of
old may have appeared when, 'To your tents, O Israel!' was still ringing
in their ears.

Indeed, religious dissension and sectarian heat were in the very air.
Outside, on the Castle Green, the voices of preachers rose up like the
drone of insects. Every waggon or barrel or chance provision case had
been converted into a pulpit, each with its own orator and little knot
of eager hearkeners. Here was a russet-coated Taunton volunteer in
jackboots and bandolier, holding forth on the justification by works.
Further on a grenadier of the militia, with blazing red coat and white
cross-belt, was deep in the mystery of the Trinity. In one or two
places, where the rude pulpits were too near to each other, the sermons
had changed into a hot discussion between the two preachers, in which
the audience took part by hums or groans, each applauding the champion
whose creed was most in accordance with his own. Through this wild
scene, made more striking by the ruddy flickering glare of the
camp-fires, I picked my way with a weight at my heart, for I felt how
vain it must be to hope for success where such division reigned, Saxon
looked on, however, with glistening eyes, and rubbed his hands with
satisfaction.

'The leaven is working,' quoth he. 'Something will come of all this
ferment.'

'I see not what can come of it save disorder and weakness,' I answered.

'Good soldiers will come of it, lad,' said he. 'They are all sharpening
themselves, each after his own fashion, on the whetstone of religion.
This arguing breedeth fanatics, and fanatics are the stuff out of which
conquerors are fashioned. Have you not heard how Old Noll's army divided
into Presbyterians, Independents, Ranters, Anabaptists, Fifth Monarchy
men, Brownists, and a score of other sects, out of whose strife rose the
finest regiments that ever formed line upon a field of battle?

          "Such as do build their faith upon
           The holy text of sword and gun."

You know old Samuel's couplet. I tell you, I would rather see them thus
employed than at their drill, for all their wrangling and jangling.'

'But how of this split in the council?' I asked.

'Ah, that is indeed a graver matter. All creeds may be welded together,
but the Puritan and the scoffer are like oil and water. Yet the Puritan
is the oil, for he will be ever atop. These courtiers do but stand for
themselves, while the others are backed up by the pith and marrow of the
army. It is well that we are afoot to-morrow. The King's troops are, I
hear, pouring across Salisbury Plain, but their ordnance and stores are
delaying them, for they know well that they must bring all they need,
since they can expect little from the goodwill of the country folk. Ah,
friend Buyse, wie geht es?'

'Ganz gut,' said the big German, looming up before us through the
darkness. 'But, sapperment, what a cawing and croaking, like a rookery
at sunset! You English are a strange people--yes, donnerwetter, a very
strange people! There are no two of you who think alike upon any subject
under Himmel! The Cavalier will have his gay coat and his loose word.
The Puritan will cut your throat rather than give up his sad-coloured
dress and his Bible. "King James!" cry some, "King Monmouth!" say the
peasants. "King Jesus!" says the Fifth Monarchy man. "No King at all!"
cry Master Wade and a few others who are for a Commonwealth. Since I
set foot on the Helderenbergh at Amsterdam, my head hath been in a whirl
with trying to understand what it is that ye desire, for before I have
got to the end of one man's tale, and begin to see a little through the
finsterniss, another will come with another story, and I am in as evil a
case as ever. But, my young Hercules, I am right glad to see you back
in safety. I am half in fear to give you my hand now, after your recent
treatment of it. I trust that you are none the worse for the danger that
you have gone through.'

'Mine eyelids are in truth a little heavy,' I answered. 'Save for an
hour or two aboard the lugger, and about as long on a prison couch, I
have not closed eye since I left the camp.'

'We shall fall in at the second bugle call, about eight of the clock,'
said Saxon. 'We shall leave you, therefore, that you may restore
yourself after your fatigues. 'With a parting nod the two old soldiers
strode off together down the crowded Fore Street, while I made the best
of my way back to the Mayor's hospitable dwelling, where I had to repeat
my story all over again to the assembled household before I was at last
suffered to seek my room.



Chapter XXVII. Of the Affair near Keynsham Bridge

Monday, June 21, 1685, broke very dark and windy, with dull clouds
moving heavily across the sky and a constant sputter of rain. Yet a
little after daybreak Monmouth's bugles were blowing in every quarter
of the town, from Tone Bridge to Shuttern, and by the hour appointed the
regiments had mustered, the roll had been called, and the vanguard was
marching briskly out through the eastern gate. It went forth in the same
order as it entered, our own regiment and the Taunton burghers bringing
up the rear. Mayor Timewell and Saxon had the ordering of this part of
the army between them, and being men who had seen much service, they
drew the ordnance into a less hazardous position, and placed a strong
guard of horse, a cannon's shot in the rear, to meet any attempt of the
Royal dragoons.

It was remarked on all sides that the army had improved in order and
discipline during the three days' halt, owing perchance to the example
of our own unceasing drill and soldierly bearing. In numbers it had
increased to nigh eight thousand, and the men were well fed and light
of heart. With sturdy close-locked ranks they splashed their way through
mud and puddle, with many a rough country joke and many a lusty stave
from song or hymn. Sir Gervas rode at the head of his musqueteers, whose
befloured tails hung limp and lank with the water dripping from
them. Lockarby's pikemen and my own company of scythesmen were mostly
labourers from the country, who were hardened against all weathers, and
plodded patiently along with the rain-drops glistening upon their ruddy
faces. In front were the Taunton foot; behind, the lumbering train of
baggage waggons, with the horse in the rear of them. So the long line
wound its way over the hills.

At the summit, where the road begins to dip down upon the other side, a
halt was called to enable the regiments to close up, and we looked back
at the fair town which many of us were never to see again. From the dark
walls and house roofs we could still mark the flapping and flutter of
white kerchiefs from those whom we left behind. Reuben sat his horse
beside me, with his spare shirt streaming in the wind and his great
pikemen all agrin behind him, though his thoughts and his eyes were
too far away to note them. As we gazed, a long thin quiver of sunshine
slipped out between two cloud banks and gilded the summit of the
Magdalene tower, with the Royal standard which still waved from it. The
incident was hailed as a happy augury, and a great shout spread from
rank to rank at the sight of it, with a waving of hats and a clattering
of weapons. Then the bugles blew a fanfare, the drums struck up a point
of war, Reuben thrust his shirt into his haversack, and on we marched
through mud and slush, with the dreary clouds bending low over us, and
buttressed by the no less dreary hills on either side. A seeker for
omens might have said that the heavens were weeping over our ill-fated
venture.

All day we trudged along roads which were quagmires, over our ankles
in mud, until in the evening we made our way to Bridgewater, where we
gained some recruits, and also some hundred pounds for our military
chest, for it was a well-to-do place, with a thriving coast trade
carried on down the River Parret. After a night in snug quarters we set
off again in even worse weather than before. The country in these parts
is a quagmire in the driest season, but the heavy rains had caused the
fens to overflow, and turned them into broad lakes on either side of the
road. This may have been to some degree in our favour, as shielding us
from the raids of the King's cavalry, but it made our march very
slow. All day it was splashing and swashing through mud and mire, the
rain-drops shining on the gun-barrels and dripping from the heavy-footed
horses. Past the swollen Parret, through Eastover, by the peaceful
village of Bawdrip, and over Polden Hill we made our way, until the
bugles sounded a halt under the groves of Ashcot, and a rude meal was
served out to the men. Then on again, through the pitiless rain, past
the wooded park of Piper's Inn, through Walton, where the floods were
threatening the cottages, past the orchards of Street, and so in the
dusk of the evening into the grey old town of Glastonbury, where the
good folk did their best by the warmth of their welcome to atone for the
bitterness of the weather.

The next morning was wet still and inclement, so the army made a short
march to Wells, which is a good-sized town, well laid out, with a fine
cathedral, which hath a great number of figures carved in stone and
placed in niches on the outer side, like that which we saw at Salisbury.
The townsfolk were strong for the Protestant cause, and the army was so
well received that their victual cost little from the military chest. On
this march we first began to come into touch with the Royal horse. More
than once when the rain mist cleared we saw the gleam of arms upon the
low hills which overlook the road, and our scouts came in with reports
of strong bodies of dragoons on either flank. At one time they massed
heavily upon our rear, as though planning a descent upon the baggage.
Saxon, however, planted a regiment of pikes on either side, so that they
broke up again and glinted off over the hills.

From Wells we marched upon the twenty-fourth to Shepton Mallet, with the
ominous sabres and helmets still twinkling behind and on either side of
us.

That evening we were at Keynsham Bridge, less than two leagues from
Bristol as the crow flies, and some of our horse forded the river and
pushed on almost to the walls.

By morning the rain clouds had at last cleared, so Reuben and I rode
slowly up one of the sloping green hills which rose behind the camp, in
the hope of gaining some sight of the enemy. Our men we left littered
about upon the grass, trying to light fires with the damp sticks, or
laying out their clothes to dry in the sunshine. A strange-looking band
they were, coated and splashed with mud from head to heel, their hats
all limp and draggled, their arms rusted, and their boots so worn that
many walked barefoot, and others had swathed their kerchiefs round
their feet. Yet their short spell of soldiering had changed them
from honest-faced yokels into fierce-eyed, half-shaven, gaunt-cheeked
fellows, who could carry arms or port pikes as though they had done
nought else since childhood.

The plight of the officers was no better than that of the men, nor
should an officer, my dears, when he is upon service, ever demean
himself by partaking of any comfort which all cannot share with him. Let
him lie by a soldier's fire and eat a soldier's fare, or let him hence,
for he is a hindrance and a stumbling-block. Our clothes were pulp, our
steel fronts red with rust, and our chargers as stained and splashed as
though they had rolled in the mire. Our very swords and pistols were in
such a plight that we could scarce draw the one or snap the other. Sir
Gervas alone succeeded in keeping his attire and his person as neat and
as dainty as ever. What he did in the watches of the night, and how he
gained his sleep, hath ever been a mystery to me, for day after day
he turned out at the bugle call, washed, scented, brushed, with wig
in order, and clothes from which every speck of mud had been carefully
removed. At his saddle-bow he bore with him the great flour dredger
which we saw him use at Taunton, and his honest musqueteers had their
heads duly dusted every morning, though in an hour their tails would
be as brown as nature made them, while the flour would be trickling in
little milky streams down their broad backs, or forming in cakes upon
the skirts of their coats. It was a long contest between the weather and
the Baronet, but our comrade proved the victor.

'There was a time when I was called plump Reuben,' quoth my friend, as
we rode together up the winding track. 'What with too little that is
solid and too much that is liquid I am like to be skeleton Reuben ere I
see Havant again. I am as full of rain-water as my father's casks are of
October. I would, Micah, that you would wring me out and hang me to dry
upon one of these bushes.'

'If we are wet, King James's men must be wetter,' said I, 'for at least
we have had such shelter as there was.'

'It is poor comfort when you are starved to know that another is in
the same plight. I give you my word, Micah, I took in one hole of my
sword-belt on Monday, two on Tuesday, one yesterday, and one to-day. I
tell you, I am thawing like an icicle in the sun.'

'If you should chance to dwindle to nought,' said I, laughing, 'what
account are we to give of you in Taunton? Since you have donned armour
and taken to winning the hearts of fair maidens, you have outstripped us
all in importance, and become a man of weight and substance.'

'I had more substance and weight ere I began trailing over the
countryside like a Hambledon packman,' quoth he. 'But in very truth and
with all gravity, Micah, it is a strange thing to feel that the whole
world for you, your hopes, your ambitions, your all, are gathered into
so small a compass that a hood might cover it, and two little pattens
support it. I feel as if she were my own higher self, my loftier
part, and that I, should I be torn from her, would remain for ever an
incomplete and half-formed being. With her, I ask nothing else. Without
her, all else is nothing.'

'But have you spoken to the old man?' I asked. 'Are you indeed
betrothed?'

'I have spoken to him,' my friend answered, 'but he was so busy in
filling ammunition cases that I could not gain his attention. When I
tried once more he was counting the spare pikes in the Castle armoury
with a tally and an ink-horn. I told him that I had come to crave his
granddaughter's hand, on which he turned to me and asked, "which hand?"
with so blank a stare that it was clear that his mind was elsewhere. On
the third trial, though, the day that you did come back from Badminton,
I did at last prefer my request, but he flashed out at me that this was
no time for such fooleries, and he bade me wait until King Monmouth was
on the throne, when I might ask him again. I warrant that he did not
call such things fooleries fifty years ago, when he went a-courting
himself.'

'At least he did not refuse you,' said I. 'It is as good as a promise
that; should the cause be successful, you shall be so too.'

'By my faith,' cried Reuben, 'if a man could by his own single blade
bring that about, there is none who hath so strong an interest in it as
I. No, not Monmouth himself! The apprentice Derrick hath for a long time
raised his eyes to his master's daughter, and the old man was ready to
have him as a son, so much was he taken by his godliness and zeal. Yet I
have learned from a side-wind that he is but a debauched and low-living
man, though he covers his pleasures with a mask of piety. I thought as
you did think that he was at the head of the roisterers who tried to
bear Mistress Ruth away, though, i' faith, I can scarce think harshly
of them, since they did me the greatest service that ever men did yet.
Meanwhile I have taken occasion, ere we left Wells two nights ago, to
speak to Master Derrick on the matter, and to warn him as he loved his
life to plan no treachery against her.

'And how took he this mild intimation?' I asked.

'As a rat takes a rat trap. Snarled out some few words of godly hatred,
and so slunk away.'

'On my life, lad,' said I, 'you have been having as many adventures in
your own way as I in mine. But here we are upon the hill-top, with as
fair an outlook as man could wish to have.'

Just beneath us ran the Avon, curving in long bends through the
woodlands, with the gleam of the sun striking back from it here and
there, as though a row of baby suns had been set upon a silver string.
On the further side the peaceful, many-hued country, rising and falling
in a swell of cornfields and orchards, swept away to break in a fringe
of forest upon the distant Malverns. On our right were the green hills
near Bath and on our left the rugged Mendips, with queenly Bristol
crouching behind her forts, and the grey channel behind flecked with
snow-white sails. At our very feet lay Keynsham Bridge, and our army
spotted in dark patches over the green fields, the smoke of their fires
and the babble of their voices floating up in the still summer air.

A road ran along the Somersetshire bank of the Avon, and down this two
troops of our horse were advancing, with intent to establish outposts
upon our eastern flank. As they jangled past in somewhat loose order,
their course lay through a pine-wood, into which the road takes a sharp
bend. We were gazing down at the scene when, like lightning from a
cloud, a troop of the Horse Guards wheeled out into the open, and
breaking from trot to canter, and from canter to gallop, dashed down in
a whirlwind of blue and steel upon our unprepared squadrons. A crackle
of hastily unslung carbines broke from the leading ranks, but in an
instant the Guards burst through them and plunged on into the second
troop. For a space the gallant rustics held their own, and the dense
mass of men and horses swayed backwards and forwards, with the swirling
sword-blades playing above them in flashes of angry light. Then blue
coats began to break from among the russet, the fight rolled wildly back
for a hundred paces, the dense throng was split asunder, and the Royal
Guards came pouring through the rent, and swerved off to right and left
through hedges and over ditches, stabbing and hacking at the fleeing
horsemen. The whole scene, with the stamping horses, tossing manes,
shouts of triumph or despair, gasping of hard-drawn breath and musical
clink and clatter of steel, was to us upon the hill like some wild
vision, so swiftly did it come and so swiftly go. A sharp, stern
bugle-call summoned the Blues back into the road, where they formed up
and trotted slowly away before fresh squadrons could come up from the
camp. The sun gleamed and the river rippled as ever, and there was
nothing save the long litter of men and horses to mark the course of the
hell blast which had broken so suddenly upon us.

As the Blues retired we observed that a single officer brought up the
rear, riding very slowly, as though it went much against his mood to
turn his back even to an army. The space betwixt the troop and him was
steadily growing greater, yet he made no effort to quicken his pace,
but jogged quietly on, looking back from time to time to see if he were
followed. The same thought sprang into my comrade's mind and my own at
the same instant, and we read it in each other's faces.

'This path,' cried he eagerly. 'It brings us out beyond the grove, and
is in the hollow all the way.'

'Lead the horses until we get on better ground,' I answered. 'We may
just cut him off if we are lucky.'

There was no time for another word, for we hurried off down the uneven
track, sliding and slipping on the rain-soaked turf. Springing into our
saddles we dashed down the gorge, through the grove, and so out on to
the road in time to see the troop disappear in the distance, and to meet
the solitary officer face to face.

He was a sun-burned, high-featured man, with black mustachios, mounted
on a great raw-boned chestnut charger. As we broke out on to the road he
pulled up to have a good look at us. Then, having fully made up his mind
as to our hostile intent, he drew his sword, plucked a pistol out of his
holster with his left hand, and gripping the bridle between his teeth,
dug his spurs into his horse's flanks and charged down upon us at the
top of his speed. As we dashed at him, Reuben on his bridle arm and I
on the other, he cut fiercely at me, and at the same moment fired at my
companion. The ball grazed Reuben's cheek, leaving a red weal behind it
like a lash from a whip, and blackening his face with the powder. His
cut, however, fell short, and throwing my arm round his waist as the two
horses dashed past each other, I plucked him from the saddle and drew
him face upwards across my saddlebow. Brave Covenant lumbered on with
his double burden, and before the Guards had learned that they had lost
their officer, we had brought him safe, in spite of his struggles and
writhings, to within sight of Monmouth's camp.

'A narrow shave, friend,' quoth Reuben, with his hand to his cheek. 'He
hath tattooed my face with powder until I shall be taken for Solomon
Sprent's younger brother.'

'Thank God that you are unhurt,' said I. 'See, our horse are advancing
along the upper road. Lord Grey himself rides at their head. We had best
take our prisoner into camp, since we can do nought here.'

'For Christ's sake, either slay me or set me down!' he cried. 'I cannot
bear to be carried in this plight, like a half-weaned infant, through
your campful of grinning yokels.'

'I would not make sport of a brave man,' I answered. 'If you will give
your word to stay with us, you shall walk between us.'

'Willingly,' said he, scrambling down and arranging his ruffled attire.
'By my faith, sirs, ye have taught me a lesson not to think too meanly
of mine enemies. I should have ridden with my troop had I thought that
there was a chance of falling in with outposts or videttes.'

'We were upon the hill before we cut you off,' quoth Reuben. 'Had that
pistol ball been a thought straighter, it is I that should have been
truly the cut-off one. Zounds, Micah! I was grumbling even now that I
had fallen away, but had my cheek been as round as of old the slug had
been through it.'

'Where have I seen you before?' asked our captive, bending his dark
eyes upon me. 'Aye, I have it! It was in the inn at Salisbury, where
my light-headed comrade Horsford did draw upon an old soldier who was
riding with you. Mine own name is Ogilvy--Major Ogilvy of the Horse
Guards Blue. I was right glad that ye did come off safely from the
hounds. Some word had come of your errand after your departure, so this
same Horsford with the Mayor and one or two other Tantivies, whose zeal
methinks outran their humanity, slipped the dogs upon your trail.'

'I remember you well,' I answered. 'You will find Colonel Decimus Saxon,
my former companion, in the camp. No doubt you will be shortly exchanged
for some prisoner of ours.'

'Much more likely to have my throat cut,' said he, with a smile. 'I
fear that Feversham in his present temper will scarce pause to make
prisoners, and Monmouth may be tempted to pay him back in his own
coin. Yet it is the fortune of war, and I should pay for my want of all
soldierly caution. Truth to tell, my mind was far from battles and ruses
at the moment, for it had wandered away to aqua-regia and its action
upon the metals, until your appearance brought me back to soldiership.'

'The horse are out of sight,' said Reuben, looking backwards, 'ours as
well as theirs. Yet I see a clump of men over yonder at the other side
of the Avon, and there on the hillside can you not see the gleam of
steel?'

'There are foot there,' I answered, puckering my eyes. 'It seems to me
that I can discern four or five regiments and as many colours of horse.
King Monmouth should know of this with all speed.'

'He does know of it,' said Reuben. 'Yonder he stands under the trees
with his council about him. See, one of them rides this way!'

A trooper had indeed detached himself from the group and galloped
towards us. 'If you are Captain Clarke, sir,' he said, with a salute,
'the King orders you to join his council.'

'Then I leave the Major in your keeping, Reuben,' I cried. 'See that
he hath what our means allow.' So saying I spurred my horse, and soon
joined the group who were gathered round the King. There were Grey,
Wade, Buyse, Ferguson, Saxon, Hollis, and a score more, all looking very
grave, and peering down the valley with their glasses. Monmouth himself
had dismounted, and was leaning against the trunk of a tree, with his
arms folded upon his breast, and a look of white despair upon his face.
Behind the tree a lackey paced up and down leading his glossy black
charger, who pranced and tossed his lordly mane, a very king among
horses.

'You see, friends,' said Monmouth, turning lack-lustre eyes from one
leader to another, 'Providence would seem to be against us. Some new
mishap is ever at our heels.'

'Not Providence, your Majesty, but our own negligence,' cried Saxon
boldly. 'Had we advanced on Bristol last night, we might have been on
the right side of the ramparts by now.'

'But we had no thought that the enemy's foot was so near!' exclaimed
Wade.

'I told ye what would come of it, and so did Oberst Buyse and the worthy
Mayor of Taunton,' Saxon answered. 'However, there is nought to be
gained by mourning over a broken pipkin. We must e'en piece it together
as best we may.'

'Let us advance on Bristol, and put oor trust in the Highest,' quoth
Ferguson. 'If it be His mighty will that we should tak' it, then
shall we enter into it, yea, though drakes and sakers lay as thick as
cobblestanes in the streets.'

'Aye! aye! On to Bristol! God with us!' cried several of the Puritans
excitedly.

'But it is madness--dummheit--utter foolishness,' Buyse broke in hotly.
'You have the chance and you will not take it. Now the chance is gone
and you are all eager to go. Here is an army of, as near as I can judge,
five thousand men on the right side of the river. We are on the wrong
side, and yet you talk of crossing and making a beleaguering of Bristol
without breaching-pieces or spades, and with this force in our rear.
Will the town make terms when they can see from their ramparts the van
of the army which comes to help them? Or does it assist us in fighting
the army to have a strong town beside us, from which horse and foot can
make an outfall upon our flank? I say again that it is madness.'

What the German soldier said was so clearly the truth that even the
fanatics were silenced. Away in the east the long shimmering lines
of steel, and the patches of scarlet upon the green hillside, were
arguments which the most thoughtless could not overlook.

'What would you advise, then?' asked Monmouth moodily, tapping his
jewelled riding-whip against his high boots.

'To cross the river and come to hand-grips with them ere they can
get help from the town,' the burly German answered bluntly. 'I cannot
understand what we are here for if it be not to fight. If we win, the
town must fall. If we lose, We have had a bold stroke for it, and can do
no more.'

'Is that your opinion, too, Colonel Saxon?' the King asked.

'Assuredly, your Majesty, if we can fight to advantage. We can scarce
do that, however, by crossing the river on a single narrow bridge in
the face of such a force. I should advise that we destroy this Keynsham
Bridge, and march down this southern bank in the hope of forcing a fight
in a position which we may choose.'

'We have not yet summoned Bath,' said Wade. 'Let us do as Colonel Saxon
proposes, and let us in the meantime march in that direction and send a
trumpet to the governor.'

'There is yet another plan,' quoth Sir Stephen Timewell, 'which is to
hasten to Gloucester, to cross the Severn there, and so march through
Worcestershire into Shropshire and Cheshire. Your Majesty has many
friends in those parts.'

Monmouth paced up and down with his hand to his forehead like one
distrait. 'What am I to do,' he cried at last, 'in the midst of all this
conflicting advice, when I know that not only my own success, but the
lives of these poor faithful peasants and craftsmen depend upon my
resolution?'

'With all humbleness, your Majesty,' said Lord Grey, who had just
returned with the horse, 'I should suggest, since there are only a few
troops of their cavalry on this side of the Avon, that we blow up the
bridge and move onwards to Bath, whence we can pass into Wiltshire,
which we know to be friendly.'

'So be it!' cried the King, with the reckless air of one who accepts
a plan, not because it is the best, but because he feels that all are
equally hopeless. 'What think you, gentlemen?' he added, with a bitter
smile. 'I have heard news from London this morning, that my uncle has
clapped two hundred merchants and others who are suspected of being true
to their creed into the Tower and the Fleet. He will have one half of
the nation mounting guard over the other half ere long.'

'Or the whole, your Majesty, mounting guard over him,' suggested Wade.
'He may himself see the Traitor's Gate some of these mornings.'

'Ha, ha! Think ye so? think ye so!' cried Monmouth, rubbing his hands
and brightening into a smile. 'Well, mayhap you have nicked the truth.
Who knows? Henry's cause seemed a losing one until Bosworth Field
settled the contention. To your charges, gentlemen. We shall march in
half-an-hour. Colonel Saxon and you, Sir Stephen, shall cover the rear
and guard the baggage--a service of honour with this fringe of horse
upon our skirts.'

The council broke up forthwith, every man riding off to his own
regiment. The whole camp was in a stir, bugles blowing and drums
rattling, until in a very short time the army was drawn up in order, and
the forlorn of cavalry had already started along the road which leads to
Bath. Five hundred horse with the Devonshire militiamen were in the van.
After them in order came the sailor regiment, the North Somerset men,
the first Taunton regiment of burghers, the Mendip and Bagworthy miners,
the lace and wool-workers of Honiton, Wellington, and Ottery St. Mary;
the woodmen, the graziers, the marsh-men, and the men from the Quantock
district. Behind were the guns and the baggage, with our own brigade and
four colours of horse as a rearguard. On our march we could see the red
coats of Feversham keeping pace with us upon the other side of the Avon.
A large body of his horse and dragoons had forded the stream and hovered
upon our skirts, but Saxon and Sir Stephen covered the baggage so
skilfully, and faced round so fiercely with such a snarl of musketry
whenever they came too nigh, that they never ventured to charge home.



Chapter XXVIII. Of the Fight in Wells Cathedral

I am fairly tied to the chariot-wheels of history now, my dear children,
and must follow on with name and place and date, whether my tale suffer
by it or no. With such a drama as this afoot it were impertinent to
speak of myself, save in so far as I saw or heard what may make these
old scenes more vivid to you. It is no pleasant matter for me to dwell
upon, yet, convinced as I am that there is no such thing as chance
either in the great or the little things of this world, I am very sure
that the sacrifices of these brave men were not thrown away, and that
their strivings were not as profitless as might at first sight appear.
If the perfidious race of Stuart is not now seated upon the throne, and
if religion in England is still a thing of free growth, we may, to my
thinking, thank these Somerset yokels for it, who first showed how small
a thing would shake the throne of an unpopular monarch. Monmouth's
army was but the vanguard of that which marched throe years later into
London, when James and his cruel ministers were flying as outcasts over
the face of the earth.

On the night of June 27, or rather early in the morning of June 28, we
reached the town of Frome, very wet and miserable, for the rain had come
on again, and all the roads were quagmires. From this next day we pushed
on once more to Wells, where we spent the night and the whole of the
next day, to give the men time to get their clothes dry, and to recover
themselves after their privations.

In the forenoon a parade of our Wiltshire regiment was held in the
Cathedral Close, when Monmouth praised it, as it well deserved, for the
soldierly progress made in so short a time.

As we returned to our quarters after dismissing our men we came upon a
great throng of the rough Bagworthy and Oare miners, who were assembled
in the open space in front of the Cathedral, listening to one of their
own number, who was addressing them from a cart. The wild and frenzied
gestures of the man showed us that he was one of those extreme sectaries
whose religion runs perilously near to madness. The hums and groans
which rose from the crowd proved, however, that his fiery words were
well suited to his hearers, so we halted on the verge of the multitude
and hearkened to his address. A red-bearded, fierce-faced man he was,
with tangled shaggy hair tumbling over his gleaming eyes, and a hoarse
voice which resounded over the whole square.

'What shall we not do for the Lord?' he cried; 'what shall we not do for
the Holy of Holies? Why is it that His hand is heavy upon us? Why is it
that we have not freed this land, even as Judith freed Bethulia? Behold,
we have looked for peace but no good came, and for a time of health, and
behold trouble! Why is this, I say? Truly, brothers, it is because we
have slighted the Lord, because we have not been wholehearted towards
Him. Lo! we have praised Him with our breath, but in our deeds we have
been cold towards Him. Ye know well that Prelacy is an accursed thing--a
hissing and an abomination in the eyes of the Almighty! Yet what have
we, His servants, wrought for Him in this matter? Have we not seen
Prelatist churches, churches of form and of show, where the creature is
confounded with the Creator--have we not seen them, I say, and have we
not forborne to sweep them away, and so lent our sanction to them? There
is the sin of a lukewarm and back-sliding generation! There is the cause
why the Lord should look coldly upon His people! Lo! at Shepton and at
Frome we have left such churches behind us. At Glastonbury, too, we have
spared those wicked walls which were reared by idolatrous hands of old.
Woe unto ye, if, after having put your hands to God's plough, ye turn
back from the work! See there!' he howled, facing round to the beautiful
Cathedral, 'what means this great heap of stones? Is it not an altar of
Baal? Is it not built for man-worship rather than God-worship? Is it not
there that the man Ken, tricked out in his foolish rochet and baubles,
may preach his soulless and lying doctrines, which are but the old dish
of Popery served up under a new cover? And shall we suffer this thing?
Shall we, the chosen children of the Great One, allow this plague-spot
to remain? Can we expect the Almighty to help us when we will not
stretch out a hand to help Him? We have left the other temples of
Prelacy behind us. Shall we leave this one, too, my brothers?'

'No, no!' yelled the crowd, tossing and swaying.

'Shall we pluck it down, then, until no one stone is left upon another?'

'Yes, yes!' they shouted.

'Now, at once?'

'Yes, yes!'

'Then to work!' he cried, and springing from the cart he rushed towards
the Cathedral, with the whole mob of wild fanatics at his heels. Some
crowded in, shouting and yelling, through the open doors, while others
swarmed up the pillars and pedestals of the front, hacking at the
sculptured ornaments, and tugging at the grey old images which filled
every niche.

'This must be stopped,' said Saxon curtly. 'We cannot afford to insult
and estray the whole Church of England to please a few hot-headed
ranters. The pillage of this Cathedral would do our cause more harm than
a pitched battle lost. Do you bring up your company, Sir Gervas, and we
shall do what we can to hold them in check until they come.'

'Hi, Masterton!' cried the Baronet, spying one of his under-officers
among the crowd who were looking on, neither assisting nor opposing the
rioters. 'Do you hasten to the quarters, and tell Barker to bring up the
company with their matches burning. I may be of use here.'

'Ha, here is Buyse!' cried Saxon joyously, as the huge German ploughed
his way through the crowd. 'And Lord Grey, too! We must save the
Cathedral, my lord! They would sack and burn it.'

'This way, gentlemen,' cried an old grey-haired man, running out towards
us with hands outspread, and a bunch of keys clanking at his girdle. 'Oh
hasten, gentlemen, if ye can indeed prevail over these lawless men! They
have pulled down Saint Peter, and they will have Paul down too unless
help comes. There will not be an apostle left. The east window is
broken. They have brought a hogshead of beer, and are broaching it
upon the high altar. Oh, alas, alas! That such things should be in a
Christian land!' He sobbed aloud and stamped about in a very frenzy of
grief.

'It is the verger, sirs,' said one of the townsfolk. 'He hath grown grey
in the Cathedral.'

'This way to the vestry door, my lords and gentlemen,' cried the old
man, pushing a way strenuously through the crowd. 'Now, lack-a-day, the
sainted Paul hath gone too!'

As he spoke a splintering crash from inside the Cathedral announced some
fresh outrage on the part of the zealots. Our guide hastened on with
renewed speed, until he came to a low oaken door heavily arched, which
he unlocked with much rasping of wards and creaking of hinges. Through
this we sidled as best we might, and hurried after the old man down a
stone-flagged corridor, which led through a wicket into the Cathedral
close by the high altar.

The great building was full of the rioters, who were rushing hither and
thither, destroying and breaking everything which they could lay their
hands on. A good number of these were genuine zealots, the followers of
the preacher whom we had listened to outside. Others, however, were on
the face of them mere rogues and thieves, such as gather round every
army upon the march. While the former were tearing down images from the
walls, or hurling the books of common prayer through the stained-glass
windows, the others were rooting up the massive brass candlesticks,
and carrying away everything which promised to be of value. One ragged
fellow was in the pulpit, tearing off the crimson velvet and hurling it
down among the crowd. Another had upset the reading-desk, and was busily
engaged in wrenching off the brazen fastenings. In the centre of
the side aisle a small group had a rope round the neck of Mark the
Evangelist, and were dragging lustily upon it, until, even as we
entered, the statue, after tottering for a few moments, came crashing
down upon the marble floor. The shouts which greeted every fresh
outrage, with the splintering of woodwork, the smashing of windows, and
the clatter of falling masonry, made up a most deafening uproar, which
was increased by the droning of the organ, until some of the rioters
silenced it by slitting up the bellows.

What more immediately concerned ourselves was the scene which was being
enacted just in front of us at the high altar. A barrel of beer had been
placed upon it, and a dozen ruffians gathered round it, one of whom with
many ribald jests had climbed up, and was engaged in knocking in the
top of the cask with a hatchet. As we entered he had just succeeded in
broaching it, and the brown mead was foaming over, while the mob with
roars of laughter were passing up their dippers and pannikins. The
German soldier rapped out a rough jagged oath at this spectacle, and
shouldering his way through the roisterers he sprang upon the altar.
The ringleader was bending over his cask, black-jack in hand, when the
soldier's iron grip fell upon his collar, and in a moment his heels were
flapping in the air, and his head three feet deep in the cask, while the
beer splashed and foamed in every direction. With a mighty heave Buyse
picked up the barrel with the half-drowned miner inside, and hurled it
clattering down the broad marble steps which led from the body of the
church. At the same time, with the aid of a dozen of our men who had
followed us into the Cathedral, we drove back the fellow's comrades, and
thrust them out beyond the rails which divided the choir from the nave.

Our inroad had the effect of checking the riot, but it simply did so by
turning the fury of the zealots from the walls and windows to ourselves.
Images, stone-work, and wood-carvings were all abandoned, and the whole
swarm came rushing up with a hoarse buzz of rage, all discipline and
order completely lost in their religious frenzy. 'Smite the Prelatists!'
they howled. 'Down with the friends of Antichrist! Cut them off even at
the horns of the altar! Down with them!' On either side they massed, a
wild, half-demented crowd, some with arms and some without, but filled
to a man with the very spirit of murder.

'This is a civil war within a civil war,' said Lord Grey, with a quiet
smile. 'We had best draw, gentlemen, and defend the gap in the rails, if
we may hold it good until help arrives.' He flashed out his rapier as
he spoke, and took his stand on the top of the steps, with Saxon and Sir
Gervas upon one side of him, Buyse, Reuben, and myself upon the other.
There was only room for six to wield their weapons with effect, so our
scanty band of followers scattered themselves along the line of the
rails, which were luckily so high and strong as to make an escalado
difficult in the face of any opposition.

The riot had now changed into open mutiny among these marshmen and
miners. Pikes, scythes, and knives glimmered through the dim light,
while their wild cries re-echoed from the high arched roof like the
howling of a pack of wolves. 'Go forward, my brothers,' cried the
fanatic preacher, who had been the cause of the outbreak--'go forward
against them! What though they be in high places! There is One who
is higher than they. Shall we shrink from His work because of a naked
sword? Shall we suffer the Prelatist altar to be preserved by these sons
of Amalek? On, on! In the name of the Lord!'

'In the name of the Lord!' cried the crowd, with a sort of hissing gasp,
like one who is about to plunge into an icy bath. 'In the name of the
Lord!' From either side they came on, gathering speed and volume, until
at last with a wild cry they surged right down upon our sword-points.

I can say nothing of what took place to right or left of me during the
ruffle, for indeed there were so many pressing upon us, and the fight
was so hot, that it was all that each of us could do to hold our own.
The very number of our assailants was in our favour, by hampering their
sword-arms. One burly miner cut fiercely at me with his scythe, but
missing me he swung half round with the force of the blow, and I passed
my sword through his body before he could recover himself. It was the
first time that I had ever slain a man in anger, my dear children, and
I shall never forget his white startled face as he looked over his
shoulder at me ere he fell. Another closed in with me before I could get
my weapon disengaged, but I struck him out with my left hand, and then
brought the flat of my sword upon his head, laying him senseless
upon the pavement. God knows, I did not wish to take the lives of the
misguided and ignorant zealots, but our own were at stake. A marshman,
looking more like a shaggy wild beast than a human being, darted under
my weapon and caught me round the knees, while another brought a flail
down upon my head-piece, from which it glanced on to my shoulder. A
third thrust at me with a pike, and pricked me on the thigh, but I shore
his weapon in two with one blow, and split his head with the next. The
man with the flail gave back at sight of this, and a kick freed me from
the unarmed ape-like creature at my feet, so that I found myself clear
of my assailants, and none the worse for my encounter, save for a touch
on the leg and some stiffness of the neck and shoulder.

Looking round I found that my comrades had also beaten off those who
were opposed to them. Saxon was holding his bloody rapier in his left
hand, while the blood was trickling from a slight wound upon his right.
Two miners lay across each other in front of him, but at the feet of
Sir Gervas Jerome no fewer than four bodies were piled together. He had
plucked out his snuff-box as I glanced at him, and was offering it with
a bow and a flourish to Lord Grey, as unconcernedly as though he were
back once more in his London coffee-house. Buyse leaned upon his long
broadsword, and looked gloomily at a headless trunk in front of him,
which I recognised from the dress as being that of the preacher. As to
Reuben, he was unhurt himself, but in sore distress over my own trifling
scar, though I assured the faithful lad that it was a less thing than
many a tear from branch or thorn which we had had when blackberrying
together.

The fanatics, though driven back, were not men to be content with a
single repulse. They had lost ten of their number, including their
leader, without being able to break our line, but the failure only
served to increase their fury. For a minute or so they gathered panting
in the aisle. Then with a mad yell they dashed in once more, and made a
desperate effort to cut a way through to the altar. It was a fiercer and
more prolonged struggle than before. One of our followers was stabbed to
the heart over the rails, and fell without a groan. Another was stunned
by a mass of masonry hurled at him by a giant cragsman. Reuben was
felled by a club, and would have been dragged out and hacked to pieces
had I not stood over him and beaten off his assailants. Sir Gervas was
borne off his legs by the rush, but lay like a wounded wildcat, striking
out furiously at everything which came within his reach. Buyse and
Saxon, back to back, stood firm amidst the seething, rushing crowd,
cutting down every man within sweep of their swords. Yet in such a
struggle numbers must in the end prevail, and I confess that I for one
had begun to have fears for the upshot of our contest, when the heavy
tramp of disciplined feet rang through the Cathedral, and the Baronet's
musqueteers came at a quick run up the central aisle. The fanatics did
not await their charge, but darted off over benches and pews, followed
by our allies, who were furious on seeing their beloved Captain upon the
ground. There was a wild minute or two, with confused shuffling of feet,
stabs, groans, and the clatter of musket butts on the marble floor. Of
the rioters some were slain, but the greater part threw down their arms
and were arrested at the command of Lord Grey, while a strong guard was
placed at the gates to prevent any fresh outburst of sectarian fury.

When at last the Cathedral was cleared and order restored, we had time
to look around us and to reckon our own injuries. In all my wanderings,
and the many wars in which I afterwards fought--wars compared to which
this affair of Monmouth's was but the merest skirmish--I have never seen
a stranger or more impressive scene. In the dim, solemn light the pile
of bodies in front of the rails, with their twisted limbs and white-set
faces, had a most sad and ghost-like aspect. The evening light, shining
through one of the few unbroken stained-glass windows, cast great
splotches of vivid crimson and of sickly green upon the heap of
motionless figures. A few wounded men sat about in the front pews or lay
upon the steps moaning for water. Of our own small company not one had
escaped unscathed. Three of our followers had been slain outright, while
a fourth was lying stunned from a blow. Buyse and Sir Gervas were much
bruised. Saxon was cut on the right arm. Reuben had been felled by a
bludgeon stroke, and would certainly have been slain but for the fine
temper of Sir Jacob Clancing's breastplate, which had turned a fierce
pike-thrust. As to myself it is scarce worth the mention, but my head
sang for some hours like a good wife's kettle, and my boot was full of
blood, which may have been a blessing in disguise, for Sneckson, our
Havant barber, was ever dinning into my ears how much the better I
should be for a phlebotomy.

In the meantime all the troops had assembled and the mutiny been swiftly
stamped out. There were doubtless many among the Puritans who had no
love for the Prelatists, but none save the most crack-brained fanatics
could fail to see that the sacking of the Cathedral would set the
whole Church of England in arms, and ruin the cause for which they were
fighting. As it was, much damage had been done; for whilst the gang
within had been smashing all which they could lay their hands upon,
others outside had chipped off cornices and gargoyles, and had even
dragged the lead covering from the roof and hurled it down in great
sheets to their companions beneath. This last led to some profit, for
the army had no great store of ammunition, so the lead was gathered up
by Monmouth's orders and recast into bullets. The prisoners were held
in custody for a time, but it was deemed unwise to punish them, so that
they were finally pardoned and dismissed from the army.

A parade of our whole force was held in the fields outside the town upon
the second day of our stay at Wells, the weather having at last become
warm and sunny. The foot was then found to muster six regiments of nine
hundred men, or five thousand four hundred in all. Of these fifteen
hundred were musqueteers, two thousand were pikemen, and the rest were
scythesmen or peasants with flails and hammers. A few bodies, such as
our own or those from Taunton, might fairly lay claim to be soldiers,
but the most of them were still labourers and craftsmen with weapons
in their hands. Yet, ill-armed and ill-drilled as they were, they were
still strong robust Englishmen, full of native courage and of religious
zeal. The light and fickle Monmouth began to take heart once more at the
sight of their sturdy bearing, and at the sound of their hearty cheers.
I heard him as I sat my horse beside his staff speak exultantly to those
around him, and ask whether these fine fellows could possibly be beaten
by mercenary half-hearted hirelings.

'What say you, Wade!' he cried. 'Are we never to see a smile on that sad
face of yours? Do you not see a woolsack in store for you as you look
upon these brave fellows?'

'God forbid that I should say a word to damp your Majesty's ardour,' the
lawyer answered; 'yet I cannot but remember that there was a time when
your Majesty, at the head of these same hirelings, did drive men as
brave as these in headlong rout from Bothwell Bridge.'

'True, true!' said the King, passing his hand over his forehead--a
favourite motion when he was worried and annoyed. 'They were bold men,
the western Covenanters, yet they could not stand against the rush of
our battalions. But they had had no training, whereas these can fight in
line and fire a platoon as well as one would wish to see.'

'If we hadna a gun nor a patronal among us,' said Ferguson, 'if we hadna
sae muckle as a sword, but just oor ain honds, yet would the Lard gie us
the victory, if it seemed good in His a' seeing een.'

'All battles are but chance work, your Majesty,' remarked Saxon, whose
sword-arm was bound round with his kerchief. 'Some lucky turn, some slip
or chance which none can foresee, is ever likely to turn the scale. I
have lost when I have looked to win, and I have won when I have looked
to lose. It is an uncertain game, and one never knows the finish till
the last card is played.'

'Not till the stakes are drawn,' said Buyse, in his deep guttural voice.
'There is many a leader that wins what you call the trick, and yet loses
the game.'

'The trick being the battle and the game the campaign,' quoth the King,
with a smile. 'Our German friend is a master of camp-fire metaphors. But
methinks our poor horses are in a sorry state. What would cousin William
over at The Hague, with his spruce guards, think of such a show as
this?'

During this talk the long column of foot had tramped past, still bearing
the banners which they had brought with them to the wars, though much
the worse for wind and weather. Monmouth's remarks had been drawn forth
by the aspect of the ten troops of horse which followed. The chargers
had been sadly worn by the continued work and constant rain, while the
riders, having allowed their caps and fronts to get coated with rust,
appeared to be in as bad a plight as their steeds. It was clear to the
least experienced of us that if we were to hold our own it was upon
our foot that we must rely. On the tops of the low hills all round the
frequent shimmer of arms, glancing here and there when the sun's rays
struck upon them, showed how strong our enemies were in the very point
in which we were so weak. Yet in the main this Wells review was cheering
to us, as showing that the men kept in good heart, and that there was no
ill-feeling at the rough handling of the zealots upon the day before.

The enemy's horse hovered about us during these days, but the foot had
been delayed through the heavy weather and the swollen streams. On the
last day of June we marched out of Wells, and made our way across flat
sedgy plains and over the low Polden Hills to Bridgewater, where we
found some few recruits awaiting us. Here Monmouth had some thoughts
of making a stand, and even set to work raising earthworks, but it was
pointed out to him that, even could he hold the town, there was not more
than a few days' provisions within it, while the country round had been
already swept so bare that little more could be expected from it. The
works were therefore abandoned, and, fairly driven to bay, without a
loophole of escape left, we awaited the approach of the enemy.



Chapter XXIX. Of the Great Cry from the Lonely House

And so our weary marching and counter-marching came at last to an end,
and we found ourselves with our backs fairly against the wall, and the
whole strength of the Government turned against us. Not a word came
to us of a rising or movement in our favour in any part of England.
Everywhere the Dissenters were cast into prison and the Church dominant.
From north and east and west the militia of the counties was on its
march against us. In London six regiments of Dutch troops had arrived as
a loan from the Prince of Orange. Others were said to be on their way.
The City had enrolled ten thousand men. Everywhere there was mustering
and marching to succour the flower of the English army, which was
already in Somersetshire. And all for the purpose of crushing some five
or six thousand clodhoppers and fishermen, half-armed and penniless, who
were ready to throw their lives away for a man and for an idea.

But this idea, my dear children, was a noble one, and one which a man
might very well sacrifice all for, and yet feel that all was well spent.
For though these poor peasants, in their dumb, blundering fashion, would
have found it hard to give all their reasons in words, yet in the inmost
heart of them they knew and felt that it was England's cause which they
were fighting for, and that they were upholding their country's true
self against those who would alter the old systems under which she had
led the nations. Three more years made all this very plain, and showed
that our simple unlettered followers had seen and judged the signs of
the times more correctly than those who called themselves their betters.
There are, to my thinking, stages of human progress for which the Church
of Rome is admirably suited. Where the mind of a nation is young, it may
be best that it should not concern itself with spiritual affairs, but
should lean upon the old staff of custom and authority. But England had
cast off her swaddling-clothes, and was a nursery of strong, thinking
men, who would bow to no authority save that which their reason and
conscience approved. It was hopeless, useless, foolish, to try to drive
such men back into a creed which they had outgrown. Such an attempt was,
however, being made, backed by all the weight of a bigoted king with a
powerful and wealthy Church as his ally. In three years the nation would
understand it, and the King would be flying from his angry people; but
at present, sunk in a torpor after the long civil wars and the corrupt
reign of Charles, they failed to see what was at stake, and turned
against those who would warn them, as a hasty man turns on the messenger
who is the bearer of evil tidings. Is it not strange, my dears, how
quickly a mere shadowy thought comes to take living form, and grow into
a very tragic reality? At one end of the chain is a king brooding over a
point of doctrine; at the other are six thousand desperate men, chivied
and chased from shire to shire, standing to bay at last amid the bleak
Bridgewater marshes, with their hearts as bitter and as hopeless as
those of hunted beasts of prey. A king's theology is a dangerous thing
for his subjects.

But if the idea for which these poor men fought was a worthy one, what
shall we say of the man who had been chosen as the champion of their
cause? Alas, that such men should have had such a leader! Swinging from
the heights of confidence to the depths of despair, choosing his future
council of state one day and proposing to fly from the army on the
next, he appeared from the start to be possessed by the very spirit
of fickleness. Yet he had borne a fair name before this enterprise. In
Scotland he had won golden opinions, not only for his success, but for
the moderation and mercy with which he treated the vanquished. On the
Continent he had commanded an English brigade in a way that earned
praise from old soldiers of Louis and the Empire. Yet now, when his own
head and his own fortunes were at stake, he was feeble, irresolute, and
cowardly. In my father's phrase, 'all the virtue had gone out of him.'
I declare when I have seen him riding among his troops, with his head
bowed upon his breast and a face like a mute at a burying, casting an
air of gloom and of despair all round him, I have felt that, even in
case of success, such a man could never wear the crown of the Tudors and
the Plantagenets, but that some stronger hand, were it that of one of
his own generals, would wrest it from him.

I will do Monmouth the justice to say that from the time when it was at
last decided to fight--for the very good reason that no other course was
open--he showed up in a more soldierly and manlier spirit. For the first
few days in July no means were neglected to hearten our troops and to
nerve them for the coming battle. From morning to night we were at work,
teaching our foot how to form up in dense groups to meet the charge of
horse, and how to depend upon each other, and look to their officers for
orders. At night the streets of the little town from the Castle Field
to the Parret Bridge resounded with the praying and the preaching. There
was no need for the officers to quell irregularities, for the troops
punished them amongst themselves. One man who came out on the streets
hot with wine was well-nigh hanged by his companions, who finally cast
him out of the town as being unworthy to fight in what they looked
upon as a sacred quarrel. As to their courage, there was no occasion to
quicken that, for they were as fearless as lions, and the only danger
was lest their fiery daring should lead them into foolhardiness. Their
desire was to hurl themselves upon the enemy like a horde of Moslem
fanatics, and it was no easy matter to drill such hot-headed fellows
into the steadiness and caution which war demands.

Provisions ran low upon the third day of our stay in Bridgewater, which
was due to our having exhausted that part of the country before, and
also to the vigilance of the Royal Horse, who scoured the district round
and cut off our supplies. Lord Grey determined, therefore, to send
out two troops of horse under cover of night, to do what they could to
refill the larder. The command of the small expedition was given over
to Major Martin Hooker, an old Lifeguardsman of rough speech and curt
manners, who had done good service in drilling the headstrong farmers
and yeomen into some sort of order. Sir Gervas Jerome and I asked leave
from Lord Grey to join the foray--a favour which was readily granted,
since there was little stirring in the town.

It was about eleven o'clock on a moonless night that we sallied out
of Bridgewater, intending to explore the country in the direction of
Boroughbridge and Athelney. We had word that there was no large body
of the enemy in that quarter, and it was a fertile district where
good store of supplies might be hoped for. We took with us four empty
waggons, to carry whatever we might have the luck to find. Our commander
arranged that one troop should ride before these and one behind, while a
small advance party, under the charge of Sir Gervas, kept some hundreds
of paces in front. In this order we clattered out of the town just as
the late bugles were blowing, and swept away down the quiet shadowy
roads, bringing anxious peering faces to the casements of the wayside
cottages as we whirled past in the darkness.

That ride comes very clearly before me as I think of it. The dark loom
of the club-headed willows flitting by us, the moaning of the breeze
among the withies, the vague, blurred figures of the troopers, the dull
thud of the hoofs, and the jingling of scabbard against stirrup--eye and
ear can both conjure up those old-time memories. The Baronet and I rode
in front, knee against knee, and his light-hearted chatter of life in
town, with his little snatches of verse or song from Cowley or Waller,
were a very balm of Gilead to my sombre and somewhat heavy spirit.

'Life is indeed life on such a night as this,' quoth he, as we breathed
in the fresh country air with the reeks of crops and of kine. 'Rabbit
me! but you are to be envied, Clarke, for having been born and bred in
the country! What pleasures has the town to offer compared to the free
gifts of nature, provided always that there be a perruquier's and
a snuff merchant's, and a scent vendor's, and one or two tolerable
outfitters within reach? With these and a good coffee-house and a
playhouse, I think I could make shift to lead a simple pastoral life for
some months.'

'In the country,' said I, laughing, 'we have ever the feeling that the
true life of mankind, with the growth of knowledge and wisdom, are being
wrought out in the towns.'

'Ventre Saint-Gris! It was little knowledge or wisdom that I acquired
there,' he answered. 'Truth to tell, I have lived more and learned more
during these few weeks that we have been sliding about in the rain with
our ragged lads, than ever I did when I was page of the court, with the
ball of fortune at my feet. It is a sorry thing for a man's mind to have
nothing higher to dwell upon than the turning of a compliment or the
dancing of a corranto. Zounds, lad! I have your friend the carpenter to
thank for much. As he says in his letter, unless a man can get the good
that is in him out, he is of loss value in the world than one of those
fowls that we hear cackling, for they at least fulfill their mission, if
it be only to lay eggs. Ged, it is a new creed for me to be preaching!'

'But,' said I, 'when you were a wealthy man you must have been of
service to some one, for how could one spend so much money and yet none
be the better?'

'You dear bucolic Micah!' he cried, with a gay laugh. 'You will ever
speak of my poor fortune with bated breath and in an awestruck voice, as
though it were the wealth of the Indies. You cannot think, lad, how easy
it is for a money-bag to take unto itself wings and fly. It is true that
the man who spends it doth not consume the money, but passes it on to
some one who profits thereby. Yet the fault lies in the fact that it was
to the wrong folk that we passed our money, thereby breeding a useless
and debauched class at the expense of honest callings. Od's fish, lad!
when I think of the swarms of needy beggars, the lecherous pimps, the
nose-slitting bullies, the toadies and the flatterers who were reared by
us, I feel that in hatching such a poisonous brood our money hath done
what no money can undo. Have I not seen them thirty deep of a morning
when I have held my levee, cringing up to my bedside--'

'Your bedside!' I exclaimed.

'Aye! it was the mode to receive in bed, attired in laced cambric
shirt and periwig, though afterwards it was permitted to sit up in your
chamber, but dressed _a la negligence_, in gown and slippers. The mode
is a terrible tyrant, Clarke, though its arm may not extend as far as
Havant. The idle man of the town must have some rule of life, so he
becomes a slave to the law of the fashions. No man in London was more
subject to it than myself. I was regular in my irregularities, and
orderly in my disorders. At eleven o'clock to the stroke, up came my
valet with the morning cup of hippocras, an excellent thing for the
qualms, and some slight refection, as the breast of an ortolan or wing
of a widgeon. Then came the levee, twenty, thirty, or forty of the class
I have spoken of, though now and then perhaps there might be some honest
case of want among them, some needy man-of-letters in quest of a guinea,
or pupil-less pedant with much ancient learning in his head and very
little modern coinage in his pocket. It was not only that I had some
power of mine own, but I was known to have the ear of my Lord Halifax,
Sidney Godolphin, Lawrence Hyde, and others whose will might make or mar
a man. Mark you those lights upon the left! Would it not be well to see
if there is not something to be had there?'

'Hooker hath orders to proceed to a certain farm,' I answered. 'This we
could take upon our return should we still have space. We shall be back
here before morning.'

'We must get supplies, if I have to ride back to Surrey for them,' said
he. 'Rat me, if I dare look my musqueteers in the face again unless I
bring them something to toast upon the end of their ramrods! They had
little more savoury than their own bullets to put in their mouths when
I left them. But I was speaking of old days in London. Our time was
well filled. Should a man of quality incline to sport there was ever
something to attract him. He might see sword-playing at Hockley, or
cocking at Shoe Lane, or baiting at Southwark, or shooting at Tothill
Fields. Again, he might walk in the physic gardens of St. James's, or go
down the river with the ebb tide to the cherry orchards at Rotherhithe,
or drive to Islington to drink the cream, or, above all, walk in the
Park, which is most modish for a gentleman who dresses in the fashion.
You see, Clarke, that we were active in our idleness, and that there was
no lack of employment. Then as evening came on there were the playhouses
to draw us, Dorset Gardens, Lincoln's Inn, Drury Lane, and the
Queen's--among the four there was ever some amusement to be found.'

'There, at least, your time was well employed,' said I; 'you could
not hearken to the grand thoughts or lofty words of Shakespeare or of
Massinger without feeling some image of them in your own soul.'

Sir Gervas chuckled quietly. 'You are as fresh to me, Micah, as this
sweet country air,' said he. 'Know, thou dear babe, that it was not to
see the play that we frequented the playhouse.'

'Then why, in Heaven's name?' I asked.

'To see each other,' he answered. 'It was the mode, I assure you, for a
man of fashion to stand with his back turned to the stage from the
rise of the curtain to the fall of it. There were the orange wenches to
quiz--plaguey sharp of tongue the hussies are, too--and there were the
vizards of the pit, whose little black masks did invite inquiry, and
there were the beauties of the town and the toasts of the Court,
all fair mark for our quizzing-glasses. Play, indeed! S'bud, we had
something better to do than to listen to alexandrines or weigh the
merits of hexameters! 'Tis true that if La Jeune were dancing, or if
Mrs. Bracegirdle or Mrs. Oldfield came upon the boards, we would hum
and clap, but it was the fine woman that we applauded rather than the
actress.'

'And when the play was over you went doubtless to supper and so to bed?'

'To supper, certainly. Sometimes to the Rhenish House, sometimes to
Pontack's in Abchurch Lane. Every one had his own taste in that matter.
Then there were dice and cards at the Groom Porter's or under the arches
at Covent Garden, piquet, passage, hazard, primero--what you choose.
After that you could find all the world at the coffee-houses, where an
arriere supper was often served with devilled bones and prunes, to drive
the fumes of wine from the head. Zounds, Micah! If the Jews should relax
their pressure, or if this war brings us any luck, you shall come to
town with me and shall see all these things for yourself.'

'Truth to tell, it doth not tempt me much,' I answered. 'Slow and solemn
I am by nature, and in such scenes as you have described I should feel a
very death's head at a banquet.'

Sir Gervas was about to reply, when of a sudden out of the silence
of the night there rose a long-drawn piercing scream, which thrilled
through every nerve of our bodies. I have never heard such a wail of
despair. We pulled up our horses, as did the troopers behind us, and
strained our ears for some sign as to whence the sound proceeded, for
some were of opinion that it came from our right and some from our left.
The main body with the waggons had come up, and we all listened intently
for any return of the terrible cry. Presently it broke upon us again,
wild, shrill, and agonised: the scream of a woman in mortal distress.

'Tis over there, Major Hooker,' cried Sir Gervas, standing up in his
stirrups and peering through the darkness. 'There is a house about two
fields off. I can see some glimmer, as from a window with the blind
drawn.'

'Shall we not make for it at once?' I asked impatiently, for our
commander sat stolidly upon his horse as though by no means sure what
course he should pursue.

'I am here, Captain Clarke,' said he, 'to convey supplies to the army,
and I am by no means justified in turning from my course to pursue other
adventures.'

'Death, man! there is a woman in distress,' cried Sir Gervas. 'Why,
Major, you would not ride past and let her call in vain for help? Hark,
there she is again!' As he spoke the wild scream rang out once more from
the lonely house.

'Nay, I can abide this no longer,' I cried, my blood boiling in my
veins; 'do you go on your errand, Major Hooker, and my friend and I
shall leave you here. We shall know how to justify our action to the
King. Come, Sir Gervas!'

'Mark ye, this is flat mutiny, Captain Clarke,' said Hooker; 'you are
under my orders, and should you desert me you do so at your peril.'

'In such a case I care not a groat for thy orders,' I answered hotly.
Turning Covenant I spurred down a narrow, deeply-rutted lane which
led towards the house, followed by Sir Gervas and two or three of the
troopers. At the same moment I heard a sharp word of command from Hooker
and the creaking of wheels, showing that he had indeed abandoned us and
proceeded on his mission.

'He is right,' quoth the Baronet, as we rode down the lane; 'Saxon or
any other old soldier would commend his discipline.'

'There are things which are higher than discipline,' I muttered.
'I could not pass on and leave this poor soul in her distress. But
see--what have we here?'

A dark mass loomed in front of us, which proved as we approached to be
four horses fastened by their bridles to the hedge.

'Cavalry horses, Captain Clarke!' cried one of the troopers who had
sprung down to examine them. 'They have the Government saddle and
holsters. Here is a wooden gate which opens on a pathway leading to the
house.'

'We had best dismount, then,' said Sir Gervas, jumping down and tying
his horse beside the others. 'Do you, lads, stay by the horses, and if
we call for ye come to our aid. Sergeant Holloway, you can come with us.
Bring your pistols with you!'



Chapter XXX. Of the Swordsman with the Brown Jacket

The sergeant, who was a great raw-boned west-countryman, pushed the gate
open, and we were advancing up the winding pathway, when a stream of
yellow light flooded out from a suddenly opened door, and we saw a dark
squat figure dart through it into the inside of the house. At the same
moment there rose up a babel of sounds, followed by two pistol shots,
and a roaring, gasping hubbub, with clash of swords and storm of oaths.
At this sudden uproar we all three ran at our topmost speed up the
pathway and peered in through the open door, where we saw a scene such
as I shall never forget while this old memory of mine can conjure up any
picture of the past.

The room was large and lofty, with long rows of hams and salted meats
dangling from the smoke-browned rafters, as is usual in Somersetshire
farmhouses. A high black clock ticked in a corner, and a rude table,
with plates and dishes laid out as for a meal, stood in the centre.
Right in front of the door a great fire of wood faggots was blazing, and
before this, to our unutterable horror, there hung a man head downwards,
suspended by a rope which was knotted round his ankles, and which,
passing over a hook in a beam, had been made fast to a ring in the
floor. The struggles of this unhappy man had caused the rope to whirl
round, so that he was spinning in front of the blaze like a joint
of meat. Across the threshold lay a woman, the one whose cries had
attracted us, but her rigid face and twisted body showed that our
aid had come too late to save her from the fate which she had seen
impending. Close by her two swarthy dragoons in the glaring red coats of
the Royal army lay stretched across each other upon the floor, dark and
scowling even in death. In the centre of the room two other dragoons
were cutting and stabbing with their broad-swords at a thick, short,
heavy-shouldered man, clad in coarse brown kersey stuff, who sprang
about among the chairs and round the table with a long basket-hilted
rapier in his hand, parrying or dodging their blows with wonderful
adroitness, and every now and then putting in a thrust in return.
Hard pressed as he was, his set resolute face, firm mouth, and bright
well-opened eyes spoke of a bold spirit within, while the blood which
dripped from the sleeve of one of his opponents proved that the contest
was not so unequal as it might appear. Even as we gazed he sprang back
to avoid a fierce rush of the furious soldiers, and by a quick sharp
side stroke he severed the rope by which the victim was hung. The body
fell with a heavy thud upon the brick floor, while the little swordsman
danced off in a moment into another quarter of the room, still stopping
or avoiding with the utmost ease and skill the shower of blows which
rained upon him.

This strange scene held us spell-bound for a few seconds, but there was
no time for delay, for a slip or trip would prove fatal to the gallant
stranger. Rushing into the chamber, sword in hand, we fell upon the
dragoons, who, outnumbered as they were, backed into a corner and struck
out fiercely, knowing that they need expect no mercy after the devil's
work in which they had been engaged. Holloway, our sergeant of horse,
springing furiously in, laid himself open to a thrust which stretched
him dead upon the ground. Before the dragoon could disengage his weapon,
Sir Gervas cut him down, while at the same moment the stranger got past
the guard of his antagonist, and wounded him mortally in the throat.
Of the four red-coats not one escaped alive, while the bodies of our
sergeant and of the old couple who had been the first victims increased
the horror of the scene.

'Poor Holloway is gone,' said I, placing my hand over his heart. 'Who
ever saw such a shambles? I feel sick and ill.'

'Here is eau-de-vie, if I mistake not,' cried the stranger, clambering
up on a chair and reaching a bottle from the shelf. 'Good, too, by the
smell. Take a sup, for you are as white as a new-bleached sheet.'

'Honest warfare I can abide, but scenes like this make my blood run
cold,' I answered, taking a gulp from the flask. I was a very young
soldier then, my dears, but I confess that to the end of my campaigns
any form of cruelty had the same effect upon me. I give you my word that
when I went to London last fall the sight of an overworked, raw-backed
cart-horse straining with its load, and flogged for not doing that which
it could not do, gave me greater qualms than did the field of Sedgemoor,
or that greater day when ten thousand of the flower of France lay
stretched before the earthworks of Landen.

'The woman is dead,' said Sir Gervas, 'and the man is also, I fear, past
recovery. He is not burned, but suffers, I should judge, poor devil!
from the rush of blood to the head.'

'If that be all it may well be cured, 'remarked the stranger; and taking
a small knife from his pocket, he rolled up the old man's sleeve and
opened one of his veins. At first only a few sluggish black drops oozed
from the wound, but presently the blood began to flow more freely, and
the injured man showed signs of returning sense.

'He will live,' said the little swordsman, putting his lancet back in
his pocket. 'And now, who may you be to whom I owe this interference
which shortened the affair, though mayhap the result would have been the
same had you left us to settle it amongst ourselves?'

'We are from Monmouth's army,' I answered. 'He lies at Bridgewater, and
we are scouting and seeking supplies.'

'And who are you?' asked Sir Gervas. 'And how came you into this
ruffle? S'bud, you are a game little rooster to fight four such great
cockerels!'

'My name is Hector Marot,' the man answered, cleaning out his empty
pistols and very carefully reloading them. 'As to who I am, it is a
matter of small moment. Suffice it that I have helped to lessen Kirk's
horse by four of his rogues. Mark their faces, so dusky and sun-dried
even in death. These men have learned warfare fighting against the
heathen in Africa, and now they practise on poor harmless English folk
the devil's tricks which they have picked up amongst the savages. The
Lord help Monmouth's men should they be beaten! These vermin are more to
be feared than hangman's cord or headsman's axe.'

'But how did you chance upon the spot at the very nick of time?' I
asked.

'Why, marry, I was jogging down the road on my mare when I heard the
clatter of hoofs behind me, and concealing myself in a field, as a
prudent man would while the country is in its present state, I saw these
four rogues gallop past. They made their way up to the farmhouse
here, and presently from cries and other tokens I knew what manner of
hell-fire business they had on hand. On that I left my mare in the field
and ran up, when I saw them through the casement, tricing the good man
up in front of his fire to make him confess where his wealth lay hidden,
though indeed it is my own belief that neither he nor any other farmer
in these parts hath any wealth left to hide, after two armies have been
quartered in turn upon them. Finding that his mouth remained closed,
they ran him up, as you saw, and would assuredly have toasted him like a
snipe, had I not stepped in and winged two of them with my barkers. The
others set upon me, but I pinked one through the forearm, and should
doubtless have given a good account of both of them but for your
incoming.'

'Right gallantly done!' I exclaimed. 'But where have I heard your name
before, Mr. Hector Marot?'

'Nay,' he answered, with a sharp, sidelong look, 'I cannot tell that.'

'It is familiar to mine ear,' said I.

He shrugged his broad shoulders, and continued to look to the priming
of his pistols, with a half-defiant and half-uneasy expression. He was
a very sturdy, deep-chested man, with a stern, square-jawed face, and a
white seam across his bronzed forehead as from a slash with a knife. He
wore a gold-edged riding-cap, a jacket of brown sad-coloured stuff much
stained by the weather, a pair of high rusty jack-boots, and a small
bob-wig.

Sir Gervas, who had been staring very hard at the man, suddenly gave a
start, and slapped his hand against his leg.

'Of course!' he cried. 'Sink me, if I could remember where I had seen
your face, but now it comes back to me very clearly.'

The man glanced doggedly from under his bent brows at each of us
in turn. 'It seems that I have fallen among acquaintances,' he said
gruffly; 'yet I have no memory of ye. Methinks, young sirs, that your
fancy doth play ye false.'

'Not a whit,' the Baronet answered quietly, and, bending forward, he
whispered a few words into the man's ear, which caused him to spring
from his seat and take a couple of quick strides forward, as though to
escape from the house.

'Nay, nay!' cried Sir Gervas, springing between him and the door, 'you
shall not run away from us. Pshaw, man! never lay your hand upon your
sword. We have had bloody work enough for one night. Besides, we would
not harm you.'

'What mean ye, then? What would ye have?' he asked, glancing about like
some fierce wild beast in a trap.

'I have a most kindly feeling to you, man, after this night's work,'
cried Sir Gervas. 'What is it to me how ye pick up a living, as long as
you are a true man at heart? Let me perish if I ever forget a face which
I have once seen, and your bonne mine, with the trade-mark upon your
forehead, is especially hard to overlook.'

'Suppose I be the same? What then?' the man asked sullenly.

'There is no suppose in the matter. I could swear to you. But I would
not, lad--not if I caught you red-handed. You must know, Clarke, since
there is none to overhear us, that in the old days I was a Justice of
the Peace in Surrey, and that our friend here was brought up before me
on a charge of riding somewhat late o' night, and of being plaguey short
with travellers. You will understand me. He was referred to assizes, but
got away in the meanwhile, and so saved his neck. Right glad I am of
it, for you will agree with me that he is too proper a man to give a
tight-rope dance at Tyburn.'

'And I remember well now where I have heard your name,' said I. 'Were
you not a captive in the Duke of Beaufort's prison at Badminton, and did
you not succeed in escaping from the old Boteler dungeon?'

'Nay, gentlemen,' he replied, seating himself on the edge of the table,
and carelessly swinging his legs, 'since ye know so much it would be
folly for me to attempt to deceive ye. I am indeed the same Hector Marot
who hath made his name a terror on the great Western road, and who hath
seen the inside of more prisons than any man in the south. With truth,
however, I can say that though I have been ten years upon the roads, I
have never yet taken a groat from the poor, or injured any man who did
not wish to injure me. On the contrary, I have often risked life and
limb to save those who were in trouble.'

'We can bear you out in that,' I answered, 'for if these four red-coat
devils have paid the price of their crimes, it is your doing rather than
ours.'

'Nay, I can take little credit for that,' our new acquaintance answered.
'Indeed, I had other scores to settle with Colonel Kirke's horse, and
was but too glad to have this breather with them.'

Whilst we were talking the men whom we had left with the horses had come
up, together with some of the neighbouring farmers and cottagers, who
were aghast at the scene of slaughter, and much troubled in their minds
over the vengeance which might be exacted by the Royal troops next day.

'For Christ's zake, zur,' cried one of them, an old ruddy-faced
countryman, 'move the bodies o' these soldier rogues into the road, and
let it zeem as how they have perished in a chance fight wi' your own
troopers loike. Should it be known as they have met their end within
a varmhouse, there will not be a thatch left unlighted over t' whole
country side; as it is, us can scarce keep these murthering Tangiers
devils from oor throats.'

'His request is in reason,' said the highwayman bluntly. 'We have no
right to have our fun, and then go our way leaving others to pay the
score.'

'Well, hark ye,' said Sir Gervas, turning to the group of frightened
rustics. 'I'll strike a bargain with ye over the matter. We have come
out for supplies, and can scarce go back empty-handed. If ye will among
ye provide us with a cart, filling it with such breadstuffs and greens
as ye may, with a dozen bullocks as well, we shall not only screen ye in
this matter, but I shall promise payment at fair market rates if ye will
come to the Protestant camp for the money.'

'I'll spare the bullocks,' quoth the old man whom we had rescued, who
was now sufficiently recovered to sit up. 'Zince my poor dame is foully
murthered it matters little to me what becomes o' the stock. I shall
zee her laid in Durston graveyard, and shall then vollow you to t' camp,
where I shall die happy if I can but rid the earth o' one more o' these
incarnate devils.'

'You say well, gaffer!' cried Hector Marot; 'you show the true spirit.
Methinks I see an old birding-piece on yonder hooks, which, with a brace
of slugs in it and a bold man behind it, might bring down one of these
fine birds for all their gay feathers.'

'Her's been a true mate to me for more'n thirty year,' said the old man,
the tears coursing down his wrinkled cheeks. 'Thirty zeed-toimes and
thirty harvests we've worked together. But this is a zeed-toime which
shall have a harvest o' blood if my right hand can compass it.'

'If you go to t' wars, Gaffer Swain, we'll look to your homestead,'
said the farmer who had spoken before. 'As to t' greenstuffs as this
gentleman asks for he shall have not one wainload but three, if he will
but gi' us half-an-hour to fill them up. If he does not tak them t'
others will, so we had raither that they go to the good cause. Here,
Miles, do you wak the labourers, and zee that they throw the potato
store wi' the spinach and the dried meats into the waggons wi' all
speed.'

'Then we had best set about our part of the contract,' said Hector
Marot. With the aid of our troopers he carried out the four dragoons and
our dead sergeant, and laid them on the ground some way down the lane,
leading the horses all round and between their bodies, so as to trample
the earth, and bear out the idea of a cavalry skirmish. While this was
doing, some of the labourers had washed down the brick floor of the
kitchen and removed all traces of the tragedy. The murdered woman had
been carried up to her own chamber, so that nothing was left to recall
what had occurred, save the unhappy farmer, who sat moodily in the same
place, with his chin resting upon his stringy work-worn hands, staring
out in front of him with a stony, empty gaze, unconscious apparently of
all that was going on around him.

The loading of the waggons had been quickly accomplished, and the little
drove of oxen gathered from a neighbouring field. We were just starting
upon our return journey when a young countryman rode up, with the news
that a troop of the Royal Horse were between the camp and ourselves.
This was grave tidings, for we were but seven all told, and our pace was
necessarily slow whilst we were hampered with the supplies.

'How about Hooker?' I suggested. 'Should we not send after him and give
him warning?'

'I'll goo at once,' said the countryman. 'I'm bound to zee him if he be
on the Athelney road.' So saying he set spurs to his horse and galloped
off through the darkness.

'While we have such volunteer scouts as this,' I remarked, 'it is easy
to see which side the country folk have in their hearts. Hooker hath
still the better part of two troops with him, so surely he can hold his
own. But how are we to make our way back?'

'Zounds, Clarke! let us extemporise a fortress,' suggested Sir Gervas.
'We could hold this farmhouse against all comers until Hooker returns,
and then join our forces to his. Now would our redoubtable Colonel be in
his glory, to have a chance of devising cross-fires, and flanking-fires,
with all the other refinements of a well-conducted leaguer.'

'Nay,' I answered, 'after leaving Major Hooker in a somewhat cavalier
fashion, it would be a bitter thing to have to ask his help now that
there is danger.'

'Ho, ho!' cried the Baronet. 'It does not take a very deep lead-line
to come to the bottom of your stoical philosophy, friend Micah. For all
your cold-blooded stolidity you are keen enough where pride or honour is
concerned. Shall we then ride onwards, and chance it? I'll lay an even
crown that we never as much as see a red coat.'

'If you will take my advice, gentlemen,' said the highwayman, trotting
up upon a beautiful bay mare, 'I should say that your best course is to
allow me to act as guide to you as far as the camp. It will be strange
if I cannot find roads which shall baffle these blundering soldiers.'

'A very wise and seasonable proposition,' cried Sir Gervas. 'Master
Marot, a pinch from my snuff-box, which is ever a covenant of friendship
with its owner. Adslidikins, man! though our acquaintance at present
is limited to my having nearly hanged you on one occasion, yet I have
a kindly feeling towards you, though I wish you had some more savoury
trade.'

'So do many who ride o' night,' Marot answered, with a chuckle. 'But we
had best start, for the east is whitening, and it will be daylight ere
we come to Bridgewater.'

Leaving the ill-omened farmhouse behind us we set off with all military
precautions, Marot riding with me some distance in front, while two of
the troopers covered the rear. It was still very dark, though a thin
grey line on the horizon showed that the dawn was not far off. In spite
of the gloom, however, our new acquaintance guided us without a moment's
halt or hesitation through a network of lanes and bypaths, across fields
and over bogs, where the waggons were sometimes up to their axles in
bog, and sometimes were groaning and straining over rocks and stones. So
frequent were our turnings, and so often did we change the direction of
our advance, that I feared more than once that our guide was at fault;
yet, when at last the first rays of the sun brightened the landscape we
saw the steeple of Bridgewater parish church shooting up right in front
of us.

'Zounds, man! you must have something of the cat in you to pick your way
so in the dark,' cried Sir Gervas, riding up to us. 'I am right glad to
see the town, for my poor waggons have been creaking and straining until
my ears are weary with listening for the snap of the axle-bar. Master
Marot, we owe you something for this.'

'Is this your own particular district?' I asked, 'or have you a like
knowledge of every part of the south?'

'My range,' said he, lighting his short, black pipe, 'is from Kent to
Cornwall, though never north of the Thames or Bristol Channel. Through
that district there is no road which is not familiar to me, nor as much
as a break in the hedge which I could not find in blackest midnight. It
is my calling. But the trade is not what it was. If I had a son I should
not bring him up to it. It hath been spoiled by the armed guards to
the mail-coaches, and by the accursed goldsmiths, who have opened their
banks and so taken the hard money into their strong boxes, giving out
instead slips of paper, which are as useless to us as an old newsletter.
I give ye my word that only a week gone last Friday I stopped a grazier
coming from Blandford fair, and I took seven hundred guineas off him in
these paper cheques, as they call them--enough, had it been in gold, to
have lasted me for a three month rouse. Truly the country is coming to a
pretty pass when such trash as that is allowed to take the place of the
King's coinage.'

'Why should you persevere in such a trade?' said I. 'Your own knowledge
must tell you that it can only lead to ruin and the gallows. Have you
ever known one who has thriven at it?'

'That have I,' he answered readily. 'There was Kingston Jones, who
worked Hounslow for many a year. He took ten thousand yellow boys on
one job, and, like a wise man, he vowed never to risk his neck again.
He went into Cheshire, with some tale of having newly arrived from the
Indies, bought an estate, and is now a flourishing country gentleman of
good repute, and a Justice of the Peace into the bargain. Zounds, man!
to see him on the bench, condemning some poor devil for stealing a dozen
eggs, is as good as a comedy in the playhouse.'

'Nay! but,' I persisted, 'you are a man, judging from what we have seen
of your courage and skill in the use of your weapons, who would gain
speedy preferment in any army. Surely it were better to use your gifts
to the gaining of honour and credit, than to make them a stepping-stone
to disgrace and the gallows?'

'For the gallows I care not a clipped shilling,' the highwayman
answered, sending up thick blue curls of smoke into the morning air. 'We
have all to pay nature's debt, and whether I do it in my boots or on a
feather bed, in one year or in ten, matters as little to me as to any
soldier among you. As to disgrace, it is a matter of opinion. I see
no shame myself in taking a toll upon the wealth of the rich, since I
freely expose my own skin in the doing of it.'

'There is a right and there is a wrong,' I answered, 'which no words
can do away with, and it is a dangerous and unprofitable trick to juggle
with them.'

'Besides, even if what you have said were true as to property,' Sir
Gervas remarked, 'it would not hold you excused for that recklessness of
human life which your trade begets.'

'Nay! it is but hunting, save that your quarry may at any time turn
round upon you, and become in turn the hunter. It is, as you say, a
dangerous game, but two can play at it, and each has an equal chance.
There is no loading of the dice, or throwing of fulhams. Now it was but
a few days back that, riding down the high-road, I perceived three jolly
farmers at full gallop across the fields with a leash of dogs yelping in
front of them, and all in pursuit of one little harmless bunny. It was
a bare and unpeopled countryside on the border of Exmoor, so I bethought
me that I could not employ my leisure better than by chasing the
chasers. Odd's wouns! it was a proper hunt. Away went my gentlemen,
whooping like madmen, with their coat skirts flapping in the breeze,
chivying on the dogs, and having a rare morning's sport. They never
marked the quiet horseman who rode behind them, and who without a
"yoick!" or "hark-a-way!" was relishing his chase with the loudest of
them. It needed but a posse of peace officers at my heels to make up a
brave string of us, catch-who-catch-can, like the game the lads play on
the village green.'

'And what came of it?' I asked, for our new acquaintance was laughing
silently to himself.

'Well, my three friends ran down their hare, and pulled out their
flasks, as men who had done a good stroke of work. They were still
hobnobbing and laughing over the slaughtered bunny, and one had
dismounted to cut off its ears as the prize of their chase, when I came
up at a hand-gallop. "Good-morrow, gentlemen," said I, "we have had rare
sport." They looked at me blankly enough, I promise you, and one of
them asked me what the devil I did there, and how I dared to join in a
private sport. "Nay, I was not chasing your hare, gentlemen," said I.
"What then, fellow?" asked one of them. "Why, marry, I was chasing you,"
I answered, "and a better run I have not had for years." With that I
lugged out my persuaders, and made the thing clear in a few words, and
I'll warrant you would have laughed could you have seen their faces as
they slowly dragged the fat leather purses from their fobs. Seventy-one
pounds was my prize that morning, which was better worth riding for than
a hare's ears.'

'Did they not raise the country on your track?' I asked.

'Nay! When Brown Alice is given her head she flies faster than the news.
Rumour spreads quick, but the good mare's stride is quicker still.'

'And here we are within our own outposts,' quoth Sir Gervas. 'Now, mine
honest friend--for honest you have been to us, whatever others may
say of you--will you not come with us, and strike in for a good cause?
Zounds, man! you have many an ill deed to atone for, I'll warrant.
Why not add one good one to your account, by risking your life for the
reformed faith?'

'Not I,' the highwayman answered, reining up his horse. 'My own skin is
nothing, but why should I risk my mare in such a fool's quarrel? Should
she come to harm in the ruffle, where could I get such another? Besides,
it matters nothing to her whether Papist or Protestant sits on the
throne of England--does it, my beauty?'

'But you might chance to gain preferment,' I said. 'Our Colonel, Decimus
Saxon, is one who loves a good swordsman, and his word hath power with
King Monmouth and the council.'

'Nay, nay!' cried Hector Marot gruffly. 'Let every man stick to his own
trade. Kirke's Horse I am ever ready to have a brush with, for a party
of them hung old blind Jim Houston of Milverton, who was a friend of
mine. I have sent seven of the red-handed rogues to their last account
for it, and might work through the whole regiment had I time. But I will
not fight against King James, nor will I risk the mare, so let me hear
no more of it. And now I must leave ye, for I have much to do. Farewell
to you!'

'Farewell, farewell!' we cried, pressing his brown horny hands; 'our
thanks to you for your guidance.' Raising his hat, he shook his bridle
and galloped off down the road in a rolling cloud of dust.

'Rat me, if I ever say a word against the thieves again!' said Sir
Gervas. 'I never saw a man wield sword more deftly in my life, and he
must be a rare hand with a pistol to bring those two tall fellows down
with two shots. But look over there, Clarke! Can you not see bodies of
red-coats?'

'Surely I can,' I answered, gazing out over the broad, reedy,
dead-coloured plain, which extended from the other side of the winding
Parret to the distant Polden Hills. 'I can see them over yonder in the
direction of Westonzoyland, as bright as the poppies among corn.'

'There are more upon the left, near Chedzoy,' quoth Sir Gervas. 'One,
two, three, and one yonder, and two others behind--six regiments of foot
in all. Methinks I see the breastplates of horse over there, and some
sign of ordnance too. Faith! Monmouth must fight now, if he ever hopes
to feel the gold rim upon his temples. The whole of King James's army
hath closed upon him.'

'We must get back to our command, then,' I answered. 'If I mistake not,
I see the flutter of our standards in the market-place.' We spurred our
weary steeds forward, and made our way with our little party and the
supplies which we had collected, until we found ourselves back in
our quarters, where we were hailed by the lusty cheers of our hungry
comrades. Before noon the drove of bullocks had been changed into joints
and steaks, while our green stuff and other victuals had helped to
furnish the last dinner which many of our men were ever destined to eat.
Major Hooker came in shortly after with a good store of provisions, but
in no very good case, for he had had a skirmish with the dragoons, and
had lost eight or ten of his men. He bore a complaint straightway to the
council concerning the manner in which we had deserted him; but great
events were coming fast upon us now, and there was small time to inquire
into petty matters of discipline. For myself, I freely confess, looking
back on it, that as a soldier he was entirely in the right, and that
from a strict military point of view our conduct was not to be excused.
Yet I trust, my dears, even now, when years have weighed me down, that
the scream of a woman in distress would be a signal which would draw me
to her aid while these old limbs could bear me. For the duty which
we owe to the weak overrides all other duties and is superior to all
circumstances, and I for one cannot see why the coat of the soldier
should harden the heart of the man.



Chapter XXXI. Of the Maid of the Marsh and the Bubble which rose from
the Bog

All Bridgewater was in a ferment as we rode in, for King James's forces
were within four miles, on the Sedgemoor Plain, and it was likely that
they would push on at once and storm the town. Some rude works had been
thrown up on the Eastover side, behind which two brigades were drawn
up in arms, while the rest of the army was held in reserve in the
market-place and Castle Field. Towards afternoon, however, parties of
our horse and peasants from the fen country came in with the news that
there was no fear of an assault being attempted. The Royal troops had
quartered themselves snugly in the little villages of the neighbourhood,
and having levied contributions of cider and of beer from the farmers,
they showed no sign of any wish to advance.

The town was full of women, the wives, mothers, and sisters of our
peasants, who had come in from far and near to see their loved ones once
more. Fleet Street or Cheapside upon a busy day are not more crowded
than were the narrow streets and lanes of the Somersetshire town.
Jack-booted, buff-coated troopers; scarlet militiamen; brown,
stern-faced Tauntonians; serge-clad pikemen; wild, ragged miners;
smockfrocked yokels; reckless, weather-tanned seamen; gaunt cragsmen
from the northern coast--all pushed and jostled each other in a thick,
many-coloured crowd. Everywhere among them were the country women,
straw-bonneted and loud-tongued, weeping, embracing, and exhorting.
Here and there amid the motley dresses and gleam of arms moved the dark,
sombre figure of a Puritan minister, with sweeping sad-coloured mantle
and penthouse hat, scattering abroad short fiery ejaculations and stern
pithy texts of the old fighting order, which warmed the men's blood like
liquor. Ever and anon a sharp, fierce shout would rise from the people,
like the yelp of a high-spirited hound which is straining at its leash
and hot to be at the throat of its enemy.

Our regiment had been taken off duty whenever it was clear that
Feversham did not mean to advance, and they were now busy upon the
victuals which our night-foray had furnished. It was a Sunday, fresh and
warm, with a clear, unclouded sky, and a gentle breeze, sweet with the
smack of the country. All day the bells of the neighbouring villages
rang out their alarm, pealing their music over the sunlit countryside.
The upper windows and red-tiled roofs of the houses were crowded with
pale-faced women and children, who peered out to eastward, where the
splotches of crimson upon the dun-coloured moor marked the position of
our enemies.

At four o'clock Monmouth held a last council of war upon the square
tower out of which springs the steeple of Bridgewater parish church,
whence a good view can be obtained of all the country round. Since my
ride to Beaufort I had always been honoured with a summons to attend, in
spite of my humble rank in the army. There were some thirty councillors
in all, as many as the space would hold, soldiers and courtiers,
Cavaliers and Puritans, all drawn together now by the bond of a common
danger. Indeed, the near approach of a crisis in their fortunes had
broken down much of the distinction of manner which had served to
separate them. The sectary had lost something of his austerity and
become flushed and eager at the prospect of battle, while the giddy man
of fashion was hushed into unwonted gravity as he considered the danger
of his position. Their old feuds were forgotten as they gathered on the
parapet and gazed with set faces at the thick columns of smoke which
rose along the sky-line.

King Monmouth stood among his chiefs, pale and haggard, with the
dishevelled, unkempt look of a man whose distress of mind has made him
forgetful of the care of his person. He held a pair of ivory glasses,
and as he raised them to his eyes his thin white hands shook and
twitched until it was grievous to watch him. Lord Grey handed his own
glasses to Saxon, who leaned his elbows upon the rough stone breastwork
and stared long and earnestly at the enemy.

'They are the very men I have myself led,' said Monmouth at last, in a
low voice, as though uttering his thoughts aloud. 'Over yonder at the
right I see Dumbarton's foot. I know these men well. They will fight.
Had we them with us all would be well.'

'Nay, your Majesty,' Lord Grey answered with spirit, 'you do your brave
followers an injustice. They, too, will fight to the last drop of their
blood in your quarrel.'

'Look down at them!' said Monmouth sadly, pointing at the swarming
streets beneath us. 'Braver hearts never beat in English breasts, yet do
but mark how they brabble and clamour like clowns on a Saturday night.
Compare them with the stern, orderly array of the trained battalions.
Alas! that I should have dragged these honest souls from their little
homes to fight so hopeless a battle!'

'Hark at that!' cried Wade. 'They do not think it hopeless, nor do we.'
As he spoke a wild shout rose from the dense crowd beneath, who were
listening to a preacher who was holding forth from a window.

'It is worthy Doctor Ferguson,' said Sir Stephen Timewell, who had
just come up. 'He is as one inspired, powerfully borne onwards in his
discourse. Verily he is even as one of the prophets of old. He has
chosen for his text, "The Lord God of gods he knoweth and Israel he
shall know. If it be in rebellion or if in transgression against the
Lord, save us not this day."'

'Amen, amen!' cried several of the Puritan soldiers devoutly, while
another hoarse burst of shouting from below, with the clashing of
scythe-blades and the clatter of arms, showed how deeply the people were
moved by the burning words of the fanatic.

'They do indeed seem to be hot for battle,' said Monmouth, with a more
sprightly look. 'It may be that one who has commanded regular troops, as
I have done, is prone to lay too much weight upon the difference which
discipline and training make. These brave lads seem high of heart. What
think you of the enemy's dispositions, Colonel Saxon?'

'By my faith, I think very little of them, your Majesty,' Saxon answered
bluntly. 'I have seen armies drawn up in array in many different parts
of the world and under many commanders. I have likewise read the section
which treats of the matter in the "De re militari" of Petrinus Bellus,
and in the works of a Fleming of repute, yet I have neither seen nor
heard anything which can commend the arrangements which we see before
us.'

'How call you the hamlet on the left--that with the square ivy-clad
church tower?' asked Monmouth, turning to the Mayor of Bridgewater,
a small, anxious-faced man, who was evidently far from easy at the
prominence which his office had brought upon him.

'Westonzoyland, your Honour--that is, your Grace--I mean, your Majesty,'
he stammered. 'The other, two miles farther off, is Middlezoy, and away
to the left, just on the far side of the rhine, is Chedzoy.'

'The rhine, sir! What do you mean?' asked the King, starting violently,
and turning so fiercely upon the timid burgher, that he lost the little
balance of wits which was left to him.

'Why, the rhine, your Grace, your Majesty,' he quavered. 'The rhine,
which, as your Majesty's Grace cannot but perceive, is what the country
folk call the rhine.'

'It is a name, your Majesty, for the deep and broad ditches which drain
off the water from the great morass of Sedgemoor,' said Sir Stephen
Timewell.

Monmouth turned white to his very lips, and several of the council
exchanged significant glances, recalling the strange prophetic jingle
which I had been the means of bringing to the camp. The silence was
broken, however, by an old Cromwellian Major named Hollis, who had been
drawing upon paper the position of the villages in which the enemy was
quartered.

'If it please your Majesty, there is something in their order which
recalls to my mind that of the army of the Scots upon the occasion
of the battle of Dunbar. Cromwell lay in Dunbar even as we lie in
Bridgewater. The ground around, which was boggy and treacherous, was
held by the enemy. There was not a man in the army who would not own
that, had old Leslie held his position, we should, as far as human
wisdom could see, have had to betake us to our ships, leave our stores
and ordnance, and so make the best of our way to Newcastle. He moved,
however, through the blessing of Providence, in such a manner that a
quagmire intervened between his right wing and the rest of his army, on
which Cromwell fell upon that wing in the early dawn, and dashed it
to pieces, with such effect that the whole army fled, and we had the
execution of them to the very gates of Leith. Seven thousand Scots lost
their lives, but not more than a hundred or so of the honest folk.
Now, your Majesty will see through your glass that a mile of bogland
intervenes between these villages, and that the nearest one, Chedzoy, as
I think they call it, might be approached without ourselves entering the
morass. Very sure I am that were the Lord-General with us now he would
counsel us to venture some such attack.'

'It is a bold thing with raw peasants to attack old soldiers,' quoth Sir
Stephen Timewell. 'Yet if it is to be done, I know well that there is
not a man born within sound of the bells of St. Mary Magdalene who will
flinch from it.'

'You say well, Sir Stephen,' said Monmouth. 'At Dunbar Cromwell had
veterans at his back, and was opposed to troops who had small experience
of war.'

'Yet there is much good sense in what Major Hollis has said,' remarked
Lord Grey. 'We must either fall on, or be gradually girt round and
starved out. That being so, why not take advantage at once of the chance
which Feversham's ignorance or carelessness hath given us? To-morrow, if
Churchill can prevail over his chief, I have little doubt that we
shall find their camp rearranged, and so have cause to regret our lost
opportunity.'

'Their horse lie at Westonzoyland,' said Wade. 'The sun is so fierce now
that we can scarce see for its glare and the haze which rises up from
the marshes. Yet a little while ago I could make out through my glasses
the long lines of horses picketed on the moor beyond the village.
Behind, in Middlezoy, are two thousand militia, while in Chedzoy, where
our attack would fall, there are five regiments of regular foot.'

'If we could break those all would be well,' cried Monmouth. 'What is
your advice, Colonel Buyse?'

'My advice is ever the same,' the German answered. 'We are here to
fight, and the sooner we get to work at it the better.'

'And yours, Colonel Saxon? Do you agree with the opinion of your
friend?'

'I think with Major Hollis, your Majesty, that Feversham by his
dispositions hath laid himself open to attack, and that we should take
advantage of it forthwith. Yet, considering that trained men and a
numerous horse have great advantage by daylight, I should be in favour
of a camisado or night onfall.'

'The same thought was in my mind,' said Grey. 'Our friends here know
every inch of the ground, and could guide us to Chedzoy as surely in the
darkness as in the day.'

'I have heard,' said Saxon, 'that much beer and cider, with wine and
strong waters, have found their way into their camp. If this be so
we may give them a rouse while their heads are still buzzing with the
liquor, when they shall scarce know whether it is ourselves or the blue
devils which have come upon them.'

A general chorus of approval from the whole council showed that the
prospect of at last coming to an engagement was welcome, after the weary
marchings and delays of the last few weeks.

'Has any cavalier anything to say against this plan?' asked the King.

We all looked from one to the other, but though many faces were doubtful
or desponding, none had a word to say against the night attack, for it
was clear that our action in any case must be hazardous, and this had at
least the merit of promising a better chance of success than any other.
Yet, my dears, I dare say the boldest of us felt a sinking at the heart
as we looked at our downcast, sad-faced leader, and asked ourselves
whether this was a likely man to bring so desperate an enterprise to a
success.

'If all are agreed,' said he, 'let our word be "Soho," and let us come
upon them as soon after midnight as may be. What remains to be settled
as to the order of battle may be left for the meantime. You will now,
gentlemen, return to your regiments, and you will remember that be the
upshot of this what it may, whether Monmouth be the crowned King of
England or a hunted fugitive, his heart, while it can still beat, will
ever bear in memory the brave friends who stood at his side in the hour
of his trouble.'

At this simple and kindly speech a flush of devotion, mingled in my
own case at least with a heart-whole pity for the poor, weak gentleman,
swept over us. We pressed round him with our hands upon the hilts of our
swords, swearing that we would stand by him, though all the world stood
between him and his rights. Even the rigid and impassive Puritans were
moved to a show of loyalty; while the courtiers, carried away by zeal,
drew their rapiers and shouted until the crowd beneath caught the
enthusiasm, and the air was full of the cheering. The light returned
to Monmouth's eye and the colour to his cheek as he listened to the
clamour. For a moment at least he looked like the King which he aspired
to be.

'My thanks to ye, dear friends and subjects,' he cried. 'The issue rests
with the Almighty, but what men can do will, I know well, be done by you
this night. If Monmouth cannot have all England, six feet of her shall
at least be his. Meanwhile, to your regiments, and may God defend the
right!'

'May God defend the right! cried the council solemnly, and separated,
leaving the King with Grey to make the final dispositions for the
attack.

'These popinjays of the Court are ready enough to wave their rapiers
and shout when there are four good miles between them and the foe,'
said Saxon, as we made our way through the crowd. 'I fear that they will
scarce be as forward when there is a line of musqueteers to be faced,
and a brigade of horse perhaps charging down upon their flank. But here
comes friend Lockarby, with news written upon his face.'

'I have a report to make, Colonel,' said Reuben, hurrying breathlessly
up to us. 'You may remember that I and my company were placed on guard
this day at the eastern gates?'

Saxon nodded.

'Being desirous of seeing all that I could of the enemy, I clambered up
a lofty tree which stands just without the town. From this post, by the
aid of a glass, I was able to make out their lines and camp. Whilst I
was gazing I chanced to observe a man slinking along under cover of the
birch-trees half-way between their lines and the town. Watching him, I
found that he was indeed moving in our direction. Presently he came so
near that I was able to distinguish who it was--for it was one whom I
know--but instead of entering the town by my gate he walked round under
cover of the peat cuttings, and so made his way doubtless to some other
entrance. He is a man, however, who I have reason to believe has no true
love for the cause, and it is my belief that he hath been to the
Royal camp with news of our doings, and hath now come back for further
information.'

'Aye!' said Saxon, raising his eyebrows. 'And what is the man's name?'

'His name is Derrick, one time chief apprentice to Master Timewell at
Taunton, and now an officer in the Taunton foot.'

'What, the young springald who had his eye upon pretty Mistress Ruth!
Now, out on love, if it is to turn a true man into a traitor! But
methought he was one of the elect? I have heard him hold forth to the
pikemen. How comes it that one of his kidney should lend help to the
Prelatist cause?'

'Love again,' quoth I. 'This same love is a pretty flower when it grows
unchecked, but a sorry weed if thwarted.'

'He hath an ill-feeling towards many in the camp,' said Reuben, 'and he
would ruin the army to avenge himself on them, as a rogue might sink
a ship in the hope of drowning one enemy. Sir Stephen himself hath
incurred his hatred for refusing to force his daughter into accepting
his suit. He has now returned into the camp, and I have reported the
matter to you, that you may judge whether it would not be well to send
a file of pikemen and lay him by the heels lest he play the spy once
more.'

'Perhaps it would be best so,' Saxon answered, full of thought, 'and yet
no doubt the fellow would have some tale prepared which would outweigh
our mere suspicions. Could we not take him in the very act?'

A thought slipped into my head. I had observed from the tower that there
was a single lonely cottage about a third of the way to the enemy's
camp, standing by the road at a place where there were marshes on either
side. Any one journeying that way must pass it. If Derrick tried to
carry our plans to Feversham he might be cut off at this point by a
party placed to lie in wait for him.

'Most excellent!' Saxon exclaimed, when I had explained the project. 'My
learned Fleming himself could not have devised a better rusus belli. Do
ye convey as many files as ye may think fit to this point, and I shall
see that Master Derrick is primed up with some fresh news for my Lord
Feversham.'

'Nay, a body of troops marching out would set tongues wagging,' said
Reuben. 'Why should not Micah and I go ourselves?'

'That would indeed be better.' Saxon answered. 'But ye must pledge your
words, come what may, to be back at sundown, for your companies must
stand to arms an hour before the advance.'

We both gladly gave the desired promise; and having learned for certain
that Derrick had indeed returned to the camp, Saxon undertook to let
drop in his presence some words as to the plans for the night, while we
set off at once for our post. Our horses we left behind, and slipping
out through the eastern gate we made our way over bog and moor,
concealing ourselves as best we could, until we came out upon the lonely
roadway, and found ourselves in front of the house.

It was a plain, whitewashed, thatch-roofed cottage, with a small board
above the door, whereon was written a notice that the occupier sold milk
and butter. No smoke reeked up from the chimney, and the shutters of the
window were closed, from which we gathered that the folk who owned it
had fled away from their perilous position. On either side the marsh
extended, reedy and shallow at the edge, but deeper at a distance, with
a bright green scum which covered its treacherous surface. We knocked
at the weather-blotched door, but receiving, as we expected, no reply,
I presently put my shoulder against it and forced the staple from its
fastenings.

There was but a single chamber within, with a straight ladder in the
corner, leading through a square hole in the ceiling to the sleeping
chamber under the roof. Three or four chairs and stools were scattered
over the earthen floor, and at the side a deal table with the broad
brown milk basins upon it. Green blotches upon the wall and a sinking
in of one side of the cottage showed the effect of its damp, marsh-girt
position.

To our surprise it had still one inmate within its walls. In the centre
of the room, facing the door as we entered, stood a little bright,
golden-haired maid, five or six years of age. She was clad in a clean
white smock, with trim leather belt and shining buckle about her waist.
Two plump little legs with socks and leathern boots peeped out from
under the dress, stoutly planted with right foot in advance as one who
was bent upon holding her ground. Her tiny head was thrown back, and her
large blue eyes were full of mingled wonder and defiance. As we entered
the little witch flapped her kerchief at us, and shooed as though we
were two of the intrusive fowl whom she was wont to chevy out of the
house. Reuben and I stood on the threshold, uncertain, and awkward, like
a pair of overgrown school lads, looking down at this fairy queen whose
realms we had invaded, in two minds whether to beat a retreat or to
appease her wrath by soft and coaxing words.

'Go 'way!' she cried, still waving her hands and shaking her kerchief.
'Go 'way! Granny told me to tell any one that came to go 'way!'

'But if they would not go away, little mistress,' asked Reuben, 'what
were you to do then?'

'I was to drive them 'way,' she answered, advancing boldly against us
with many flaps. 'You bad man!' she continued, flashing out at me, 'you
have broken granny's bolt.'

'Nay, I'll mend it again,' I answered penitently, and catching up
a stone I soon fastened the injured staple. 'There, mistress, your
granddam will never tell the difference.'

'Ye must go 'way all the same,' she persisted; 'this is granny's house,
not yours.'

What were we to do with this resolute little dame of the marshes? That
we should stay in the house was a crying need, for there was no other
cover or shelter among the dreary bogs where we could hide ourselves.
Yet she was bent upon driving us out with a decision and fearlessness
which might have put Monmouth to shame.

'You sell milk,' said Reuben. 'We are tired and thirsty, so we have come
to have a horn of it.'

'Nay,' she cried, breaking into smiles, 'will ye pay me just as the folk
pay granny? Oh, heart alive! but that will be fine!' She skipped up
on to a stool and filled a pair of deep mugs from the basins upon the
table. 'A penny, please!' said she.

It was strange to see the little wife hide the coin away in her smock,
with pride and joy in her innocent face at this rare stroke of business
which she had done for her absent granny. We bore our milk away to the
window, and having loosed the shutters we seated ourselves so as to have
an outlook down the road.

'For the Lord's sake, drink slow!' whispered Reuben, under his breath.
'We must keep on swilling milk or she will want to turn us out.'

'We have paid toll now,' I answered; 'surely she will let us bide.'

'If you have done you must go 'way,' she said firmly.

'Were ever two men-at-arms so tyrannised over by a little dolly such as
this!' said I, laughing. 'Nay, little one, we shall compound with you by
paying you this shilling, which will buy all your milk. We can stay here
and drink it at our ease.'

'Jinny, the cow, is just across the marsh,' quoth she. 'It is nigh
milking time, and I shall fetch her round if ye wish more.'

'Now, God forbid!' cried Reuben. 'It will end in our having to buy the
cow. Where is your granny, little maid?'

'She hath gone into the town,' the child answered. 'There are bad men
with red coats and guns coming to steal and to fight, but granny will
soon make them go 'way. Granny has gone to set it all right.'

'We are fighting against the men with the red coats, my chuck,' said
I; 'we shall take care of your house with you, and let no one steal
anything.'

'Nay, then ye may stay,' quoth she, climbing up upon my knee as grave as
a sparrow upon a bough. 'What a great boy you are!'

'And why not a man?' I asked.

'Because you have no beard upon your face. Why, granny hath more hair
upon her chin than you. Besides, only boys drink milk. Men drink cider.'

'Then if I am a boy I shall be your sweetheart,' said I.

'Nay, indeed!' she cried, with a toss of her golden locks. 'I have no
mind to wed for a while, but Giles Martin of Gommatch is my sweetheart.
What a pretty shining tin smock you have, and what a great sword! Why
should people have these things to harm each other with when they are in
truth all brothers?'

'Why are they all brothers, little mistress?' asked Reuben.

'Because granny says that they are all the children of the great
Father,' she answered. 'If they have all one father they must be
brothers, mustn't they?'

'Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, Micah,' quoth Reuben, staring
out of the window.

'You are a rare little marsh flower,' I said, as she clambered up to
grasp at my steel cap. 'Is it not strange to think, Reuben, that there
should be thousands of Christian men upon either side of us, athirst
for each other's lives, and here between them is a blue-eyed cherub who
lisps out the blessed philosophy which would send us all to our homes
with softened hearts and hale bodies?'

'A day of this child would sicken me for over of soldiering,' Reuben
answered. 'The cavalier and the butcher become too near of kin, as I
listen to her.'

'Perhaps both are equally needful,' said I, shrugging my shoulders. 'We
have put our hands to the plough. But methinks I see the man for whom we
wait coming down under the shadow of yonder line of pollard willows.'

'It is he, sure enough,' cried Reuben, peeping through the diamond-paned
window.

'Then, little one, you must sit here,' said I, raising her up from my
knee and placing her on a chair in a corner. 'You must be a brave lass
and sit still, whatever may chance. Will you do so?'

She pursed up her rosy lips and nodded her head.

'He comes on apace, Micah,' quoth my comrade, who was still standing
by the casement. 'Is he not like some treacherous fox or other beast of
prey?'

There was indeed something in his lean, black-clothed figure and swift
furtive movements which was like some cruel and cunning animal. He stole
along under shadow of the stunted trees and withies, with bent body and
gliding gait, so that from Bridgewater it would be no easy matter for
the most keen-sighted to see him. Indeed, he was so far from the town
that he might safely have come out from his concealment and struck
across the moor, but the deep morass on either side prevented him from
leaving the road until he had passed the cottage.

As he came abreast of our ambush we both sprang out from the open door
and barred his way. I have heard the Independent minister at Emsworth
give an account of Satan's appearance, but if the worthy man had been
with us that day, he need not have drawn upon his fancy. The man's dark
face whitened into a sickly and mottled pallor, while he drew back with
a long sharp intaking of the breath and a venomous flash from his black
eyes, glancing swiftly from right to left for some means of escape. For
an instant his hand shot towards his sword-hilt, but his reason told him
that he could scarce expect to fight his way past us. Then he glanced
round, but any retreat would lead him back to the men whom he had
betrayed. So he stood sullen and stolid, with heavy, downcast face and
shifting, restless eye, the very type and symbol of treachery.

'We have waited some time for you, Master John Derrick,' said I. 'You
must now return with us to the town.'

'On what grounds do you arrest me?' he asked, in hoarse, broken tones.
'Where is your warranty? Who hath given you a commission to molest
travellers upon the King's highway?'

'I have my Colonel's commission,' I answered shortly. 'You have been
once already to Feversham's camp this morning.'

'It is a lie,' he snarled fiercely. 'I do but take a stroll to enjoy the
air.'

'It is the truth,' said Reuben. 'I saw you myself on your return. Let us
see that paper which peeps from your doublet.'

'We all know why you should set this trap for me,' Derrick cried
bitterly. 'You have set evil reports afloat against me, lest I stand in
your light with the Mayor's daughter. What are you that you should dare
to raise your eyes to her! A mere vagrant and masterless man, coming
none know whence. Why should you aspire to pluck the flower which has
grown up amongst us? What had you to do with her or with us? Answer me!'

'It is not a matter which I shall discuss, save at a more fitting time
and place,' Reuben answered quietly. 'Do you give over your sword and
come back with us. For my part, I promise to do what I can to save your
life. Should we win this night, your poor efforts can do little to harm
us. Should we lose, there may be few of us left to harm.'

'I thank you for your kindly protection,' he replied, in the same white,
cold, bitter manner, unbuckling his sword as he spoke, and walking
slowly up to my companion. 'You can take this as a gift to Mistress
Ruth,' he said, presenting the weapon in his left hand, 'and this!' he
added, plucking a knife from his belt and burying it in my poor friend's
side.

It was done in an instant--so suddenly that I had neither time to spring
between, nor to grasp his intention before the wounded man sank gasping
on the ground, and the knife tinkled upon the pathway at my feet. The
villain set up a shrill cry of triumph, and bounding back in time to
avoid the savage sword thrust which I made at him, he turned and fled
down the road at the top of his speed. He was a far lighter man than I,
and more scantily clad, yet I had, from my long wind and length of limb,
been the best runner of my district, and he soon learned by the sound of
my feet that he had no chance of shaking me off. Twice he doubled as a
hare does when the hound is upon him, and twice my sword passed within a
foot of him, for in very truth I had no more thought of mercy than if
he had been a poisonous snake who had fastened his fangs into my friend
before my eyes. I never dreamed of giving nor did he of claiming it.
At last, hearing my steps close upon him and my breathing at his
very shoulder, he sprang wildly through the reeds and dashed into the
treacherous morass. Ankle-deep, knee-deep, thigh-deep, waist-deep, we
struggled and staggered, I still gaining upon him, until I was within
arm's-reach of him, and had whirled up my sword to strike. It had been
ordained, however, my dear children, that he should die not the death of
a man, but that of the reptile which he was, for even as I closed upon
him he sank of a sudden with a gurgling sound, and the green marsh scum
met above his head. No ripple was there and no splash to mark the spot.
It was sudden and silent, as though some strange monster of the marshes
had seized him and dragged him down into the depths. As I stood with
upraised sword still gazing upon the spot, one single great bubble rose
and burst upon the surface, and then all was still once more, and the
dreary fens lay stretched before me, the very home of death and of
desolation. I know not whether he had indeed come upon some sudden pit
which had engulfed him, or whether in his despair he had cast himself
down of set purpose. I do but know that there in the great Sedgemoor
morass are buried the bones of the traitor and the spy.

I made my way as best I could through the oozy clinging mud to the
margin, and hastened back to where Reuben was lying. Bending over him
I found that the knife had pierced through the side leather which
connected his back and front plates, and that the blood was not only
pouring out of the wound, but was trickling from the corner of his
mouth. With trembling fingers I undid the straps and buckles, loosened
the armour, and pressed my kerchief to his side to staunch the flow.

'I trust that you have not slain him, Micah,' he said of a sudden,
opening his eyes.

'A higher power than ours has judged him, Reuben,' I answered.

'Poor devil! He has had much to embitter him,' he murmured, and
straightway fainted again. As I knelt over him, marking the lad's white
face and laboured breathing, and bethought me of his simple, kindly
nature and of the affection which I had done so little to deserve, I am
not ashamed to say, my dears, albeit I am a man somewhat backward in my
emotions, that my tears were mingled with his blood.

As it chanced, Decimus Saxon had found time to ascend the church tower
for the purpose of watching us through his glass and seeing how we
fared. Noting that there was something amiss, he had hurried down for
a skilled chirurgeon, whom he brought out to us under an escort of
scythesmen. I was still kneeling by my senseless friend, doing what an
ignorant man might to assist him, when the party arrived and helped me
to bear him into the cottage, out of the glare of the sun. The minutes
were as hours while the man of physic with a grave face examined and
probed the wound.

'It will scarce prove fatal,' he said at last, and I could have embraced
him for the words. 'The blade has glanced on a rib, though the lung is
slightly torn. We shall hear him back with us to the town.'

'You hear what he says,' said Saxon kindly. 'He is a man whose opinion
is of weight--

          "A skilful leach is better far,
           Than half a hundred men of war."

Cheer up, man! You are as white as though it were your blood and not his
which was drained away. Where is Derrick?'

'Drowned in the marshes,' I answered.

''Tis well! It will save us six feet of good hemp. But our position here
is somewhat exposed, since the Royal Horse might make a dash at us. Who
is this little maid who sits so white and still in the corner.'

''Tis the guardian of the house. Her granny has left her here.'

'You had better come with us. There may be rough work here ere all is
over.'

'Nay, I must wait for granny,' she answered, with the tears running down
her cheeks.

'But how if I take you to granny, little one,' said I. 'We cannot
leave you here. 'I held out my arms, and the child sprang into them and
nestled up against my bosom, sobbing as though her heart would break.
'Take me away,' she cried; 'I'se frightened.'

I soothed the little trembling thing as best I might, and bore her off
with me upon my shoulder. The scythesmen had passed the handles of their
long weapons through the sleeves of their jerkins in such a way as to
form a couch or litter, upon which poor Reuben was laid. A slight dash
of colour had come back to his cheeks in answer to some cordial given
him by the chirurgeon, and he nodded and smiled at Saxon. Thus, pacing
slowly, we returned to Bridgewater, where Reuben was carried to our
quarters, and I bore the little maid of the marshes to kind townsfolk,
who promised to restore her to her home when the troubles were over.



Chapter XXXII. Of the Onfall at Sedgemoor

However pressing our own private griefs and needs, we had little time
now to dwell upon them, for the moment was at hand which was to decide
for the time not only our own fates, but that of the Protestant cause
in England. None of us made light of the danger. Nothing less than a
miracle could preserve us from defeat, and most of us were of opinion
that the days of the miracles were past. Others, however, thought
otherwise. I believe that many of our Puritans, had they seen the
heavens open that night, and the armies of the Seraphim and the Cherubim
descending to our aid, would have looked upon it as by no means a
wonderful or unexpected occurrence.

The whole town was loud with the preaching. Every troop or company had
its own chosen orator, and sometimes more than one, who held forth
and expounded. From barrels, from waggons, from windows, and even from
housetops, they addressed the crowds beneath; nor was their eloquence
in vain. Hoarse, fierce shouts rose up from the streets, with broken
prayers and ejaculations. Men were drunk with religion as with wine.
Their faces were flushed, their speech thick, their gestures wild. Sir
Stephen and Saxon smiled at each other as they watched them, for they
knew, as old soldiers, that of all causes which make a man valiant in
deed and careless of life, this religious fit is the strongest and the
most enduring.

In the evening I found time to look in upon my wounded friend, and found
him propped up with cushions upon his couch, breathing with some pain,
but as bright and merry as ever. Our prisoner, Major Ogilvy, who had
conceived a warm affection for us, sat by his side and read aloud to him
out of an old book of plays.

'This wound hath come at an evil moment,' said Reuben impatiently.
'Is it not too much that a little prick like this should send my men
captainless into battle, after all our marching and drilling? I have
been present at the grace, and am cut off from the dinner.'

'Your company hath been joined to mine,' I answered, 'though, indeed,
the honest fellows are cast down at not having their own captain. Has
the physician been to see you?'

'He has left even now,' said Major Ogilvy. 'He pronounces our friend to
be doing right well, but hath warned me against allowing him to talk.'

'Hark to that, lad!' said I, shaking my finger at him. 'If I hear a word
from you I go. You will escape a rough waking this night, Major. What
think you of our chance?'

'I have thought little of your chance from the first,' he replied
frankly. 'Monmouth is like a ruined gamester, who is now putting his
last piece upon the board. He cannot win much, and he may lose all.'

'Nay, that is a hard saying,' said I. 'A success might set the whole of
the Midlands in arms.'

'England is not ripe for it,' the Major answered, with a shake of his
head. 'It is true that it has no fancy either for Papistry or for a
Papist King, but we know that it is but a passing evil, since the next
in succession, the Prince of Orange, is a Protestant. Why, then, should
we risk so many evils to bring that about which time and patience must,
perforce, accomplish between them? Besides, the man whom ye support has
shown that he is unworthy of confidence. Did he not in his declaration
promise to leave the choice of a monarch to the Commons? And yet, in
less than a week, he proclaimed himself at Taunton Market Cross! Who
could believe one who has so little regard for truth?'

'Treason, Major, rank treason,' I answered, laughing. 'Yet if we could
order a leader as one does a coat we might, perchance, have chosen
one of a stronger texture. We are in arms not for him, but for the old
liberties and rights of Englishmen. Have you seen Sir Gervas?'

Major Ogilvy, and even Reuben, burst out laughing. 'You will find him
in the room above,' said our prisoner. 'Never did a famous toast prepare
herself for a court ball as he is preparing for his battle. If the
King's troops take him they will assuredly think that they have the
Duke. He hath been in here to consult us as to his patches, hosen, and I
know not what beside. You had best go up to him.'

'Adieu, then, Reuben!' I said, grasping his hand in mine.

'Adieu, Micah! God shield you from harm,' said he.

'Can I speak to you aside, Major?' I whispered. 'I think,' I went on,
as he followed me into the passage, 'that you will not say that your
captivity hath been made very harsh for you. May I ask, therefore, that
you will keep an eye upon my friend should we be indeed defeated this
night? No doubt if Feversham gains the upper hand there will be bloody
work. The hale can look after themselves, but he is helpless, and will
need a friend.'

The Major pressed my hand. 'I swear to God,' he said, 'that no harm
shall befall him.'

'You have taken a load from my heart,' I answered; 'I know that I leave
him in safety. 'I can now ride to battle with an easy mind.' With a
friendly smile the soldier returned to the sick-room, whilst I ascended
the stair and entered the quarters of Sir Gervas Jerome.

He was standing before a table which was littered all over with pots,
brushes, boxes, and a score of the like trifles, which he had either
bought or borrowed for the occasion. A large hand-mirror was balanced
against the wall, with rush-lights on either side of it. In front of
this, with a most solemn and serious expression upon his pale, handsome
face, the Baronet was arranging and re-arranging a white berdash cravat.
His riding-boots were brightly polished, and the broken seam repaired.
His sword-sheath, breastplate, and trappings were clear and bright.
He wore his gayest and newest suit, and above all he had donned a most
noble and impressive full-bottomed periwig, which drooped down to his
shoulders, as white as powder could make it. From his dainty riding-hat
to his shining spur there was no speck or stain upon him--a sad set-off
to my own state, plastered as I was with a thick crust of the Sedgemoor
mud, and disordered from having ridden and worked for two days without
rest or repose.

'Split me, but you have come in good time!' he exclaimed, as I entered.
'I have even now sent down for a flask of canary. Ah, and here it
comes!' as a maid from the inn tripped upstairs with the bottle and
glasses. 'Here is a gold piece, my pretty dear, the very last that I
have in the whole world. It is the only survivor of a goodly family. Pay
mine host for the wine, little one, and keep the change for thyself, to
buy ribbons for the next holiday. Now, curse me if I can get this cravat
to fit unwrinkled!'

'There is nought amiss with it,' I answered. 'How can such trifles
occupy you at such a time?'

'Trifles!' he cried angrily. 'Trifles! Well, there, it boots not to
argue with you. Your bucolic mind would never rise to the subtle import
which may lie in such matters--the rest of mind which it is to have
them right, and the plaguey uneasiness when aught is wrong. It comes,
doubtless, from training, and it may be that I have it more than others
of my class. I feel as a cat who would lick all day to take the least
speck from her fur. Is not the patch over the eyebrow happily chosen?
Nay, you cannot even offer an opinion; I would as soon ask friend Marot,
the knight of the pistol. Fill up your glass!'

'Your company awaits you by the church,' I remarked; 'I saw them as I
passed.'

'How looked they?' he asked. 'Were they powdered and clean?'

'Nay, I had little leisure to observe. I saw that they were cutting
their matches and arranging their priming.'

'I would that they had all snaphances,' he answered, sprinkling himself
with scented water; 'the matchlocks are slow and cumbersome. Have you
had wine enough?'

'I will take no more,' I answered.

'Then mayhap the Major may care to finish it. It is not often I ask help
with a bottle, but I would keep my head cool this night. Let us go down
and see to our men.'

It was ten o'clock when we descended into the street. The hubbub of
the preachers and the shouting of the people had died away, for the
regiments had fallen into their places, and stood silent and stern,
with the faint light from the lamps and windows playing over their dark
serried ranks. A cool, clear moon shone down upon us from amidst fleecy
clouds, which drifted ever and anon across her face. Away in the north
tremulous rays of light flickered up into the heavens, coming and going
like long, quivering fingers. They were the northern lights, a sight
rarely seen in the southland counties. It is little wonder that, coming
at such a time, the fanatics should have pointed to them as signals
from another world, and should have compared them to that pillar of fire
which guided Israel through the dangers of the desert. The footpaths and
the windows were crowded with women and children, who broke into shrill
cries of fear or of wonder as the strange light waxed and waned.

'It is half after ten by St. Mary's clock,' said Saxon, as we rode up to
the regiment. 'Have we nothing to give the men?'

'There is a hogshead of Zoyland cider in the yard of yonder inn,' said
Sir Gervas. 'Here, Dawson, do you take those gold sleeve links and give
them to mine host in exchange. Broach the barrel, and let each man have
his horn full. Sink me, if they shall fight with nought but cold water
in them.'

'They will feel the need of it ere morning,' said Saxon, as a score
of pikemen hastened off to the inn. 'The marsh air is chilling to the
blood.'

'I feel cold already, and Covenant is stamping with it,' said I. 'Might
we not, if we have time upon our hands, canter our horses down the
line?'

'Of a surety,' Saxon answered gladly, 'we could not do better;' so
shaking our bridles we rode off, our horses' hoofs striking fire from
the flint-paved streets as we passed.

Behind the horse, in a long line which stretched from the Eastover gate,
across the bridge, along the High Street, up the Cornhill, and so past
the church to the Pig Cross, stood our foot, silent and grim, save when
some woman's voice from the windows called forth a deep, short answer
from the ranks. The fitful light gleamed on scythes-blade or gun-barrel,
and showed up the lines of rugged, hard set faces, some of mere children
with never a hair upon their cheeks, others of old men whose grey beards
swept down to their cross-belts, but all bearing the same stamp of a
dogged courage and a fierce self-contained resolution. Here were still
the fisher folk of the south. Here, too, were the fierce men from the
Mendips, the wild hunters from Porlock Quay and Minehead, the poachers
of Exmoor, the shaggy marshmen of Axbridge, the mountain men from the
Quantocks, the serge and wool-workers of Devonshire, the graziers of
Bampton, the red-coats from the Militia, the stout burghers of Taunton,
and then, as the very bone and sinew of all, the brave smockfrocked
peasants of the plains, who had turned up their jackets to the elbow,
and exposed their brown and corded arms, as was their wont when good
work had to be done. As I speak to you, dear children, fifty years
rolls by like a mist in the morning, and I am riding once more down
the winding street, and see again the serried ranks of my gallant
companions. Brave hearts! They showed to all time how little training it
takes to turn an Englishman into a soldier, and what manner of men are
bred in those quiet, peaceful hamlets which dot the sunny slopes of the
Somerset and Devon downs. If ever it should be that England should
be struck upon her knees, if those who fight her battles should have
deserted her, and she should find herself unarmed in the presence of her
enemy, let her take heart and remember that every village in the realm
is a barrack, and that her real standing army is the hardy courage and
simple virtue which stand ever in the breast of the humblest of her
peasants.

As we rode down the long line a buzz of greeting and welcome rose now
and again from the ranks as they recognised through the gloom Saxon's
tall, gaunt figure. The clock was on the stroke of eleven as we returned
to our own men, and at that very moment King Monmouth rode out from the
inn where he was quartered, and trotted with his staff down the High
Street. All cheering had been forbidden, but waving caps and brandished
arms spoke the ardour of his devoted followers. No bugle was to sound
the march, but as each received the word the one in its rear followed
its movements. The clatter and shuffle of hundreds of moving feet came
nearer and nearer, until the Frome men in front of us began to march,
and we found ourselves fairly started upon the last journey which many
of us were ever to take in this world.

Our road lay across the Parret, through Eastover, and so along the
winding track past the spot where Derrick met his fate, and the lonely
cottage of the little maid. At the other side of this the road becomes
a mere pathway over the plain. A dense haze lay over the moor, gathering
thickly in the hollows, and veiling both the town which we had left and
the villages which we were approaching. Now and again it would lift
for a few moments, and then I could see in the moonlight the long black
writhing line of the army, with the shimmer of steel playing over it,
and the rude white standards flapping in the night breeze. Far on the
right a great fire was blazing--some farmhouse, doubtless, which the
Tangiers devils had made spoil of. Very slow our march was, and very
careful, for the plain was, as Sir Stephen Timewell had told us, cut
across by great ditches or rhines, which could not be passed save at
some few places. These ditches were cut for the purpose of draining the
marshes, and were many feet deep of water and of mud, so that even
the horse could not cross them. The bridges were narrow, and some time
passed before the army could get over. At last, however, the two main
ones, the Black Ditch and the Langmoor Rhine, were safely traversed and
a halt was called while the foot was formed in line, for we had reason
to believe that no other force lay between the Royal camp and ourselves.
So far our enterprise had succeeded admirably. We were within half a
mile of the camp without mistake or accident, and none of the enemy's
scouts had shown sign of their presence. Clearly they held us in such
contempt that it had never occurred to them that we might open the
attack. If ever a general deserved a beating it was Feversham that
night. As he drew up upon the moor the clock of Chedzoy struck one.

'Is it not glorious?' whispered Sir Gervas, as we reined up upon the
further side of the Langmoor Rhine. 'What is there on earth to compare
with the excitement of this?'

'You speak as though it wore a cocking-match or a bull-baiting, 'I
answered, with some little coldness. 'It is a solemn and a sad occasion.
Win who will, English blood must soak the soil of England this night.'

'The more room for those who are left,' said he lightly. 'Mark over
yonder the glow of their camp-fires amidst the fog. What was it that
your seaman friend did recommend? Get the weather-gauge of them and
board--eh? Have you told that to the Colonel?'

'Nay, this is no time for quips and cranks,' I answered gravely; 'the
chances are that few of us will ever see to-morrow's sun rise.'

'I have no great curiosity to see it,' he remarked, with a laugh. 'It
will be much as yesterday's. Zounds! though I have never risen to see
one in my life, I have looked on many a hundred ere I went to bed.'

'I have told friend Reuben such few things as I should desire to be done
in case I should fall,' said I. 'It has eased my mind much to know that
I leave behind some word of farewell, and little remembrance to all whom
I have known. Is there no service of the sort which I can do for you?'

'Hum!' said he, musing. 'If I go under, you can tell Araminta--nay, let
the poor wench alone! Why should I send her messages which may plague
her! Should you be in town, little Tommy Chichester would be glad to
hear of the fun which we have had in Somerset. You will find him at the
Coca Tree every day of the week between two and four of the clock. There
is Mother Butterworth, too, whom I might commend to your notice. She
was the queen of wet-nurses, but alas! cruel time hath dried up her
business, and she hath need of some little nursing herself.'

'If I live and you should fall, I shall do what may be done for her,'
said I. 'Have you aught else to say?'

'Only that Hacker of Paul's Yard is the best for vests,' he answered.
'It is a small piece of knowledge, yet like most other knowledge it hath
been bought and paid for. One other thing! I have a trinket or two left
which might serve as a gift for the pretty Puritan maid, should our
friend lead her to the altar. Od's my life, but she will make him read
some queer books! How now, Colonel, why are we stuck out on the moor
like a row of herons among the sedges?'

'They are ordering the line for the attack,' said Saxon, who had ridden
up during our conversation. 'Donnerblitz! Who ever saw a camp so
exposed to an onfall? Oh for twelve hundred good horse--for an hour of
Wessenburg's Pandours! Would I not trample them down until their camp
was like a field of young corn after a hail-storm!'

'May not our horse advance?' I asked.

The old soldier gave a deep snort of disdain. 'If this fight is to be
won it must be by our foot,' said he; 'what can we hope for from such
cavalry? Keep your men well in hand, for we may have to bear the brunt
of the King's dragoons. A flank attack would fall upon us, for we are in
the post of honour.'

'There are troops to the right of us,' I answered, peering through the
darkness.

'Aye! the Taunton burghers and the Frome peasants. Our brigade covers
the right flank. Next us are the Mendip miners, nor could I wish for
better comrades, if their zeal do not outrun their discretion. They are
on their knees in the mud at this moment.'

'They will fight none the worse for that,' I remarked; 'but surely the
troops are advancing!'

'Aye, aye!' cried Saxon joyously, plucking out his sword, and tying
his handkerchief round the handle to strengthen his grip. 'The hour has
come! Forwards!'

Very slowly and silently we crept on through the dense fog, our feet
splashing and slipping in the sodden soil. With all the care which
we could take, the advance of so great a number of men could not be
conducted without a deep sonorous sound from the thousands of marching
feet. Ahead of us were splotches of ruddy light twinkling through the
fog which marked the Royal watch-fires. Immediately in front in a dense
column our own horse moved forwards. Of a sudden out of the darkness
there came a sharp challenge and a shout, with the discharge of a
carbine and the sound of galloping hoofs. Away down the line we heard
a ripple of shots. The first line of outposts had been reached. At the
alarm our horse charged forward with a huzza, and we followed them as
fast as our men could run. We had crossed two or three hundred yards of
moor, and could hear the blowing of the Royal bugles quite close to us,
when our horse came to a sudden halt, and our whole advance was at a
standstill.

'Sancta Maria!' cried Saxon, dashing forward with the rest of us to find
out the cause of the delay. 'We must on at any cost! A halt now will
ruin our camisado.'

'Forwards, forwards!' cried Sir Gervas and I, waving our swords.

'It is no use, gentlemen,' cried a cornet of horse, wringing his hands;
'we are undone and betrayed. There is a broad ditch without a ford in
front of us, full twenty feet across!'

'Give me room for my horse, and I shall show ye the way across!' cried
the Baronet, backing his steed. 'Now, lads, who's for a jump?'

'Nay, sir, for God's sake!' said a trooper, laying his hand upon his
bridle. 'Sergeant Sexton hath sprung in even now, and horse and man have
gone to the bottom!'

'Let us see it, then!' cried Saxon, pushing his way through the crowd
of horsemen. We followed close at his heels, until we found ourselves on
the borders of the vast trench which impeded our advance.

To this day I have never been able to make up my mind whether it was
by chance or by treachery on the part of our guides that this fosse was
overlooked until we stumbled upon it in the dark. There are some who say
that the Bussex Rhine, as it is called, is not either deep or broad,
and was, therefore, unmentioned by the moorsmen, but that the recent
constant rains had swollen it to an extent never before known. Others
say that the guides had been deceived by the fog, and taken a wrong
course, whereas, had we followed another track, we might have been able
to come upon the camp without crossing the ditch. However that may be,
it is certain that we found it stretching in front of us, broad, black,
and forbidding, full twenty feet from bank to bank, with the cap of the
ill-fated sergeant just visible in the centre as a mute warning to all
who might attempt to ford it.

'There must be a passage somewhere,' cried Saxon furiously. 'Every
moment is worth a troop of horse to them. Where is my Lord Grey? Hath
the guide met with his deserts?'

'Major Hollis hath hurled the guide into the ditch,' the young cornet
answered. 'My Lord Grey hath ridden along the bank seeking for a ford.'

I caught a pike out of a footman's hand, and probed into the black
oozy mud, standing myself up to the waist in it, and holding Covenant's
bridle in my left hand. Nowhere could I touch bottom or find any hope of
solid foothold.

'Here, fellow!' cried Saxon, seizing a trooper by the arm. 'Make for
the rear! Gallop as though the devil were behind you! Bring up a pair
of ammunition waggons, and we shall see whether we cannot bridge this
infernal puddle.'

'If a few of us could make a lodgment upon the other side we might make
it good until help came,' said Sir Gervas, as the horseman galloped off
upon his mission.

All down the rebel line a fierce low roar of disappointment and rage
showed that the whole army had met the same obstacle which hindered
our attack. On the other side of the ditch the drums beat, the bugles
screamed, and the shouts and oaths of the officers could be heard as
they marshalled their men. Glancing lights in Chedzoy, Westonzoyland,
and the other hamlets to left and right, showed how fast the alarm
was extending. Decimus Saxon rode up and down the edge of the fosse,
pattering forth foreign oaths, grinding his teeth in his fury, and
rising now and again in his stirrups to shake his gauntleted hands at
the enemy.

'For whom are ye?' shouted a hoarse voice out of the haze.

'For the King!' roared the peasants in answer.

'For which King?' cried the voice.

'For King Monmouth!'

'Let them have it, lads!' and instantly a storm of musket bullets
whistled and sung about our ears. As the sheet of flame sprang out of
the darkness the maddened, half-broken horses dashed wildly away across
the plain, resisting the efforts of the riders to pull them up. There
are some, indeed, who say that those efforts were not very strong, and
that our troopers, disheartened at the check at the ditch, were not
sorry to show their heels to the enemy. As to my Lord Grey, I can say
truly that I saw him in the dim light among the flying squadrons, doing
all that a brave cavalier could do to bring them to a stand. Away they
went, however, thundering through the ranks of the foot and out over the
moor, leaving their companions to bear the whole brunt of the battle.

'On to your faces, men!' shouted Saxon, in a voice which rose high above
the crash of the musketry and the cries of the wounded. The pikemen and
scythesmen threw themselves down at his command, while the musqueteers
knelt in front of them, loading and firing, with nothing to aim at save
the burning matches of the enemy's pieces, which could be seen twinkling
through the darkness. All along, both to the right and the left, a
rolling fire had broken out, coming in short, quick volleys from the
soldiers, and in a continuous confused rattle from the peasants. On the
further wing our four guns had been brought into play, and we could hear
their dull growling in the distance.

'Sing, brothers, sing!' cried our stout-hearted chaplain, Master Joshua
Pettigrue, bustling backwards and forwards among the prostrate ranks.
'Let us call upon the Lord in our day of trial!' The men raised a loud
hymn of praise, which swelled into a great chorus as it was taken up by
the Taunton burghers upon our right and the miners upon our left. At
the sound the soldiers on the other side raised a fierce huzza, and the
whole air was full of clamour.

Our musqueteers had been brought to the very edge of the Bussex Rhine,
and the Royal troops had also advanced as far as they were able, so that
there were not five pikes'-lengths between the lines. Yet that short
distance was so impassable that, save for the more deadly fire, a
quarter of a mile might have divided us. So near were we that the
burning wads from the enemy's muskets flew in flakes of fire over
our heads, and we felt upon our faces the hot, quick flush of their
discharges. Yet though the air was alive with bullets, the aim of the
soldiers was too high for our kneeling ranks, and very few of the men
were struck. For our part, we did what we could to keep the barrels of
our muskets from inclining upwards. Saxon, Sir Gervas, and I walked
our horses up and down without ceasing, pushing them level with our
sword-blades, and calling on the men to aim steadily and slowly. The
groans and cries from the other side of the ditch showed that some, at
least, of our bullets had not been fired in vain.

'We hold our own in this quarter,' said I to Saxon. 'It seems to me that
their fire slackens.'

'It is their horse that I fear,' he answered. 'They can avoid the ditch,
since they come from the hamlets on the flank. They may be upon us at
any time.'

'Hullo, sir!' shouted Sir Gervas, reining up his steed upon the very
brink of the ditch, and raising his cap in salute to a mounted officer
upon the other side. 'Can you tell me if we have the honour to be
opposed to the foot guards?'

'We are Dumbarton's regiment, sir,' cried the other. 'We shall give ye
good cause to remember having met us.'

'We shall be across presently to make your further acquaintance,' Sir
Gervas answered, and at the same moment rolled, horse and all, into the
ditch, amid a roar of exultation from the soldiers. Half-a-dozen of his
musqueteers sprang instantly, waist deep, into the mud, and dragged our
friend out of danger, but the charger, which had been shot through the
heart, sank without a struggle.

'There is no harm!' cried the Baronet, springing to his feet, 'I would
rather fight on foot like my brave musqueteers.' The men broke out
a-cheering at his words, and the fire on both sides became hotter
than ever. It was a marvel to me, and to many more, to see these brave
peasants with their mouths full of bullets, loading, priming, and firing
as steadily as though they had been at it all their lives, and holding
their own against a veteran regiment which has proved itself in other
fields to be second to none in the army of England.

The grey light of morning was stealing over the moor, and still the
fight was undecided. The fog hung about us in feathery streaks, and
the smoke from our guns drifted across in a dun-coloured cloud, through
which the long lines of red coats upon the other side of the rhine
loomed up like a battalion of giants. My eyes ached and my lips prinkled
with the smack of the powder. On every side of me men were falling fast,
for the increased light had improved the aim of the soldiers. Our good
chaplain, in the very midst of a psalm, had uttered a great shout
of praise and thanksgiving, and so passed on to join those of his
parishioners who were scattered round him upon the moor. Hope-above
Williams and Keeper Milson, under-officers, and among the stoutest
men in the company, were both down, the one dead and the other sorely
wounded, but still ramming down charges, and spitting bullets into his
gun-barrel. The two Stukeleys of Somerton, twins, and lads of great
promise, lay silently with grey faces turned to the grey sky, united in
death as they had been in birth. Everywhere the dead lay thick amid the
living. Yet no man flinched from his place, and Saxon still walked
his horse among them with words of hope and praise, while his stern,
deep-lined face and tall sinewy figure were a very beacon of hope to
the simple rustics. Such of my scythesmen as could handle a musket were
thrown forward into the fighting line, and furnished with the arms and
pouches of those who had fallen.

Ever and anon as the light waxed I could note through the rifts in the
smoke and the fog how the fight was progressing in other parts of the
field. On the right the heath was brown with the Taunton and Frome
men, who, like ourselves, were lying down to avoid the fire. Along the
borders of the Bussex Rhine a deep fringe of their musqueteers were
exchanging murderous volleys, almost muzzle to muzzle, with the
left wing of the same regiment with which we were engaged, which was
supported by a second regiment in broad white facings, which I believe
to have belonged to the Wiltshire Militia. On either bank of the black
trench a thick line of dead, brown on the one side, and scarlet on the
other, served as a screen to their companions, who sheltered themselves
behind them and rested their musket-barrels upon their prostrate bodies.
To the left amongst the withies lay five hundred Mendip and Bagworthy
miners, singing lustily, but so ill-armed that they had scarce one gun
among ten wherewith to reply to the fire which was poured into them.
They could not advance, and they would not retreat, so they sheltered
themselves as best they might, and waited patiently until their leaders
might decide what was to be done. Further down for half a mile or more
the long rolling cloud of smoke, with petulant flashes of flame spurting
out through it, showed that every one of our raw regiments was bearing
its part manfully. The cannon on the left had ceased firing. The Dutch
gunners had left the Islanders to settle their own quarrels, and were
scampering back to Bridgewater, leaving their silent pieces to the Royal
Horse.

The battle was in this state when there rose a cry of 'The King, the
King!' and Monmouth rode through our ranks, bare-headed and wild-eyed,
with Buyse, Wade, and a dozen more beside him. They pulled up within a
spear's-length of me, and Saxon, spurring forward to meet them, raised
his sword to the salute. I could not but mark the contrast between
the calm, grave face of the veteran, composed yet alert, and the half
frantic bearing of the man whom we were compelled to look upon as our
leader.

'How think ye, Colonel Saxon?' he cried wildly. 'How goes the fight? Is
all well with ye? What an error, alas! what an error! Shall we draw off,
eh? How say you?'

'We hold our own here, your Majesty,' Saxon answered. 'Methinks had we
something after the nature of palisados or stockados, after the Swedish
fashion, we might even make it good against the horse.'

'Ah, the horse!' cried the unhappy Monmouth. 'If we get over this, my
Lord Grey shall answer for it. They ran like a flock of sheep. What
leader could do anything with such troops? Oh, lack-a-day, lack-a-day!
Shall we not advance?'

'There is no reason to advance, your Majesty, now that the surprise has
failed,' said Saxon. 'I had sent for carts to bridge over the trench,
according to the plan which is commended in the treatise, "De vallis et
fossis," but they are useless now. We can but fight it out as we are.'

'To throw troops across would be to sacrifice them,' said Wade. 'We have
lost heavily, Colonel Saxon, but I think from the look of yonder bank
that ye have given a good account of the red-coats.'

'Stand firm! For God's sake, stand firm!' cried Monmouth distractedly.
'The horse have fled, and the cannoniers also. Oh! what can I do with
such men? What shall I do? Alas, alas!' He set spurs to his horse and
galloped off down the line, still ringing his hands and uttering his
dismal wailings. Oh, my children, how small, how very small a thing is
death when weighed in the balance with dishonour! Had this man but borne
his fate silently, as did the meanest footman who followed his banners,
how proud and glad would we have been to have discoursed of him, our
princely leader. But let him rest. The fears and agitations and petty
fond emotions, which showed upon him as the breeze shows upon the water,
are all stilled now for many a long year. Let us think of the kind heart
and forget the feeble spirit.

As his escort trooped after him, the great German man-at-arms separated
from them and turned back to us. 'I am weary of trotting up and down
like a lust-ritter at a fair,' said he. 'If I bide with ye I am like to
have my share of any fighting which is going. So, steady, mein Liebchen.
That ball grazed her tail, but she is too old a soldier to wince at
trifles. Hullo, friend, where is your horse?'

'At the bottom of the ditch,' said Sir Gervas, scraping the mud off his
dress with his sword-blade. ''Tis now half-past two,' he continued,
'and we have been at this child's-play for an hour and more. With a line
regiment, too! It is not what I had looked forward to!'

'You shall have something to console you anon,' cried the German, with
his eyes shining. 'Mein Gott! Is it not splendid? Look to it, friend
Saxon, look to it!'

It was no light matter which had so roused the soldier's admiration. Out
of the haze which still lay thick upon our right there twinkled here and
there a bright gleam of silvery light, while a dull, thundering noise
broke upon our ears like that of the surf upon a rocky shore. More and
more frequent came the fitful flashes of steel, louder and yet louder
grew the hoarse gathering tumult, until of a sudden the fog was rent,
and the long lines of the Royal cavalry broke out from it, wave after
wave, rich in scarlet and blue and gold, as grand a sight as ever the
eye rested upon. There was something in the smooth, steady sweep of so
great a body of horsemen which gave the feeling of irresistible power.
Rank after rank, and line after line, with waving standards, tossing
manes, and gleaming steel, they poured onwards, an army in themselves,
with either flank still shrouded in the mist. As they thundered along,
knee to knee and bridle to bridle, there came from them such a gust of
deep-chested oaths with the jangle of harness, the clash of steel, and
the measured beat of multitudinous hoofs, that no man who hath not stood
up against such a whirlwind, with nothing but a seven-foot pike in his
hand, can know how hard it is to face it with a steady lip and a firm
grip.

But wonderful as was the sight, there was, as ye may guess, my
dears, little time for us to gaze upon it. Saxon and the German flung
themselves among the pikemen and did all that men could do to thicken
their array. Sir Gervas and I did the same with the scythesmen, who had
been trained to form a triple front after the German fashion, one rank
kneeling, one stooping, and one standing erect, with weapons advanced.
Close to us the Taunton men had hardened into a dark sullen ring,
bristling with steel, in the centre of which might be seen and heard
their venerable Mayor, his long beard fluttering in the breeze, and his
strident voice clanging over the field. Louder and louder grew the roar
of the horse. 'Steady, my brave lads,' cried Saxon, in trumpet tones.
'Dig the pike-butt into the earth! Best it on the right foot! Give not
an inch! Steady!' A great shout went up from either side, and then the
living wave broke over us.

What hope is there to describe such a scene as that--the crashing of
wood, the sharp gasping cries, the snorting of horses, the jar when the
push of pike met with the sweep of sword! Who can hope to make
another see that of which he himself carries away so vague and dim an
impression? One who has acted in such a scene gathers no general sense
of the whole combat, such as might be gained by a mere onlooker, but
he has stamped for ever upon his mind just the few incidents which may
chance to occur before his own eyes. Thus my memories are confined to a
swirl of smoke with steel caps and fierce, eager faces breaking through
it, with the red gaping nostrils of horses and their pawing fore-feet
as they recoiled from the hedge of steel. I see, too, a young beardless
lad, an officer of dragoons, crawling on hands and knees under the
scythes, and I hear his groan as one of the peasants pinned him to the
ground. I see a bearded, broad-faced trooper riding a grey horse just
outside the fringe of the scythes, seeking for some entrance, and
screaming the while with rage. Small things imprint themselves upon a
man's notice at such a time. I even marked the man's strong white teeth
and pink gums. At the same time I see a white-faced, thin-lipped man
leaning far forward over his horse's neck and driving at me with his
sword point, cursing the while as only a dragoon can curse. All these
images start up as I think of that fierce rally, during which I hacked
and cut and thrust at man and horse without a thought of parry or
of guard. All round rose a fierce babel of shouts and cries, godly
ejaculations from the peasants and oaths from the horsemen, with Saxon's
voice above all imploring his pikemen to stand firm. Then the cloud
of horse-men recoiled, circling off over the plain, and the shout of
triumph from my comrades, and an open snuff-box thrust out in front of
me, proclaimed that we had seen the back of as stout a squadron as ever
followed a kettledrum.

But if we could claim it as a victory, the army in general could scarce
say as much. None but the very pick of the troops could stand against
the flood of heavy horses and steel-clad men. The Frome peasants were
gone, swept utterly from the field. Many had been driven by pure weight
and pressure into the fatal mud which had checked our advance. Many
others, sorely cut and slashed, lay in ghastly heaps all over the ground
which they had held. A few by joining our ranks had saved themselves
from the fate of their companions. Further off the men of Taunton still
stood fast, though in sadly diminished numbers. A long ridge of horses
and cavaliers in front of them showed how stern had been the attack and
how fierce the resistance. On our left the wild miners had been broken
at the first rush, but had fought so savagely, throwing themselves upon
the ground and stabbing upwards at the stomachs of the horses, that they
had at last beaten off the dragoons. The Devonshire militiamen, however,
had been scattered, and shared the fate of the men of Frome. During the
whole of the struggle the foot upon the further bank of the Bussex Rhine
were pouring in a hail of bullets, which our musqueteers, having to
defend themselves against the horse, were unable to reply to.

It needed no great amount of soldierly experience to see that the battle
was lost, and that Monmouth's cause was doomed. It was broad daylight
now, though the sun had not yet risen. Our cavalry was gone, our
ordnance was silent, our line was pierced in many places, and more than
one of our regiments had been destroyed. On the right flank the Horse
Guards Blue, the Tangiers Horse, and two dragoon regiments were forming
up for a fresh attack. On the left the foot-guards had bridged the ditch
and were fighting hand to hand with the men from North Somerset. In
front a steady fire was being poured into us, to which our reply was
feeble and uncertain, for the powder carts had gone astray in the dark,
and many were calling hoarsely for ammunition, while others were loading
with pebbles instead of ball. Add to this that the regiments which still
held their ground had all been badly shaken by the charge, and had lost
a third of their number. Yet the brave clowns sent up cheer after cheer,
and shouted words of encouragement and homely jests to each other,
as though a battle were but some rough game which must as a matter of
course be played out while there was a player left to join in it.

'Is Captain Clarke there?' cried Decimus Saxon, riding up with his
sword-arm flecked with blood. 'Ride over to Sir Stephen Timewell and
tell him to join his men to ours. Apart we shall be broken--together we
may stand another charge.'

Setting spurs to Covenant I rode over to our companions and delivered
the message. Sir Stephen, who had been struck by a petronel bullet,
and wore a crimsoned kerchief bound round his snow-white head, saw
the wisdom of the advice, and moved his townsmen as directed. His
musqueteers being better provided with powder than ours did good service
by keeping down for a time the deadly fire from across the fosse.

'Who would have thought it of him?' cried Sir Stephen, with flashing
eyes, as Buyse and Saxon rode out to meet him. 'What think ye now of our
noble monarch, our champion of the Protestant cause?'

'He is no very great Krieger,' said Buyse. 'Yet perhaps it may be from
want of habit as much as from want of courage.'

'Courage!' cried the old Mayor, in a voice of scorn. 'Look over yonder
and behold your King.' He pointed out over the moor with a finger
which shook as much from anger as from age. There, far away, showing
up against the dark peat-coloured soil, rode a gaily-dressed cavalier,
followed by a knot of attendants, galloping as fast as his horse would
carry him from the field of battle. There was no mistaking the fugitive.
It was the recreant Monmouth.

'Hush!' cried Saxon, as we all gave a cry of horror and execration;
'do not dishearten our brave lads! Cowardice is catching and will run
through an army like the putrid fever.'

'Der Feigherzige!' cried Buyse, grinding his teeth. 'And the brave
country folk! It is too much.'

'Stand to your pikes, men!' roared Saxon, in a voice of thunder, and
we had scarce time to form our square and throw ourselves inside of it,
before the whirlwind of horse was upon us once more. When the Taunton
men had joined us a weak spot had been left in our ranks, and through
this in an instant the Blue Guards smashed their way, pouring through
the opening, and cutting fiercely to right and left. The burghers on the
one side and our own men on the other replied by savage stabs from their
pikes and scythes, which emptied many a saddle, but while the struggle
was at its hottest the King's cannon opened for the first time with a
deafening roar upon the other side of the rhine, and a storm of balls
ploughed their way through our dense ranks, leaving furrows of dead
and wounded behind them. At the same moment a great cry of 'Powder! For
Christ's sake, powder!' arose from the musqueteers whose last charge had
been fired. Again the cannon roared, and again our men were mowed down
as though Death himself with his scythe were amongst us. At last our
ranks were breaking. In the very centre of the pikemen steel caps were
gleaming, and broadswords rising and falling. The whole body was swept
back two hundred paces or more, struggling furiously the while, and
was there mixed with other like bodies which had been dashed out of all
semblance of military order, and yet refused to fly. Men of Devon, of
Dorset, of Wiltshire, and of Somerset, trodden down by horse, slashed by
dragoons, dropping by scores under the rain of bullets, still fought on
with a dogged, desperate courage for a ruined cause and a man who
had deserted them. Everywhere as I glanced around me were set faces,
clenched teeth, yells of rage and defiance, but never a sound of fear
or of submission. Some clambered up upon the cruppers of the riders and
dragged them backwards from their saddles. Others lay upon their faces
and hamstrung the chargers with their scythe-blades, stabbing the
horsemen before they could disengage themselves. Again and again the
guards crashed through them from side to side, and yet the shattered
ranks closed up behind them and continued the long-drawn struggle. So
hopeless was it and so pitiable that I could have found it in my heart
to wish that they would break and fly, were it not that on the broad
moor there was no refuge which they could make for. And all this time,
while they struggled and fought, blackened with powder and parched with
thirst, spilling their blood as though it were water, the man who called
himself their King was spurring over the countryside with a loose rein
and a quaking heart, his thoughts centred upon saving his own neck, come
what might to his gallant followers.

Large numbers of the foot fought to the death, neither giving nor
receiving quarter; but at last, scattered, broken, and without
ammunition, the main body of the peasants dispersed and fled across the
moor, closely followed by the horse. Saxon, Buyse, and I had done all
that we could to rally them once more, and had cut down some of the
foremost of the pursuers, when my eye fell suddenly upon Sir Gervas,
standing hatless with a few of his musqueteers in the midst of a swarm
of dragoons. Spurring our horses we cut a way to his rescue, and laid
our swords about us until we had cleared off his assailants for the
moment.

'Jump up behind me!' I cried. 'We can make good our escape.'

He looked up smiling and shook his head. 'I stay with my company,' said
he.

'Your company!' Saxon cried. 'Why, man, you are mad! Your company is cut
off to the last man.'

'That's what I mean,' he answered, flicking some dirt from his cravat.
'Don't ye mind! Look out for yourselves. Goodbye, Clarke! Present my
compliments to--' The dragoons charged down upon us again. We were all
borne backwards, fighting desperately, and when we could look round the
Baronet was gone for ever. We heard afterwards that the King's troops
found upon the field a body which they mistook for that of Monmouth, on
account of the effeminate grace of the features and the richness of the
attire. No doubt it was that of our undaunted friend, Sir Gervas Jerome,
a name which shall ever be dear to my heart. When, ten years afterwards,
we heard much of the gallantry of the young courtiers of the household
of the French King, and of the sprightly courage with which they fought
against us in the Lowlands at Steinkirk and elsewhere, I have always
thought, from my recollection of Sir Gervas, that I knew what manner of
men they were.

And now it was every man for himself. In no part of the field did
the insurgents continue to resist. The first rays of the sun shining
slantwise across the great dreary plain lit up the long line of the
scarlet battalions, and glittered upon the cruel swords which rose and
fell among the struggling drove of resistless fugitives. The German had
become separated from us in the tumult, and we knew not whether he lived
or was slain, though long afterwards we learned that he made good his
escape, only to be captured with the ill-fated Duke of Monmouth. Grey,
Wade, Ferguson, and others had contrived also to save themselves, while
Stephen Timewell lay in the midst of a stern ring of his hard-faced
burghers, dying as he had lived, a gallant Puritan Englishman. All this
we learned afterwards. At present we rode for our lives across the moor,
followed by a few scattered bodies of horse, who soon abandoned their
pursuit in order to fasten upon some more easy prey.

We were passing a small clump of alder bushes when a loud manly voice
raised in prayer attracted our attention. Pushing aside the branches, we
came upon a man, seated with his back up against a great stone, cutting
at his own arm with a broad-bladed knife, and giving forth the Lord's
prayer the while, without a pause or a quiver in his tone. As he glanced
up from his terrible task we both recognised him as one Hollis, whom I
have mentioned as having been with Cromwell at Dunbar. His arm had
been half severed by a cannon-ball, and he was quietly completing the
separation in order to free himself from the dangling and useless limb.
Even Saxon, used as he was to all the forms and incidents of war, stared
open-eyed and aghast at this strange surgery; but the man, with a short
nod of recognition, went grimly forward with his task, until, even as
we gazed, he separated the last shred which held it, and lay over with
blanched lips which still murmured the prayer. (1) We could do little
to help him, and, indeed, might by our halt attract his pursuers to his
hiding-place; so, throwing him down my flask half filled with water, we
hastened on upon our way. Oh, war, my children, what a terrible thing it
is! How are men cozened and cheated by the rare trappings and prancing
steeds, by the empty terms of honour and of glory, until they forget
in the outward tinsel and show the real ghastly horror of the accursed
thing! Think not of the dazzling squadrons, nor of the spirit-stirring
blare of the trumpets, but think of that lonely man under the shadow of
the alders, and of what he was doing in a Christian age and a Christian
land. Surely I, who have grown grey in harness, and who have seen as
many fields as I have years of my life, should be the last to preach
upon this subject, and yet I can clearly see that, in honesty, men must
either give up war, or else they must confess that the words of the
Redeemer are too lofty for them, and that there is no longer any use in
pretending that His teaching can be reduced to practice. I have seen a
Christian minister blessing a cannon which had just been founded, and
another blessing a war-ship as it glided from the slips. They,
the so-called representatives of Christ, blessed these engines of
destruction which cruel man has devised to destroy and tear his
fellow-worms. What would we say if we read in Holy Writ of our Lord
having blessed the battering-rams and the catapults of the legions?
Would we think that it was in agreement with His teaching? But there!
As long as the heads of the Church wander away so far from the spirit of
its teaching as to live in palaces and drive in carriages, what wonder
if, with such examples before them, the lower clergy overstep at times
the lines laid down by their great Master?

Looking back from the summit of the low hills which lie to the westward
of the moor, we could see the cloud of horse-men streaming over the
bridge of the Parret and into the town of Bridgewater, with the helpless
drove of fugitives still flying in front of them. We had pulled up our
horses, and were looking sadly and silently back at the fatal plain,
when the thud of hoofs fell upon our ears, and, turning round, we found
two horsemen in the dress of the guards riding towards us. They had made
a circuit to cut us off, for they were riding straight for us with drawn
swords and eager gestures.

'More slaughter,' I said wearily. 'Why will they force us to it?'

Saxon glanced keenly from beneath his drooping lids at the approaching
horsemen, and a grim smile wreathed his face in a thousand lines and
wrinkles.

'It is our friend who set the hounds upon our track at Salisbury,' he
said. 'This is a happy meeting. I have a score to settle with him.'

It was, indeed, the hot-headed young comet whom we had met at the outset
of our adventures. Some evil chance had led him to recognise the tall
figure of my companion as we rode from the field, and to follow him, in
the hope of obtaining revenge for the humiliation which he had met with
at his hands. The other was a lance-corporal, a man of square soldierly
build, riding a heavy black horse with a white blaze upon its forehead.

Saxon rode slowly towards the officer, while the trooper and I fixed our
eyes upon each other.

'Well, boy,' I heard my companion say, 'I trust that you have learned to
fence since we met last.'

The young guardsman gave a snarl of rage at the taunt, and an instant
afterwards the clink of their sword-blades showed that they had met.
For my own part I dared not spare a glance upon them, for my opponent
attacked me with such fury that it was all that I could do to keep him
off. No pistol was drawn upon either side. It was an honest contest of
steel against steel. So constant were the corporal's thrusts, now at my
face, now at my body, that I had never an opening for one of the heavy
cuts which might have ended the matter. Our horses spun round each
other, biting and pawing, while we thrust and parried, until at last,
coming together knee to knee, we found ourselves within sword-point, and
grasped each other by the throat. He plucked a dagger from his belt and
struck it into my left arm, but I dealt him a blow with my gauntleted
hand, which smote him off his horse and stretched him speechless upon
the plain. Almost at the same moment the cornet dropped from his horse,
wounded in several places. Saxon sprang from his saddle, and picking the
soldier's dagger from the ground, would have finished them both had I
not jumped down also and restrained him. He flashed round upon me with
so savage a face that I could see that the wild-beast nature within him
was fairly roused.

'What hast thou to do?' he snarled. 'Let go!'

'Nay, nay! Blood enough hath been shed,' said I. 'Let them lie.'

'What mercy would they have had upon us?' he cried passionately,
struggling to get his wrist free. 'They have lost, and must pay
forfeit.'

'Not in cold blood,' I said firmly. 'I shall not abide it.'

'Indeed, your lordship,' he sneered, with the devil peeping out through
his eyes. With a violent wrench he freed himself from my grasp, and
springing back, picked up the sword which he had dropped.

'What then?' I asked, standing on my guard astride of the wounded man.

He stood for a minute or more looking at me from under his heavy-hung
brows, with his whole face writhing with passion. Every instant I
expected that he would fly at me, but at last, with a gulp in his
throat, he sheathed his rapier with a sharp clang, and sprang back into
the saddle.

'We part here,' he said coldly. 'I have twice been on the verge of
slaying you, and the third time might be too much for my patience. You
are no fit companion for a cavalier of fortune. Join the clergy, lad; it
is your vocation.'

'Is this Decimus Saxon who speaks, or is it Will Spotterbridge?' I
asked, remembering his jest concerning his ancestry, but no answering
smile came upon his rugged face. Gathering up his bridle in his left
hand, he shot one last malignant glance at the bleeding officer, and
galloped off along one of the tracks which lead to the southward. I
stood gazing after him, but he never sent so much as a hand-wave back,
riding on with a rigid neck until he vanished in a dip in the moor.

'There goes one friend,' thought I sadly, 'and all forsooth because I
will not stand by and see a helpless man's throat cut. Another friend is
dead on the field. A third, the oldest and dearest of all, lies wounded
at Bridgewater, at the mercy of a brutal soldiery. If I return to my
home I do but bring trouble and danger to those whom I love. Whither
shall I turn?' For some minutes I stood irresolute beside the prostrate
guardsmen, while Covenant strolled slowly along cropping the scanty
herbage, and turning his dark full eyes towards me from time to time, as
though to assure me that one friend at least was steadfast. Northward I
looked at the Polden Hills, southwards, at the Blackdowns, westward
at the long blue range of the Quantocks, and eastward at the broad fen
country; but nowhere could I see any hope of safety. Truth to say, I
felt sick at heart and cared little for the time whether I escaped or
no.

A muttered oath followed by a groan roused me from my meditations.
The corporal was sitting up rubbing his head with a look of stupid
astonishment upon his face, as though he were not very sure either of
where he was or how he came there. The officer, too, had opened his
eyes and shown other signs of returning consciousness. His wounds were
clearly of no very serious nature. There was no danger of their pursuing
me even should they wish to do so, for their horses had trotted off to
join the numerous other riderless steeds who were wandering all over the
moorlands. I mounted, therefore, and rode slowly away, saving my good
charger as much as possible, for the morning's work had already told
somewhat heavily upon him.

There were many scattered bodies of horse riding hither and thither over
the marshes, but I was able to avoid them, and trotted onwards, keeping
to the waste country until I found myself eight or ten miles from the
battlefield. The few cottages and houses which I passed wore deserted,
and many of them bore signs of having been plundered. Not a peasant was
to be seen. The evil fame of Kirke's lambs had chased away all those who
had not actually taken arms. At last, after riding for three hours, I
bethought me that I was far enough from the main line of pursuit to
be free from danger, so I chose out a sheltered spot where a clump of
bushes overhung a little brook. There, seated upon a bank of velvet
moss, I rested my weary limbs, and tried to wash the stains of battle
from my person.

It was only now when I could look quietly at my own attire that it was
brought home to me how terrible the encounter must have been in which
I had been engaged, and how wonderful it was that I had come off so
scatheless. Of the blows which I had struck in the fight I had faint
remembrance, yet they must have been many and terrible, for my sword
edge was as jagged and turned as though I had hacked for an hour at an
iron bar. From head to foot I was splashed and crimsoned with blood,
partly my own, but mostly that of others. My headpiece was dinted with
blows. A petronel bullet had glanced off my front plate, striking it
at an angle, and had left a broad groove across it. Two or three other
cracks and stars showed where the good sheet of proof steel had saved
me. My left arm was stiff and well-nigh powerless from the corporal's
stab, but on stripping off my doublet and examining the place, I found
that though there had been much bleeding the wound was on the outer side
of the bone, and was therefore of no great import. A kerchief dipped in
water and bound tightly round it eased the smart and stanched the blood.
Beyond this scratch I had no injuries, though from my own efforts I felt
as stiff and sore all over as though I had been well cudgelled, and the
slight wound got in Wells Cathedral had reopened and was bleeding. With
a little patience and cold water, however, I was able to dress it and to
tie myself up as well as any chirurgeon in the kingdom.

Having seen to my injuries I had now to attend to my appearance, for
in truth I might have stood for one of those gory giants with whom the
worthy Don Bellianis of Greece and other stout champions were wont to
contend. No woman or child but would have fled at the sight of me, for
I was as red as the parish butcher when Martinmas is nigh. A good wash,
however, in the brook soon removed those traces of war, and I was
able to get the marks off my breastplate and boots. In the case of my
clothes, however, it was so hopeless to clean them that I gave it up in
despair. My good old horse had been never so much as grazed by steel or
bullet, so that with a little watering and tending he was soon as fresh
as ever, and we turned our backs on the streamlet a better-favoured pair
than we had approached it.

It was now going on to mid-day, and I began to feel very hungry, for I
had tasted nothing since the evening before. Two or three houses stood
in a cluster upon the moor, but the blackened walls and scorched thatch
showed that it was hopeless to expect anything from them. Once or twice
I spied folk in the fields or on the roadway; but at sight of an armed
horseman they ran for their lives, diving into the brushwood like wild
animals. At one place, where a high oak tree marked the meeting of three
roads, two bodies dangling from one of the branches showed that the
fears of the villagers were based upon experience. These poor men had in
all likelihood been hanged because the amount of their little hoardings
had not come up to the expectations of their plunderers; or because,
having given all to one band of robbers, they had nothing with which
to appease the next. At last, when I was fairly weary of my fruitless
search for food, I espied a windmill standing upon a green hill at
the other side of some fields. Judging from its appearance that it had
escaped the general pillage, I took the pathway which branched away to
it from the high-road. (Note J, Appendix)

1. The incident is historically true, and may serve to show what sort of
men they were who had learned their soldiering under Cromwell.



Chapter XXXIII. Of my Perilous Adventure at the Mill

At the base of the mill there stood a shed which was evidently used to
stall the horses which brought the farmers' grain. Some grass was heaped
up inside it, so I loosened Covenant's girths and left him to have a
hearty meal. The mill itself appeared to be silent and empty. I climbed
the steep wood ladder, and pushing the door open, walked into a round
stone-flagged room, from which a second ladder led to the loft above. On
one side of this chamber was a long wooden box, and all round the walls
were ranged rows of sacks full of flour. In the fireplace stood a pile
of faggots ready for lighting, so with the aid of my tinder-box I soon
had a cheerful blaze. Taking a large handful of flour from the nearest
bag I moistened it with water from a pitcher, and having rolled it out
into a flat cake, proceeded to bake it, smiling the while to think of
what my mother would say to such rough cookery. Very sure I am that
Patrick Lamb himself, whose book, the 'Complete Court Cook,' was ever in
the dear soul's left hand while she stirred and basted with her right,
could not have turned out a dish which was more to my taste at the
moment, for I had not even patience to wait for the browning of it, but
snapped it up and devoured it half hot. I then rolled a second one, and
having placed it before the fire, and drawn my pipe from my pocket,
I set myself to smoke, waiting with all the philosophy which I could
muster until it should be ready.

I was lost in thought, brooding sadly over the blow which the news would
be to my father, when I was startled by a loud sneeze, which sounded as
though it were delivered in my very ear. I started to my feet and gazed
all round me, but there was nothing save the solid wall behind and the
empty chamber before. I had almost come to persuade myself that I had
been the creature of some delusion, when again a crashing sneeze, louder
and more prolonged than the last, broke upon the silence. Could some one
be hid in one of the bags? Drawing my sword I walked round pricking the
great flour sacks, but without being able to find cause for the sound. I
was still marvelling over the matter when a most extraordinary chorus of
gasps, snorts, and whistles broke out, with cries of 'Oh, holy mother!'
'Blessed Redeemer!' and other such exclamations. This time there could
be no doubt as to whence the uproar came. Rushing up to the great chest
upon which I had been seated, I threw back the heavy lid and gazed in.

It was more than half full of flour, in the midst of which was
floundering some creature, which was so coated and caked with the white
powder, that it would have been hard to say that it was human were
it not for the pitiable cries which it was uttering. Stooping down I
dragged the man from his hiding-place, when he dropped upon his knees
upon the floor and yelled for mercy, raising such a cloud of dust from
every wriggle of his body that I began to cough and to sneeze. As the
skin of powder began to scale off from him, I saw to my surprise that he
was no miller or peasant, but was a man-at-arms, with a huge sword girt
to his side, looking at present not unlike a frosted icicle, and a
great steel-faced breastplate. His steel cap had remained behind in the
flour-bin, and his bright red hair, the only touch of colour about him,
stood straight up in the air with terror, as he implored me to spare his
life. Thinking that there was something familiar about his voice, I drew
my hand across his face, which set him yelling as though I had slain
him. There was no mistaking the heavy cheeks and the little greedy
eyes. It was none other than Master Tetheridge, the noisy town-clerk of
Taunton.

But how much changed from the town-clerk whom we had seen strutting, in
all the pomp and bravery of his office, before the good Mayor on the day
of our coming to Somersetshire! Where now was the ruddy colour like a
pippin in September? Where was the assured manner and the manly port? As
he knelt his great jack-boots clicked together with apprehension, and he
poured forth in a piping voice, like that of a Lincoln's Inn mumper, a
string of pleadings, excuses, and entreaties, as though I were Feversham
in person, and was about to order him to instant execution.

'I am but a poor scrivener man, your serene Highness,' he bawled.
'Indeed, I am a most unhappy clerk, your Honour, who has been driven
into these courses by the tyranny of those above him. A more loyal man,
your Grace, never wore neat's leather, but when the mayor says "Yes,"
can the clerk say "No"? Spare me, your lordship; spare a most penitent
wretch, whose only prayer is that he may be allowed to serve King James
to the last drop of his blood!'

'Do you renounce the Duke of Monmouth?' I asked, in a stern voice.

'I do--from my heart!' said he fervently.

'Then prepare to die!' I roared, whipping out my sword, 'for I am one of
his officers.'

At the sight of the steel the wretched clerk gave a perfect bellow of
terror, and falling upon his face he wriggled and twisted, until looking
up he perceived that I was laughing. On that he crawled up on to his
knees once more, and from that to his feet, glancing at me askance, as
though by no means assured of my intentions.

'You must remember me, Master Tetheridge,' I said. 'I am Captain Clarke,
of Saxon's regiment of Wiltshire foot. I am surprised, indeed, that you
should have fallen away from that allegiance to which you did not only
swear yourself, but did administer the oath to so many others.'

'Not a whit, Captain, not a whit!' he answered, resuming his old
bantam-cock manner as soon as he saw that there was no danger. 'I am
upon oath as true and as leal a man as ever I was.'

'That I can fully believe,' I answered.

'I did but dissimulate,' he continued, brushing the flour from his
person. 'I did but practise that cunning of the serpent which should
in every warrior accompany the courage of the lion. You have read your
Homer, doubtless. Eh? I too have had a touch of the humanities. I am no
mere rough soldier, however stoutly I can hold mine own at sword-play.
Master Ulysses is my type, even as thine, I take it, is Master Ajax.'

'Methinks that Master Jack-in-the-box would fit you better,' said I.
'Wilt have a half of this cake? How came you in the flour-bin?'

'Why, marry, in this wise,' he answered, with his mouth full of dough.
'It was a wile or ruse, after the fashion of the greatest commanders,
who have always been famous for concealing their movements, and lurking
where they were least expected. For when the fight was lost, and I had
cut and hacked until my arm was weary and my edge blunted, I found that
I was left alone alive of all the Taunton men. Were we on the field you
could see where I had stood by the ring of slain which would be found
within the sweep of my sword-arm. Finding that all was lost and that our
rogues were fled, I mounted our worthy Mayor's charger, seeing that the
gallant gentleman had no further need for it, and rode slowly from the
field. I promise you that there was that in my eye and bearing which
prevented their horse from making too close a pursuit of me. One trooper
did indeed throw himself across my path, but mine old back-handed cut
was too much for him. Alas, I have much upon my conscience? I have made
both widows and orphans. Why will they brave me when--God of mercy, what
is that?'

''Tis but my horse in the stall below,' I answered.

'I thought it was the dragoons,' quoth the clerk, wiping away the drops
which had started out upon his brow. 'You and I would have gone forth
and smitten them.'

'Or climbed into the flour-bin,' said I.

'I have not yet made clear to you how I came there,' he continued.
'Having ridden, then, some leagues from the field, and noting this
windmill, it did occur to me that a stout man might single-handed make
it good against a troop of horse. We have no great love of flight, we
Tetheridges. It may be mere empty pride, and yet the feeling runs strong
in the family. We have a fighting strain in us ever since my kinsman
followed Ireton's army as a sutler. I pulled up, therefore, and had
dismounted to take my observations, when my brute of a charger gave
the bridle a twitch, jerked itself free, and was off in an instant over
hedges and ditches. I had, therefore, only my good sword left to trust
to. I climbed up the ladder, and was engaged in planning how the defence
could best be conducted, when I heard the clank of hoofs, and on the
top of it you did ascend from below. I retired at once into ambush, from
which I should assuredly have made a sudden outfall or sally, had the
flour not so choked my breathing that I felt as though I had a two-pound
loaf stuck in my gizzard. For myself, I am glad that it has so come
about, for in my blind wrath I might unwittingly have done you an
injury. Hearing the clank of your sword as you did come up the ladder,
I did opine that you were one of King James's minions, the captain,
perchance, of some troop in the fields below.'

'All very clear and explicit, Master Tetheridge,' said I, re-lighting
my pipe. 'No doubt your demeanour when I did draw you from your
hiding-place was also a mere cloak for your valour. But enough of that.
It is to the future that we have to look. What are your intentions?'

'To remain with you, Captain,' said he.

'Nay, that you shall not,' I answered; 'I have no great fancy for your
companionship. Your overflowing valour may bring me into ruffles which I
had otherwise avoided.'

'Nay, nay! I shall moderate my spirit,' he cried. 'In such troublous
times you will find yourself none the worse for the company of a tried
fighting man.'

'Tried and found wanting,' said I, weary of the man's braggart talk. 'I
tell you I will go alone.'

'Nay, you need not be so hot about it,' he exclaimed, shrinking away
from me. 'In any case, we had best stay here until nightfall, when we
may make our way to the coast.'

'That is the first mark of sense that you have shown,' said I. 'The
King's horse will find enough to do with the Zoyland cider and the
Bridgewater ale. If we can pass through, I have friends on the north
coast who would give us a lift in their lugger as far as Holland.
This help I will not refuse to give you, since you are my fellow in
misfortune. I would that Saxon had stayed with me! I fear he will be
taken!'

'If you mean Colonel Saxon,' said the clerk, 'I think that he also is
one who hath much guile as well as valour. A stern, fierce soldier
he was, as I know well, having fought back to back with him for forty
minutes by the clock, against a troop of Sarsfield's horse. Plain of
speech he was, and perhaps a trifle inconsiderate of the honour of a
cavalier, but in the field it would have been well for the army had they
had more such commanders.'

'You say truly,' I answered; 'but now that we have refreshed ourselves
it is time that we bethought us of taking some rest, since we may have
far to travel this night. I would that I could lay my hand upon a flagon
of ale.'

'I would gladly drink to our further acquaintanceship in the same,'
said my companion, 'but as to the matter of slumber that may be readily
arranged. If you ascend that ladder you will find in the loft a litter
of empty sacks, upon which you can repose. For myself, I will stay down
here for a while and cook myself another cake.'

'Do you remain on watch for two hours and then arouse me,' I replied.
'I shall then keep guard whilst you sleep.' He touched the hilt of his
sword as a sign that he would be true to his post, so not without some
misgivings I climbed up into the loft, and throwing myself upon the
rude couch was soon in a deep and dreamless slumber, lulled by the low,
mournful groaning and creaking of the sails.

I was awoken by steps beside me, and found that the little clerk had
come up the ladder and was bending over me. I asked him if the time had
come for me to rouse, on which he answered in a strange quavering voice
that I had yet an hour, and that he had come up to see if there was any
service which he could render me. I was too weary to take much note
of his slinking manner and pallid cheeks, so thanking him for his
attention, I turned over and was soon asleep once more.

My next waking was a rougher and a sterner one. There came a sudden
rush of heavy feet up the ladder, and a dozen red-coats swarmed into the
room. Springing on to my feet I put out my hand for the sword which I
had laid all ready by my side, but the trusty weapon had gone. It had
been stolen whilst I slumbered. Unarmed and taken at a vantage, I was
struck down and pinioned in a moment. One held a pistol to my head, and
swore that he would blow my brains out if I stirred, while the others
wound a coil of rope round my body and arms, until Samson himself could
scarce have got free. Feeling that my struggles were of no possible
avail, I lay silent and waited for whatever was to come. Neither now nor
at any time, dear children, have I laid great store upon my life, but
far less then than now, for each of you are tiny tendrils which bind me
to this world. Yet, when I think of the other dear ones who are waiting
for me on the further shore, I do not think that even now death would
seem an evil thing in my eyes. What a hopeless and empty thing would
life be without it!

Having lashed my arms, the soldiers dragged me down the ladder, as
though I had been a truss of hay, into the room beneath, which was
also crowded with troopers. In one corner was the wretched scrivener,
a picture of abject terror, with chattering teeth and trembling knees,
only prevented from falling upon the floor by the grasp of a stalwart
corporal. In front of him stood two officers, one a little hard brown
man with dark twinkling eyes and an alert manner, the other tall and
slender, with a long golden moustache, which drooped down half-way to
his shoulders. The former had my sword in his hand, and they were both
examining the blade curiously.

'It is a good bit of steel, Dick,' said one, putting the point against
the stone floor, and pressing down until he touched it with the handle.
'See, with what a snap it rebounds! No maker's name, but the date 1638
is stamped upon the pommel. Where did you get it, fellow?' he asked,
fixing his keen gaze upon my face.

'It was my father's before me,' I answered.

'Then I trust that he drew it in a better quarrel than his son hath
done,' said the taller officer, with a sneer.

'In as good, though not in a better,' I returned. 'That sword hath
always been drawn for the rights and liberties of Englishmen, and
against the tyranny of kings and the bigotry of priests.'

'What a tag for a playhouse, Dick,' cried the officer. 'How doth it
run? "The bigotry of kings and the tyranny of priests." Why, if well
delivered by Betterton close up to the footlights, with one hand upon
his heart and the other pointing to the sky, I warrant the pit would
rise at it.'

'Very like,' said the other, twirling his moustache. 'But we have no
time for fine speeches now. What are we to do with the little one?'

'Hang him,' the other answered carelessly.

'No, no, your most gracious honours,' howled Master Tetheridge, suddenly
writhing out of the corporal's grip and flinging himself upon the
floor at their feet. 'Did I not tell ye where ye could find one of the
stoutest soldiers of the rebel army? Did not I guide ye to him? Did not
I even creep up and remove his sword lest any of the King's subjects
be slain in the taking of him? Surely, surely, ye would not use me so
scurvily when I have done ye these services? Have I not made good my
words? Is he not as I described him, a giant in stature and of wondrous
strength? The whole army will bear me out in it, that he was worth any
two in single fight. I have given him over to ye. Surely ye will let me
go!'

'Very well delivered--plaguily so!' quoth the little officer, clapping
the palm of one hand softly against the back of the other. 'The emphasis
was just, and the enunciation clear. A little further back towards the
wings, corporal, if you please. Thank you! Now, Dick, it is your cue.'

'Nay, John, you are too absurd!' cried the other impatiently. 'The mask
and the buskins are well enough in their place, but you look upon the
play as a reality and upon the reality as but a play. What this reptile
hath said is true. We must keep faith with him if we wish that others of
the country folk should give up the fugitives. There is no help for it!'

'For myself I believe in Jeddart law,' his companion answered. 'I
would hang the man first and then discuss the question of our promise.
However, pink me if I will obtrude my opinion on any man!'

'Nay, it cannot be,' the taller said. 'Corporal, do you take him down.
Henderson will go with you. Take from him that plate and sword, which
his mother would wear with as good a grace. And hark ye, corporal, a few
touches of thy stirrup leathers across his fat shoulders might not be
amiss, as helping him to remember the King's dragoons.'

My treacherous companion was dragged off, struggling and yelping, and
presently a series of piercing howls, growing fainter and fainter as he
fled before his tormentors, announced that the hint had been taken. The
two officers rushed to the little window of the mill and roared with
laughter, while the troopers, peeping furtively over their shoulders,
could not restrain themselves from joining in their mirth, from which I
gathered that Master Tetheridge, as, spurred on by fear, he hurled his
fat body through hedges and into ditches, was a somewhat comical sight.

'And now for the other,' said the little officer, turning away from the
window and wiping the tears of laughter from his face. 'That beam over
yonder would serve our purpose. Where is Hangman Broderick, the Jack
Ketch of the Royals?'

'Here I am, sir,' responded a sullen, heavy-faced trooper, shuffling
forward; 'I have a rope here with a noose.'

'Throw it over the beam, then. What is amiss with your hand, you clumsy
rogue, that you should wear linen round it?'

'May it please you, sir,' the man answered, 'it was all through an
ungrateful, prick-eared Presbyterian knave whom I hung at Gommatch. I
had done all that could be done for him. Had he been at Tyburn he could
scarce have met with more attention. Yet when I did put my hand to his
neck to see that all was as it should be, he did fix me with his teeth,
and hath gnawed a great piece from my thumb.'

'I am sorry for you,' said the officer. 'You know, no doubt, that the
human bite under such circumstances is as deadly as that of the mad dog,
so that you may find yourself snapping and barking one of these fine
mornings. Nay, turn not pale! I have heard you preach patience and
courage to your victims. You are not afraid of death?'

'Not of any Christian death, your Honour. Yet, ten shillings a week is
scarce enough to pay a man for an end like that!'

'Nay, it is all a lottery,' remarked the Captain cheerily. 'I have heard
that in these cases a man is so drawn up that his heels do beat a tattoo
against the back of his head. But, mayhap, it is not as painful as it
would appear. Meanwhile, do you proceed to do your office.'

Three or four troopers caught me by the arms, but I shook them off as
best I might, and walked with, as I trust, a steady step and a cheerful
face under the beam, which was a great smoke-blackened rafter passing
from one side of the chamber to the other. The rope was thrown over
this, and the noose placed round my neck with trembling fingers by the
hangman, who took particular care to keep beyond the range of my teeth.
Half-a-dozen dragoons seized the further end of the coil, and stood
ready to swing me into eternity. Through all my adventurous life I have
never been so close upon the threshold of death as at that moment, and
yet I declare to you that, terrible as my position was, I could think
of nothing but the tattoo marks upon old Solomon Sprent's arm, and the
cunning fashion in which he had interwoven the red and the blue. Yet I
was keenly alive to all that was going on around me. The scene of the
bleak stone-floored room, the single narrow window, the two lounging
elegant officers, the pile of arms in the corner, and even the texture
of the coarse red serge and the patterns of the great brass buttons upon
the sleeve of the man who held me, are all stamped clearly upon my mind.

'We must do our work with order,' remarked the taller Captain, taking a
note-book from his pocket. 'Colonel Sarsfield may desire some details.
Let me see! This is the seventeenth, is it not?'

'Four at the farm and five at the cross-roads,' the other answered,
counting upon his fingers. 'Then there was the one whom we shot in the
hedge, and the wounded one who nearly saved himself by dying, and the
two in the grove under the hill. I can remember no more, save those who
were strung up in 'Bridgewater immediately after the action.'

'It is well to do it in an orderly fashion,' quoth the other, scribbling
in his book. 'It is very well for Kirke and his men, who are half Moors
themselves, to hang and to slaughter without discrimination or ceremony,
but we should set them a better example. What is your name, sirrah?'

'My name is Captain Micah Clarke,' I answered.

The two officers looked at each other, and the smaller one gave a long
whistle. 'It is the very man!' said he. 'This comes of asking questions!
Rat me, if I had not misgivings that it might prove to be so. They said
that he was large of limb.'

'Tell me, sirrah, have you ever known one Major Ogilvy of the Horse
Guards Blue?' asked the Captain.

'Seeing that I had the honour of taking him prisoner,' I replied, 'and
seeing also that he hath shared soldier's fare and quarters with me ever
since, I think I may fairly say that I do know him.'

'Cast loose the cord!' said the officer, and the hangman reluctantly
slipped the cord over my head once more. 'Young man, you are surely
reserved for something great, for you will never be nearer your grave
until you do actually step into it. This Major Ogilvy hath made great
interest both for you and for a wounded comrade of yours who lies at
Bridgewater. Your name hath been given to the commanders of horse, with
orders to bring you in unscathed should you be taken. Yet it is but fair
to tell you that though the Major's good word may save you from martial
law, it will stand you in small stead before a civil judge, before whom
ye must in the end take your trial.'

'I desire to share the same lot and fortune as has befallen my
companions-in-arms,' I answered.

'Nay, that is but a sullen way to take your deliverance,' cried the
smaller officer. 'The situation is as flat as sutler's beer. Otway would
have made a bettor thing of it. Can you not rise to the occasion? Where
is she?'

'She! Who?' I asked.

'She. The she. The woman. Your wife, sweetheart, betrothed, what you
will.'

'There is none such,' I answered.

'There now! What can be done in a case like that?' cried he
despairingly. 'She should have rushed in from the wings and thrown
herself upon your bosom. I have seen such a situation earn three rounds
from the pit. There is good material spoiling here for want of some one
to work it up.'

'We have something else to work up, Jack,' exclaimed his companion
impatiently. 'Sergeant Gredder, do you with two troopers conduct the
prisoner to Gommatch Church. It is time that we were once more upon our
way, for in a few hours the darkness will hinder the pursuit.'

At the word of command the troopers descended into the field where their
horses were picketed, and were speedily on the march once more, the tall
Captain leading them, and the stage-struck cornet bringing up the
rear. The sergeant to whose care I had been committed--a great
square-shouldered, dark-browed man--ordered my own horse to be brought
out, and helped me to mount it. He removed the pistols from the
holsters, however, and hung them with my sword at his own saddle-bow.

'Shall I tie his feet under the horse's belly?' asked one of the
dragoons.

'Nay, the lad hath an honest face,' the sergeant answered. 'If he
promises to be quiet we shall cast free his arms.'

'I have no desire to escape,' said I.

'Then untie the rope. A brave man in misfortune hath ever my goodwill,
strike me dumb else! Sergeant Gredder is my name, formerly of Mackay's
and now of the Royals--as hard-worked and badly-paid a man as any in
his Majesty's service. Right wheel, and down the pathway! Do ye ride
on either side, and I behind! Our carbines are primed, friend, so stand
true to your promise!'

'Nay, you can rely upon it,' I answered.

'Your little comrade did play you a scurvy trick,' said the sergeant,
'for seeing us ride down the road he did make across to us, and
bargained with the Captain that his life should be spared, on condition
that he should deliver into our hands what he described as one of the
stoutest soldiers in the rebel army. Truly you have thews and sinews
enough, though you are surely too young to have seen much service.'

'This hath been my first campaign,' I answered.

'And is like to be your last,' he remarked, with soldierly frankness. 'I
hear that the Privy Council intend to make such an example as will take
the heart out of the Whigs for twenty years to come. They have a lawyer
coming from London whose wig is more to be feared than our helmets. He
will slay more men in a day than a troop of horse in a ten-mile chase.
Faith! I would sooner they took this butcher-work into their own hands.
See those bodies on yonder tree. It is an evil season when such acorns
grow upon English oaks.'

'It is an evil season,' said I, 'when men who call themselves Christians
inflict such vengeance upon poor simple peasants, who have done no more
than their conscience urged them. That the leaders and officers should
suffer is but fair. They stood to win in case of success, and should pay
forfeit now that they have lost. But it goes to my heart to see those
poor godly country folk so treated.'

'Aye, there is truth in that,' said the sergeant. 'Now if it were some
of these snuffle-nosed preachers, the old lank-haired bell-wethers who
have led their flocks to the devil, it would be another thing. Why
can they not conform to the Church, and be plagued to them? It is good
enough for the King, so surely it is good enough for them; or are their
souls so delicate that they cannot satisfy themselves with that on which
every honest Englishman thrives? The main road to Heaven is too common
for them. They must needs have each a by-path of their own, and cry out
against all who will not follow it.'

'Why,' said I, 'there are pious men of all creeds. If a man lead a life
of virtue, what matter what he believes?

'Let a man keep his virtue in his heart,' quoth Sergeant Gredder. 'Let
him pack it deep in the knapsack of his soul. I suspect godliness
which shows upon the surface, the snuffling talk, the rolling eyes, the
groaning and the hawking. It is like the forged money, which can be told
by its being more bright and more showy than the real.'

'An apt comparison!' said I. 'But how comes it, sergeant, that you have
given attention to these matters? Unless they are much belied, the Royal
Dragoons find other things to think of.'

'I was one of Mackay's foot,' he answered shortly. 'I have heard of
him,' said I. 'A man, I believe, both of parts and of piety.'

'That, indeed, he is,' cried Sergeant Gredder warmly. 'He is a man stern
and soldierly to the outer eye, but with the heart of a saint within
him. I promise you there was little need of the strapado in his
regiment, for there was not a man who did not fear the look of sorrow in
his Colonel's eyes far more than he did the provost-marshal.'

During the whole of our long ride I found the worthy sergeant a true
follower of the excellent Colonel Mackay, for he proved to be a man of
more than ordinary intelligence, and of serious and thoughtful habit.
As to the two troopers, they rode on either side of me as silent as
statues; for the common dragoons of those days could but talk of wine
and women, and were helpless and speechless when aught else was to the
fore. When we at last rode into the little village of Gommatch, which
overlooks the plain of Sedgemoor, it was with regret on each side that I
bade my guardian adieu. As a parting favour I begged him to take charge
of Covenant for me, promising to pay a certain sum by the month for his
keep, and commissioning him to retain the horse for his own use should I
fail to claim him within the year. It was a load off my mind when I saw
my trusty companion led away, staring back at me with questioning eyes,
as though unable to understand the separation. Come what might, I knew
now that, he was in the keeping of a good man who would see that no harm
befell him.



Chapter XXXIV. Of the Coming of Solomon Sprent

The church of Gommatch was a small ivy-clad building with a square
Norman tower, standing in the centre of the hamlet of that name. Its
great oaken doors, studded with iron, and high narrow windows, fitted
it well for the use to which it was now turned. Two companies of
Dumbarton's Foot had been quartered in the village, with a portly Major
at their head, to whom I was handed over by Sergeant Gredder, with some
account of my capture, and of the reasons which had prevented my summary
execution.

Night was now drawing in, but a few dim lamps, hung here and there upon
the walls, cast an uncertain, flickering light over the scene. A hundred
or more prisoners were scattered about upon the stone floor, many of
them wounded, and some evidently dying. The hale had gathered in silent,
subdued groups round their stricken friends, and were doing what they
could to lessen their sufferings. Some had even removed the greater part
of their clothing in order to furnish head-rests and pallets for the
wounded. Here and there in the shadows dark kneeling figures might be
seen, and the measured sound of their prayers rang through the aisles,
with a groan now and again, or a choking gasp as some poor sufferer
battled for breath. The dim, yellow light streaming over the earnest
pain-drawn faces, and the tattered mud-coloured figures, would have made
it a fitting study for any of those Low Country painters whose pictures
I saw long afterwards at The Hague.

On Thursday morning, the third day after the battle, we were all
conveyed into Bridgewater, where we were confined for the remainder
of the week in St. Mary's Church, the very one from the tower of which
Monmouth and his commanders had inspected Feversham's position. The more
we heard of the fight from the soldiers and others, the more clear it
became that, but for the most unfortunate accidents, there was every
chance that our night attack might have succeeded. There was scarcely a
fault which a General could commit which Feversham had not been guilty
of. He had thought too lightly of his enemy, and left his camp entirely
open to a surprise. When the firing broke out he sprang from his couch,
but failing to find his wig, he had groped about his tent while the
battle was being decided, and only came out when it was well-nigh over.
All were agreed that had it not been for the chance of the Bussex Rhine
having been overlooked by our guides and scouts, we should have been
among the tents before the men could have been called to arms. Only
this and the fiery energy of John Churchill, the second in command,
afterwards better known under a higher name, both to French and to
English history, prevented the Royal army from meeting with a reverse
which might have altered the result of the campaign.(Note K, Appendix.)
Should ye hear or read, then, my dear children, that Monmouth's rising
was easily put down, or that it was hopeless from the first, remember
that I, who was concerned in it, say confidently that it really trembled
in the balance, and that this handful of resolute peasants with their
pikes and their scythes were within an ace of altering the whole
course of English history. The ferocity of the Privy Council, after the
rebellion was quelled, arose from their knowledge of how very close it
had been to success.

I do not wish to say too much of the cruelty and barbarity of the
victors, for it is not good for your childish ears to hear of such
doings. The sluggard Feversham and the brutal Kirke have earned
themselves a name in the West, which is second only to that of the arch
villain who came after them. As for their victims, when they had hanged
and quartered and done their wicked worst upon them, at least they left
their names in their own little villages, to be treasured up and handed
from generation to generation, as brave men and true who had died for a
noble cause. Go now to Milverton, or to Wiveliscombe, or to Minehead, or
to Colyford, or to any village through the whole breadth and length of
Somersetshire, and you will find that they have not forgotten what
they proudly call their martyrs. But where now is Kirke and where is
Feversham? Their names are preserved, it is true, but preserved in a
county's hatred. Who can fail to see now that these men in punishing
others brought a far heavier punishment upon themselves? Their sin hath
indeed found them out.

They did all that wicked and callous-hearted men could do, knowing well
that such deeds were acceptable to the cold-blooded, bigoted hypocrite
who sat upon the throne. They worked to win his favour, and they won it.
Men were hanged and cut down and hanged again. Every cross-road in the
country was ghastly with gibbets. There was not an insult or a contumely
which might make the pangs of death more unendurable, which was not
heaped upon these long-suffering men; yet it is proudly recounted in
their native shire that of all the host of victims there was not one who
did not meet his end with a firm lip, protesting that if the thing were
to do again he was ready to do it.

At the end of a week or two news came of the fugitives. Monmouth, it
seems, had been captured by Portman's yellow coats when trying to make
his way to the New Forest, whence he hoped to escape to the Continent.
He was dragged, gaunt, unshaven, and trembling, out of a bean-field in
which he had taken refuge, and was carried to Ringwood, in Hampshire.
Strange rumours reached us concerning his behaviour--rumours which came
to our ears through the coarse jests of our guards. Some said that he
had gone on his knees to the yokels who had seized him. Others that he
had written to the King offering to do anything, even to throw over the
Protestant cause, to save his head from the scaffold.(Note L, Appendix.)
We laughed at these stories at the time, and set them down as inventions
of our enemies. It seemed too impossible that at a time when his
supporters were so sternly and so loyally standing true to him, he,
their leader, with the eyes of all men upon him, should be showing less
courage than every little drummer-boy displays, who trips along at the
head of his regiment upon the field of battle. Alas! time showed that
the stories were indeed true, and that there was no depth of infamy to
which this unhappy man would not descend, in the hope of prolonging
for a few years that existence which had proved a curse to so many who
trusted him.

Of Saxon no news had come, good or bad, which encouraged me to hope that
he had found a hiding-place for himself. Reuben was still confined to
his couch by his wound, and was under the care and protection of
Major Ogilvy. The good gentleman came to see me more than once, and
endeavoured to add to my comfort, until I made him understand that it
pained me to find myself upon a different footing to the brave fellows
with whom I had shared the perils of the campaign. One great favour he
did me in writing to my father, and informing him that I was well and
in no pressing danger. In reply to this letter I had a stout Christian
answer from the old man, bidding me to be of good courage, and quoting
largely from a sermon on patience by the Reverend Josiah Seaton of
Petersfield. My mother, he said, was in deep distress at my position,
but was held up by her confidence in the decrees of Providence. He
enclosed a draft for Major Ogilvy, commissioning him to use it in
whatever way I should suggest. This money, together with the small hoard
which my mother had sewed into my collar, proved to be invaluable, for
when the gaol fever broke out amongst us I was able to get fitting food
for the sick, and also to pay for the services of physicians, so that
the disease was stamped out ere it had time to spread.

Early in August we were brought from Bridgewater to Taunton, where we
were thrown with hundreds of others into the same wool storehouse where
our regiment had been quartered in the early days of the campaign. We
gained little by the change, save that we found that our new guards
were somewhat more satiated with cruelty than our old ones, and were
therefore less exacting upon their prisoners. Not only were friends
allowed in occasionally to see us, but books and papers could be
obtained by the aid of a small present to the sergeant on duty. We were
able, therefore, to spend our time with some degree of comfort during
the month or more which passed before our trial.

One evening I was standing listlessly with my back against the wall,
looking up at a thin slit of blue sky which showed itself through the
narrow window, and fancying myself back in the meadows of Havant once
more, when a voice fell upon my ear which did, indeed, recall me to my
Hampshire home. Those deep, husky tones, rising at times into an angry
roar, could belong to none other than my old friend the seaman. I
approached the door from which the uproar came, and all doubt vanished
as I listened to the conversation.

'Won't let me pass, won't ye?' he was shouting. 'Let me tell you
I've held on my course when better men than you have asked me to veil
topsails. I tell you I have the admiral's permit, and I won't clew up
for a bit of a red-painted cock-boat; so move from athwart my hawse, or
I may chance to run you down.'

'We don't know nothing about admirals here,' said the sergeant of the
guard. 'The time for seeing prisoners is over for the day, and if you do
not take your ill-favoured body out of this I may try the weight o' my
halberd on your back.'

'I have taken blows and given them ere you were ever thought of, you
land-swab,' roared old Solomon. 'I was yardarm and yardarm with De
Ruyter when you were learning to suck milk; but, old as I am, I would
have you know that I am not condemned yet, and that I am fit to exchange
broadsides with any lobster-tailed piccaroon that ever was triced up to
a triangle and had the King's diamonds cut in his back. If I tack back
to Major Ogilvy and signal him the way that I have been welcomed, he'll
make your hide redder than ever your coat was.'

'Major Ogilvy!' exclaimed the sergeant, in a more respectful voice. 'If
you had said that your permit was from Major Ogilvy it would have been
another thing, but you did rave of admirals and commodores, and God
knows what other outlandish talk!'

'Shame on your parents that they should have reared you with so slight
a knowledge o' the King's English!' grumbled Solomon. 'In truth, friend,
it is a marvel to me why sailor men should be able to show a lead to
those on shore in the matter of lingo. For out of seven hundred men in
the ship _Worcester_--the same that sank in the Bay of Funchal--there
was not so much as a powder-boy but could understand every word that I
said, whereas on shore there is many a great jolterhead, like thyself,
who might be a Portugee for all the English that he knows, and who
stares at me like a pig in a hurricane if I do lint ask him what he
makes the reckoning, or how many bells have gone.'

'Whom is it that you would see?' asked the sergeant gruffly. 'You have a
most infernally long tongue.'

'Aye, and a rough one, too, when I have fools to deal with,' returned
the seaman. 'If I had you in my watch, lad, for a three years' cruise, I
would make a man of you yet.'

'Pass the old man through!' cried the sergeant furiously, and the sailor
came stumping in, with his bronzed face all screwed up and twisted,
partly with amusement at his victory over the sergeant, and partly from
a great chunk of tobacco which he was wont to stow within his cheek.
Having glanced round without perceiving me, he put his hands to his
mouth and bellowed out my name, with a string of 'Ahoys!' which rang
through the building.

'Here I am, Solomon,' said I, touching him on the shoulder.

'God bless you, lad! God bless you!' he cried, wringing my hand. 'I
could not see you, for my port eye is as foggy as the Newfoundland
banks, and has been ever since Long Sue Williams of the Point hove a
quart pot at it in the Tiger inn nigh thirty year agone. How are you?
All sound, alow and aloft?'

'As well as might be,' I answered. 'I have little to complain of.'

'None of your standing rigging shot away!' said he. 'No spars crippled?
No shots between wind and water, eh? You have not been hulled, nor
raked, nor laid aboard of?'

'None of these things,' said I, laughing.

'Faith! you are leaner than of old, and have aged ten years in two
months. You did go forth as smart and trim a fighting ship as over
answered helm, and now you are like the same ship when the battle and
the storm have taken the gloss from her sides and torn the love-pennants
from her peak. Yet am I right glad to see you sound in wind and limb.'

'I have looked upon sights,' said I, 'which might well add ten years to
a man's age.'

'Aye, aye!' he answered, with a hollow groan, shaking his head from side
to side. 'It is a most accursed affair. Yet, bad as the tempest is, the
calm will ever come afterwards if you will but ride it out with your
anchor placed deep in Providence. Ah, lad, that is good holding ground!
But if I know you aright, your grief is more for these poor wretches
around you than for yourself.'

'It is, indeed, a sore sight to see them suffer so patiently and
uncomplainingly,' I answered, 'and for such a man, too!'

'Aye, the chicken-livered swab!' growled the seaman, grinding his teeth.

'How are my mother and my father,' I asked, 'and how came you so far
from home?'

'Nay, I should have grounded on my beef bones had I waited longer at my
moorings. I cut my cable, therefore, and, making a northerly tack as far
as Salisbury, I run down with a fair wind. Thy father hath set his face
hard, and goes about his work as usual, though much troubled by the
Justices, who have twice had him up to Winchester for examination, but
have found his papers all right and no charge to be brought against him.
Your mother, poor soul, hath little time to mope or to pipe her eye, for
she hath such a sense of duty that, were the ship to founder under her,
it is a plate galleon to a china orange that she would stand fast in the
caboose curing marigolds or rolling pastry. They have taken to prayer
as some would to rum, and warm their hearts with it when the wind of
misfortune blows chill. They were right glad that I should come down to
you, and I gave them the word of a sailor that I would get you out of
the bilboes if it might anyhow be done.'

'Get me out, Solomon!' said I; 'nay, that may be put outside the
question. How could you get me out?'

'There are many ways,' he answered, sinking his voice to a whisper, and
nodding his grizzled head as one who talks upon what has cost him much
time and thought. 'There is scuttling.'

'Scuttling?'

'Aye, lad! When I was quartermaster of the galley _Providence_ in the
second Dutch war, we were caught betwixt a lee shore and Van Tromp's
squadron, so that after fighting until our sticks were shot away and our
scuppers were arun with blood, we were carried by boarding and sent as
prisoners to the Texel. We were stowed away in irons in the afterhold,
amongst the bilge water and the rats, with hatches battened down and
guards atop, but even then they could not keep us, for the irons got
adrift, and Will Adams, the carpenter's mate, picked a hole in the seams
so that the vessel nearly foundered, and in the confusion we fell upon
the prize crew, and, using our fetters as cudgels, regained possession
of the vessel. But you smile, as though there were little hopes from any
such plan!'

'If this wool-house were the galley _Providence_ and Taunton Deane were
the Bay of Biscay, it might be attempted,' I said.

'I have indeed got out o' the channel,' he answered, with a wrinkled
brow. 'There is, however, another most excellent plan which I have
conceived, which is to blow up the building.'

'To blow it up!' I cried.

'Aye! A brace of kegs and a slow match would do it any dark night. Then
where would be these walls which now shut ye in?'

'Where would be the folk that are now inside them!' I asked. 'Would you
not blow them up as well?'

'Plague take it, I had forgot that,' cried Solomon. 'Nay, then, I leave
it with you. What have you to propose? Do but give your sailing orders,
and, with or without a consort, you will find that I will steer by them
as long as this old hulk can answer to her helm.'

'Then my advice is, my dear old friend,' said I, 'that you leave matters
to take their course, and hie back to Havant with a message from me to
those who know me, telling them to be of good cheer, and to hope for the
best. Neither you nor any other man can help me now, for I have thrown
in my lot with these poor folk, and I would not leave them if I could.
Do what you can to cheer my mother's heart, and commend me to Zachary
Palmer. Your visit hath been a joy to me, and your return will be the
same to them. You can serve me better so than by biding here.'

'Sink me if I like going back without a blow struck,' he growled. 'Yet
if it is your will there is an end of the matter. Tell me, lad. Has
that lank-sparred, slab-sided, herring-gutted friend of yours played
you false? for if he has, by the eternal, old as I am, my hanger shall
scrape acquaintance with the longshore tuck which hangs at his girdle. I
know where he hath laid himself up, moored stem and stern, all snug and
shipshape, waiting for the turn of the tide.'

'What, Saxon!' I cried. 'Do you indeed know where he is? For God's sake
speak low, for it would mean a commission and five hundred good pounds
to any one of these soldiers could he lay hands upon him.'

'They are scarce like to do that,' said Solomon. 'On my journey hither I
chanced to put into port at a place called Bruton, where there is an
inn that will compare with most, and the skipper is a wench with a glib
tongue and a merry eye. I was drinking a glass of spiced ale, as is my
custom about six bells of the middle watch, when I chanced to notice a
great lanky carter, who was loading up a waggon in the yard with a cargo
o' beer casks. Looking closer it seemed to me that the man's nose,
like the beak of a goshawk, and his glinting eyes with the lids only
half-reefed, were known to me, but when I overheard him swearing to
himself in good High Dutch, then his figurehead came back to me in
a moment. I put out into the yard, and touched him on the shoulder.
Zounds, lad! you should have seen him spring back and spit at me like
a wildcat with every hair of his head in a bristle. He whipped a knife
from under his smock, for he thought, doubtless, that I was about to
earn the reward by handing him over to the red-coats. I told him that
his secret was safe with me, and I asked him if he had heard that you
were laid by the heels. He answered that he knew it, and that he would
be answerable that no harm befell you, though in truth it seemed to me
that he had his hands full in trimming his own sails, without acting as
pilot to another. However, there I left him, and there I shall find him
again if so be as he has done you an injury.'

'Nay,' I answered, 'I am right glad that he has found this refuge.
We did separate upon a difference of opinion, but I have no cause
to complain of him. In many ways he hath shown me both kindness and
goodwill.'

'He is as crafty as a purser's clerk,' quoth Solomon. 'I have seen
Reuben Lockarby, who sends his love to you. He is still kept in his bunk
from his wound, but he meets with good treatment. Major Ogilvy tells me
that he has made such interest for him that there is every chance that
he will gain his discharge, the more particularly since he was not
present at the battle. Your own chance of pardon would, he thinks, be
greater if you had fought less stoutly, but you have marked yourself
as a dangerous man, more especially as you have the love of many of the
common folk among the rebels.'

The good old seaman stayed with me until late in the night, listening to
my adventures, and narrating in return the simple gossip of the village,
which is of more interest to the absent wanderer than the rise and fall
of empires. Before he left he drew a great handful of silver pieces
from his pouch, and went round amongst the prisoners, listening to their
wants, and doing what he could with rough sailor talk and dropping coins
to lighten their troubles. There is a language in the kindly eye and
the honest brow which all men may understand; and though the seaman's
speeches might have been in Greek, for all that they conveyed to the
Somersetshire peasants, yet they crowded round him as he departed and
called blessings upon his head. I felt as though he had brought a whiff
of his own pure ocean breezes into our close and noisome prison, and
left us the sweeter and the healthier.

Late in August the judges started from London upon that wicked journey
which blighted the lives and the homes of so many, and hath left a
memory in the counties through which they passed which shall never fade
while a father can speak to a son. We heard reports of them from day to
day, for the guards took pleasure in detailing them with many coarse and
foul jests, that we might know what was in store for us, and lose none
of what they called the pleasures of anticipation. At Winchester the
sainted and honoured Lady Alice Lisle was sentenced by Chief Justice
Jeffreys to be burned alive, and the exertions and prayers of her
friends could scarce prevail upon him to allow her the small boon of
the axe instead of the faggot. Her graceful head was hewn from her
body amidst the groans and the cries of a weeping multitude in the
market-place of the town. At Dorchester the slaughter was wholesale.
Three hundred were condemned to death, and seventy-four were actually
executed, until the most loyal and Tory of the country squires had to
complain of the universal presence of the dangling bodies. Thence the
judges proceeded to Exeter and thence to Taunton, which they reached in
the first week of September, more like furious and ravenous beasts which
have tasted blood and cannot quench their cravings for slaughter, than
just-minded men, trained to distinguish the various degrees of guilt, or
to pick out the innocent and screen him from injustice. A rare field
was open for their cruelty, for in Taunton alone there lay a thousand
hapless prisoners, many of whom were so little trained to express their
thoughts, and so hampered by the strange dialect in which they spoke,
that they might have been born dumb for all the chance they had of
making either judge or counsel understand the pleadings which they
wished to lay before them.

It was on a Monday evening that the Lord Chief Justice made his entry.
From one of the windows of the room in which we were confined I saw him
pass. First rode the dragoons with their standards and kettledrums, then
the javelin-men with their halberds, and behind them the line of coaches
full of the high dignitaries of the law. Last of all, drawn by six
long-tailed Flemish mares, came a great open coach, thickly crusted
with gold, in which, reclining amidst velvet cushions, sat the infamous
Judge, wrapped in a cloak of crimson plush with a heavy white periwig
upon his head, which was so long that it dropped down over his
shoulders. They say that he wore scarlet in order to strike terror into
the hearts of the people, and that his courts were for the same reason
draped in the colour of blood. As for himself, it hath ever been the
custom, since his wickedness hath come to be known to all men, to
picture him as a man whose expression and features were as monstrous and
as hideous as was the mind behind them. This is by no means the case.
On the contrary, he was a man who, in his younger days, must have been
remarkable for his extreme beauty.(1) He was not, it is true, very old,
as years go, when I saw him, but debauchery and low living had left
their traces upon his countenance, without, however entirely destroying
the regularity and the beauty of his features. He was dark, more like a
Spaniard than an Englishman, with black eyes and olive complexion. His
expression was lofty and noble, but his temper was so easily aflame that
the slightest cross or annoyance would set him raving like a madman,
with blazing eyes and foaming mouth. I have seen him myself with the
froth upon his lips and his whole face twitching with passion, like
one who hath the falling sickness. Yet his other emotions were under as
little control, for I have heard say that a very little would cause him
to sob and to weep, more especially when he had himself been slighted by
those who were above him. He was, I believe, a man who had great powers
either for good or for evil, but by pandering to the darker side of
his nature and neglecting the other, he brought himself to be as near
a fiend as it is possible for a man to be. It must indeed have been an
evil government where so vile and foul-mouthed a wretch was chosen out
to hold the scales of justice. As he drove past, a Tory gentleman
riding by the side of his coach drew his attention to the faces of
the prisoners looking out at him. He glanced up at them with a quick,
malicious gleam of his white teeth, then settled down again amongst the
cushions. I observed that as he passed not a hat was raised among the
crowd, and that even the rude soldiers appeared to look upon him half
in terror, half in disgust, as a lion might look upon some foul,
blood-sucking bat which battened upon the prey which he had himself
struck down.

(1) The painting of Jeffreys in the National Portrait Gallery more
than bears out Micah Clarke's remarks. He is the handsomest man in the
collection.



Chapter XXXV. Of the Devil in Wig and Gown

There was no delay in the work of slaughter. That very night the great
gallows was erected outside the White Hart inn. Hour after hour we could
hear the blows of mallets and the sawing of beams, mingled with the
shoutings and the ribald choruses of the Chief Justice's suite, who were
carousing with the officers of the Tangiers regiment in the front room,
which overlooked the gibbet. Amongst the prisoners the night was passed
in prayer and meditation, the stout-hearted holding forth to their
weaker brethren, and exhorting them to play the man, and to go to
their death in a fashion which should be an example to true Protestants
throughout the world. The Puritan divines had been mostly strung up
off-hand immediately after the battle, but a few were left to sustain
the courage of their flocks, and to show them the way upon the scaffold.
Never have I seen anything so admirable as the cool and cheerful bravery
wherewith these poor clowns faced their fate. Their courage on the
battlefield paled before that which they showed in the shambles of the
law. So amid the low murmur of prayer and appeals for mercy to God from
tongues which never yet asked mercy from man, the morning broke, the
last morning which many of us were to spend upon earth.

The court should have opened at nine, but my Lord Chief Justice was
indisposed, having sat up somewhat late with Colonel Kirke. It was
nearly eleven before the trumpeters and criers announced that he had
taken his seat. One by one my fellow-prisoners were called out by name,
the more prominent being chosen first. They went out from amongst us
amid hand-shakings and blessings, but we saw and heard no more of them,
save that a sudden fierce rattle of kettledrums would rise up now and
again, which was, as our guards told us, to drown any dying words which
might fall from the sufferers and bear fruit in the breasts of those who
heard them. With firm steps and smiling faces the roll of martyrs went
forth to their fate during the whole of that long autumn day, until the
rough soldiers of the guard stood silent and awed in the presence of
a courage which they could not but recognise as higher and nobler than
their own. Folk may call it a trial that they received, and a trial it
really was, but not in the sense that we Englishmen use it. It was but
being haled before a Judge, and insulted before being dragged to the
gibbet. The court-house was the thorny path which led to the scaffold.
What use to put a witness up, when he was shouted down, cursed at,
and threatened by the Chief Justice, who bellowed and swore until the
frightened burghers in Fore Street could hear him? I have heard from
those who were there that day that he raved like a demoniac, and that
his black eyes shone with a vivid vindictive brightness which was scarce
human. The jury shrank from him as from a venomous thing when he
turned his baleful glance upon them. At times, as I have been told, his
sternness gave place to a still more terrible merriment, and he would
lean back in his seat of justice and laugh until the tears hopped down
upon his ermine. Nearly a hundred were either executed or condemned to
death upon that opening day.

I had expected to be amongst the first of those called, and no doubt I
should have been so but for the exertions of Major Ogilvy. As it was,
the second day passed, but I still found myself overlooked. On the
third and fourth days the slaughter was slackened, not on account of
any awakening grace on the part of the Judge, but because the great Tory
landowners, and the chief supporters of the Government, had still some
bowels of compassion, which revolted at this butchery of defenceless
men. Had it not been for the influence which these gentlemen brought
to bear upon the Judge, I have no doubt at all that Jeffreys would have
hung the whole eleven hundred prisoners then confined in Taunton. As
it was, two hundred and fifty fell victims to this accursed monster's
thirst for human blood.

On the eighth day of the assizes there were but fifty of us left in
the wool warehouse. For the last few days prisoners had been tried
in batches of ten and twenty, but now the whole of us were taken in
a drove, under escort, to the court-house, where as many as could be
squeezed in were ranged in the dock, while the rest were penned, like
calves in the market, in the body of the hall. The Judge reclined in a
high chair, with a scarlet dais above him, while two other Judges, in
less elevated seats, were stationed on either side of him. On the right
hand was the jury-box, containing twelve carefully picked men--Tories
of the old school--firm upholders of the doctrines of non-resistance and
the divine right of kings. Much care had been taken by the Crown in
the choice of these men, and there was not one of them but would have
sentenced his own father had there been so much as a suspicion that he
leaned to Presbyterianism or to Whiggery. Just under the Judge was a
broad table, covered with green cloth and strewn with papers. On
the right hand of this were a long array of Crown lawyers, grim,
ferret-faced men, each with a sheaf of papers in his hands, which they
sniffed through again and again, as though they were so many bloodhounds
picking up the trail along which they were to hunt us down. On the other
side of the table sat a single fresh-faced young man, in silk gown and
wig, with a nervous, shuffling manner. This was the barrister, Master
Helstrop, whom the Crown in its clemency had allowed us for our defence,
lest any should be bold enough to say that we had not had every fairness
in our trial. The remainder of the court was filled with the servants
of the Justices' retinue and the soldiers of the garrison, who used the
place as their common lounge, looking on the whole thing as a mighty
cheap form of sport, and roaring with laughter at the rude banter and
coarse pleasantries of his Lordship.

The clerk having gabbled through the usual form that we, the prisoners
at the bar, having shaken off the fear of God, had unlawfully and
traitorously assembled, and so onwards, the Lord Justice proceeded to
take matters into his own hands, as was his wont.

'I trust that we shall come well out of this!' he broke out. 'I
trust that no judgment will fall upon this building! Was ever so much
wickedness fitted into one court-house before? Who ever saw such an
array of villainous faces? Ah, rogues, I see a rope ready for every
one of ye! Art not afraid of judgment? Art not afraid of hell-fire? You
grey-bearded rascal in the corner, how comes it that you have not had
more of the grace of God in you than to take up arms against your most
gracious and loving sovereign?'

'I have followed the guidance of my conscience, my Lord,' said the
venerable cloth-worker of Wellington, to whom he spoke.

'Ha, your conscience!' howled Jeffreys. 'A ranter with a conscience!
Where has your conscience been these two months back, you villain and
rogue? Your conscience will stand you in little stead, sirrah, when
you are dancing on nothing with a rope round your neck. Was ever such
wickedness? Who ever heard such effrontery? And you, you great hulking
rebel, have you not grace enough to cast your eyes down, but must needs
look justice in the face as though you were an honest man? Are you not
afeared, sirrah? Do you not see death close upon you?'

'I have seen that before now, my Lord, and I was not afeared,' I
answered.

'Generation of vipers!' he cried, throwing up his hands. 'The best of
fathers! The kindest of kings! See that my words are placed upon the
record, clerk! The most indulgent of parents! But wayward children
must, with all kindness, be flogged into obedience. Here he broke into
a savage grin. 'The King will save your own natural parents all further
care on your account. If they had wished to keep ye, they should have
brought ye up in better principles. Rogues, we shall be merciful to
ye--oh, merciful, merciful! How many are here, recorder?'

'Fifty and one, my Lord.'

'Oh, sink of villainy! Fifty and one as arrant knaves as ever lay on
a hurdle! Oh, what a mass of corruption have we here! Who defends the
villains?'

'I defend the prisoners, your Lordship,' replied the young lawyer.

'Master Helstrop, Master Helstrop!' cried Jeffreys, shaking his great
wig until the powder flew out of it; 'you are in all these dirty cases,
Master Helstrop. You might find yourself in a parlous condition, Master
Helstrop. I think sometimes that I see you yourself in the dock, Master
Helstrop. You may yourself soon need the help of a gentleman of the long
robe, Master Helstrop. Oh, have a care! Have a care!'

'The brief is from the Crown, your Lordship,' the lawyer answered, in a
quavering voice.

'Must I be answered back, then!' roared Jeffreys, his black eyes blazing
with the rage of a demon. 'Am I to be insulted in my own court? Is every
five-groat piece of a pleader, because he chance to have a wig and a
gown, to browbeat the Lord Justice, and to fly in the face of the ruling
of the Court? Oh, Master Helstrop, I fear that I shall live to see some
evil come upon you!'

'I crave your Lordship's pardon!' cried the faint-hearted barrister,
with his face the colour of his brief.

'Keep a guard upon your words and upon your actions?' Jeffreys answered,
in a menacing voice. 'See that you are not too zealous in the cause
of the scum of the earth. How now, then? What do these one and fifty
villains desire to say for themselves? What is their lie? Gentlemen of
the jury, I beg that ye will take particular notice of the cut-throat
faces of these men. 'Tis well that Colonel Kirke hath afforded the Court
a sufficient guard, for neither justice nor the Church is safe at their
hands.'

'Forty of them desire to plead guilty to the charge of taking up arms
against the King,' replied our barrister.

'Ah!' roared the Judge. 'Was ever such unparalleled impudence? Was there
ever such brazen effrontery? Guilty, quotha! Have they expressed their
repentance for this sin against a most kind and long-suffering monarch!
Put down those words on the record, clerk!'

'They have refused to express repentance, your Lordship!' replied the
counsel for the defence.

'Oh, the parricides! Oh, the shameless rogues!' cried the Judge. 'Put
the forty together on this side of the enclosure. Oh, gentlemen, have ye
ever seen such a concentration of vice? See how baseness and wickedness
can stand with head erect! Oh, hardened monsters! But the other eleven.
How can they expect us to believe this transparent falsehood--this
palpable device? How can they foist it upon the Court?'

'My Lord, their defence hath not yet been advanced!' stammered Master
Helstrop.

'I can sniff a lie before it is uttered,' roared the Judge, by no means
abashed. 'I can read it as quick as ye can think it. Come, come, the
Court's time is precious. Put forward a defence, or seat yourself, and
let judgment be passed.'

'These men, my Lord,' said the counsel, who was trembling until the
parchment rattled in his hand. 'These eleven men, my Lord--'

'Eleven devils, my Lord,' interrupted Jeffreys.

'They are innocent peasants, my Lord, who love God and the King, and
have in no wise mingled themselves in this recent business. They have
been dragged from their homes, my Lord, not because there was suspicion
against them, but because they could not satisfy the greed of certain
common soldiers who were balked of plunder in--'

'Oh, shame, shame!' cried Jeffreys, in a voice of thunder. 'Oh,
threefold shame, Master Helstrop! Are you not content with bolstering
up rebels, but you must go out of your way to slander the King's troops?
What is this world coming to? What, in a word, is the defence of these
rogues?'

'An alibi, your Lordship.'

'Ha! The common plea of every scoundrel. Have they witnesses?'

'We have here a list of forty witnesses, your Lordship. They are waiting
below, many of them having come great distances, and with much toil and
trouble.'

'Who are they? What are they?' cried Jeffreys.

'They are country folk, your Lordship. Cottagers and farmers, the
neighbours of these poor men, who knew them well, and can speak as to
their doings.'

'Cottagers and farmers!' the Judge shouted. 'Why, then, they are drawn
from the very class from which these men come. Would you have us believe
the oath of those who are themselves Whigs, Presbyterians, Somersetshire
ranters, the pothouse companions of the men whom we are trying? I
warrant they have arranged it all snugly over their beer--snugly,
snugly, the rogues!'

'Will you not hear the witnesses, your Lordship?' cried our counsel,
shamed into some little sense of manhood by this outrage.

'Not a word from them, sirrah,' said Jeffreys. 'It is a question whether
my duty towards my kind master the King--write down "kind master,"
clerk--doth not warrant me in placing all your witnesses in the dock as
the aiders and abettors of treason.'

'If it please your Lordship,' cried one of the prisoners, 'I have for
witnesses Mr. Johnson, of Nether Stowey, who is a good Tory, and also
Mr. Shepperton, the clergyman.'

'The more shame to them to appear in such a cause,' replied Jeffreys.
'What are we to say, gentlemen of the jury, when we see county gentry
and the clergy of the Established Church supporting treason and
rebellion in this fashion? Surely the last days are at hand! You are a
most malignant and dangerous Whig to have so far drawn them from their
duty.'

'But hear me, my Lord!' cried one of the prisoners.

'Hear you, you bellowing calf!' shouted the Judge. 'We can hear naught
else. Do you think that you are back in your conventicle, that you
should dare to raise your voice in such a fashion? Hear you, quotha! We
shall hear you at the end of a rope, ere many days.'

'We scarce think, your Lordship,' said one of the Crown lawyers,
springing to his feet amid a great rustling of papers, 'we scarce think
that it is necessary for the Crown to state any case. We have already
heard the whole tale of this most damnable and execrable attempt many
times over. The men in the dock before your Lordship have for the most
part confessed to their guilt, and of those who hold out there is not
one who has given us any reason to believe that he is innocent of
the foul crime laid to his charge. The gentlemen of the long robe are
therefore unanimously of opinion that the jury may at once be required
to pronounce a single verdict upon the whole of the prisoners.'

'Which is--?' asked Jeffreys, glancing round at the foreman--

'Guilty, your Lordship,' said he, with a grin, while his brother jurymen
nodded their heads and laughed to one another.

'Of course, of course! guilty as Judas Iscariot!' cried the Judge,
looking down with exultant eyes at the throng of peasants and burghers
before him. 'Move them a little forwards, ushers, that I may see them
to more advantage. Oh, ye cunning ones! Are ye not taken? Are ye not
compassed around? Where now can ye fly? Do ye not see hell opening
at your feet? Eh? Are ye not afraid? Oh, short, short shall be your
shrift!' The very devil seemed to be in the man, for as he spoke he
writhed with unholy laughter, and drummed his hand upon the red cushion
in front of him. I glanced round at my companions, but their faces were
all as though they had been chiselled out of marble. If he had hoped to
see a moist eye or a quivering lip, the satisfaction was denied him.

'Had I my way,' said he, 'there is not one of ye but should swing for
it. Aye, and if I had my way, some of those whose stomachs are too nice
for this work, and who profess to serve the King with their lips while
they intercede for his worst enemies, should themselves have cause to
remember Taunton assizes. Oh, most ungrateful rebels! Have ye not
heard how your most soft-hearted and compassionate monarch, the best of
men--put it down in the record, clerk--on the intercession of that great
and charitable statesman, Lord Sunderland--mark it down, clerk--hath
had pity on ye? Hath it not melted ye? Hath it not made ye loathe
yourselves? I declare, when I think of it'--here, with a sudden catching
of the breath, he burst out a-sobbing, the tears running down his
cheeks--'when I think of it, the Christian forbearance, the ineffable
mercy, it doth bring forcibly to my mind that great Judge before whom
all of us--even I--shall one day have to render an account. Shall I
repeat it, clerk, or have you it down?'

'I have it down, your Lordship.'

'Then write "sobs" in the margin. 'Tis well that the King should
know our opinion on such matters. Know, then, you most traitorous and
unnatural rebels, that this good father whom ye have spurned has stepped
in between yourselves and the laws which ye have offended. At his
command we withhold from ye the chastisement which ye have merited.
If ye can indeed pray, and if your soul-cursing conventicles have not
driven all grace out of ye, drop on your knees and offer up thanks when
I tell ye that he hath ordained that ye shall all have a free pardon.'
Here the Judge rose from his seat as though about to descend from the
tribunal, and we gazed upon each other in the utmost astonishment at
this most unlooked-for end to the trial. The soldiers and lawyers were
equally amazed, while a hum of joy and applause rose up from the few
country folk who had dared to venture within the accursed precincts.

'This pardon, however,' continued Jeffreys, turning round with a
malicious smile upon his face, 'is coupled with certain conditions and
limitations. Ye shall all be removed from here to Poole, in chains,
where ye shall find a vessel awaiting ye. With others ye shall be stowed
away in the hold of the said vessel, and conveyed at the King's expense
to the Plantations, there to be sold as slaves. God send ye masters who
will know by the free use of wood and leather to soften your stubborn
thoughts and incline your mind to better things.' He was again about to
withdraw, when one of the Crown lawyers whispered something across to
him.

'Well thought of, coz,' cried the Judge. 'I had forgot. Bring back the
prisoners, ushers! Perhaps ye think that by the Plantations I mean his
Majesty's American dominions. Unhappily, there are too many of your
breed in that part already. Ye would fall among friends who might
strengthen ye in your evil courses, and so risk your salvation. To send
ye there would be to add one brand to another and yet hope to put
out the fire. By the Plantations, therefore, I mean Barbadoes and the
Indies, where ye shall live with the other slaves, whose skins may be
blacker than yours, but I dare warrant that their souls are more white.'
With this concluding speech the trial ended, and we were led back
through the crowded streets to the prison from which we had been
brought. On either side of the street, as we passed, we could see
the limbs of former companions dangling in the wind, and their heads
grinning at us from the tops of poles and pikes. No savage country in
the heart of heathen Africa could have presented a more dreadful sight
than did the old English town of Taunton when Jeffreys and Kirke had
the ordering of it. There was death in the air, and the townsfolk crept
silently about, scarcely daring to wear black for those whom they had
loved and lost, lest it should be twisted into an act of treason.

We were scarce back in the wool-house once more when a file of
guards with a sergeant entered, escorting a long, pale-faced man with
protruding teeth, whose bright blue coat and white silk breeches,
gold-headed sword, and glancing shoe-buckles, proclaimed him to be one
of those London exquisites whom interest or curiosity had brought down
to the scene of the rebellion. He tripped along upon his tiptoes like a
French dancing-master, waving his scented kerchief in front of his
thin high nose, and inhaling aromatic salts from a blue phial which he
carried in his left hand.

'By the Lard!' he cried, 'but the stench of these filthy wretches is
enough to stap one's breath. It is, by the Lard! Smite my vitals if
I would venture among them if I were not a very rake hell. Is there a
danger of prison fever, sergeant? Heh?'

'They are all sound as roaches, your honour,' said the under-officer,
touching his cap.

'Heh, heh!' cried the exquisite, with a shrill treble laugh. 'It is
not often ye have a visit from a person of quality, I'll warrant. It
is business, sergeant, business! "Auri sacra fames"--you remember what
Virgilius Maro says, sergeant?'

'Never heard the gentleman speak, sir--at least not to my knowledge,
sir,' said the sergeant.

'Heh, heh! Never heard him speak, heh? That will do for Slaughter's,
sergeant. That will set them all in a titter at Slaughter's. Pink my
soul! but when I venture on a story the folk complain that they can't
get served, for the drawers laugh until there is no work to be got out
of them. Oh, lay me bleeding, but these are a filthy and most ungodly
crew! Let the musqueteers stand close, sergeant, lest they fly at me.'

'We shall see to that, your honour.'

'I have a grant of a dozen of them, and Captain Pogram hath offered me
twelve pounds a head. But they must be brawny rogues--strong and brawny,
for the voyage kills many, sergeant, and the climate doth also tell upon
them. Now here is one whom I must have. Yes, in very truth he is a
young man, and hath much life in him and much strength. Tick him off,
sergeant, tick him off!'

'His name is Clarke,' said the soldier. 'I have marked him down.'

'If this is the clerk I would I had a parson to match him,' cried the
fop, sniffing at his bottle. 'Do you see the pleasantry, sergeant. Heh,
heh! Does your sluggish mind rise to the occasion? Strike me purple, but
I am in excellent fettle! There is yonder man with the brown face, you
can mark him down. And the young man beside him, also. Tick him off. Ha,
he waves his hand towards me! Stand firm, sergeant! Where are my salts?
What is it, man, what is it?'

'If it plaize your han'r,' said the young peasant, 'if so be as you
have chose me to be of a pairty, I trust that you will allow my vaither
yander to go with us also.'

'Pshaw, pshaw!' cried the fop, 'you are beyond reason, you are indeed!
Who ever heard of such a thing? Honour forbids it! How could I foist
an old man upon mine honest friend, Captain Pogram. Fie, fie! Split
me asunder if he would not say that I had choused him! There is yonder
lusty fellow with the red head, sergeant! The blacks will think he is
a-fire. Those, and these six stout yokels, will make up my dozen.'

'You have indeed the pick of them,' said the sergeant.

'Aye, sink me, but I have a quick eye for horse, man, or woman! I'll
pick the best of a batch with most. Twelve twelves, close on a hundred
and fifty pieces, sergeant, and all for a few words, my friend, all for
a few words. I did but send my wife, a demmed handsome woman, mark you,
and dresses in the mode, to my good friend the secretary to ask for some
rebels. "How many?" says he. "A dozen will do," says she. It was all
done in a penstroke. What a cursed fool she was not to have asked for a
hundred! But what is this, sergeant, what is this?'

A small, brisk, pippin-faced fellow in a riding-coat and high boots had
come clanking into the wool-house with much assurance and authority,
with a great old-fashioned sword trailing behind him, and a riding-whip
switching in his hand.

'Morning, sergeant!' said he, in a loud, overbearing voice. 'You may
have heard my name? I am Master John Wooton, of Langmere House, near
Dulverton, who bestirred himself so for the King, and hath been termed
by Mr. Godolphin, in the House of Commons, one of the local pillars of
the State. Those were his words. Fine, were they not? Pillars, mark ye,
the conceit being that the State was, as it were, a palace or a temple,
and the loyal men so many pillars, amongst whom I also was one. I am a
local pillar. I have received a Royal permit, sergeant, to choose from
amongst your prisoners ten sturdy rogues whom I may sell as a reward
to me for my exertions. Draw them up, therefore, that I may make my
choice!'

'Then, sir, we are upon the same errand,' quoth the Londoner, bowing
with his hand over his heart, until his sword seemed to point straight
up to the ceiling. 'The Honourable George Dawnish, at your service! Your
very humble and devoted servant, sir! Yours to command in any or
all ways. It is a real joy and privilege to me, sir, to make your
distinguished acquaintance. Hem!'

The country squire appeared to be somewhat taken aback at this shower
of London compliments. 'Ahem, sir! Yes, sir!' said he, bobbing his head.
'Glad to see you, sir! Most damnably so! But these men, sergeant? Time
presses, for to-morrow is Shepton market, and I would fain see my old
twenty-score boar once more before he is sold. There is a beefy one.
I'll have him.'

'Ged, I've forestalled you,' cried the courtier. 'Sink me, but it gives
me real pain. He is mine.'

'Then this,' said the other, pointing with his whip.

'He is mine, too. Heh, heh, heh! Strike me stiff, but this is too
funny!'

'Od's wounds! How many are yours!' cried the Dulverton squire.

'A dozen. Heh, heh! A round dozen. All those who stand upon this side.
Pink me, but I have got the best of you there! The early bird--you know
the old saw!'

'It is a disgrace,' the squire cried hotly. 'A shame and a disgrace. We
must needs fight for the King and risk our skins, and then when all is
done, down come a drove of lacqueys in waiting, and snap up the pickings
before their betters are served.'

'Lacqueys in waiting, sir!' shrieked the exquisite. 'S'death, sir! This
toucheth mine honour very nearly! I have seen blood flow, yes, sir, and
wounds gape on less provocation. Retract, sir, retract!'

'Away, you clothes-pole!' cried the other contemptuously. 'You are come
like the other birds of carrion when the fight is o'er. Have you been
named in full Parliament? Are you a local pillar? Away, away, you
tailor's dummy!'

'You insolent clodhopper!' cried the fop. 'You most foul-mouthed
bumpkin! The only local pillar that you have ever deserved to make
acquaintance with is the whipping-post. Ha, sergeant, he lays his
hand upon his sword! Stop him, sergeant, stop him, or I may do him an
injury.'

'Nay, gentlemen,' cried the under officer. 'This quarrel must not
continue here. We must have no brawling within the prison. Yet there is
a level turf without, and as fine elbow-room as a gentleman could wish
for a breather.'

This proposal did not appear to commend itself to either of the angry
gentlemen, who proceeded to exchange the length of their swords, and to
promise that each should hear from the other before sunset. Our owner,
as I may call him, the fop, took his departure at last, and the country
squire having chosen the next ton swaggered off, cursing the courtiers,
the Londoners, the sergeant, the prisoners, and above all, the
ingratitude of the Government which had made him so small a return
for his exertions. This was but the first of many such scenes, for the
Government, in endeavouring to satisfy the claims of its supporters, had
promised many more than there were prisoners. I am grieved to say that
I have seen not only men, but even my own countrywomen, and ladies of
title to boot, wringing their hands and bewailing themselves because
they were unable to get any of the poor Somersetshire folk to sell as
slaves. Indeed, it was only with difficulty that they could be made
to see that their claim upon Government did not give them the right of
seizing any burgher or peasant who might come in their way, and shipping
him right off for the Plantations.

Well, my dear grandchildren, from night to night through this long and
weary winter I have taken you back with me into the past, and made you
see scenes the players in which are all beneath the turf, save
that perhaps here and there some greybeard like myself may have a
recollection of them. I understand that you, Joseph, have every morning
set down upon paper that which I have narrated the night before. It is
as well that you should do so, for your own children and your children's
children may find it of interest, and even perhaps take a pride in
hearing that their ancestors played a part in such scenes. But now
the spring is coming, and the green is bare of snow, so that there are
better things for you to do than to sit listening to the stories of
a garrulous old man. Nay, nay, you shake your heads, but indeed those
young limbs want exercising and strengthening and knitting together,
which can never come from sitting toasting round the blaze. Besides, my
story draws quickly to an end now, for I had never intended to tell you
more than the events connected with the Western rising. If the closing
part hath been of the dreariest, and if all doth not wind up with
the ringing of bells and the joining of hands, like the tales in the
chap-books, you must blame history and not me. For Truth is a stern
mistress, and when one hath once started off with her one must follow
on after the jade, though she lead in flat defiance of all the rules and
conditions which would fain turn that tangled wilderness the world into
the trim Dutch garden of the story-tellers.

Three days after our trial we were drawn up in North Street in front
of the Castle with others from the other prisons who were to share our
fate. We were placed four abreast, with a rope connecting each rank,
and of these ranks I counted fifty, which would bring our total to two
hundred. On each side of us rode dragoons, and in front and behind were
companies of musqueteers to prevent any attempt at rescue or escape.
In this order we set off upon the tenth day of September, amidst the
weeping and wailing of the townsfolk, many of whom saw their sons or
brothers marching off into exile without their being able to exchange a
last word or embrace with them. Some of these poor folk, doddering old
men and wrinkled, decrepit women, toiled for miles after us down the
high-road, until the rearguard of foot faced round upon them, and drove
them away with curses and blows from their ramrods.

That day we made our way through Yeovil and Sherborne, and on the morrow
proceeded over the North Downs as far as Blandford, where we were penned
together like cattle and left for the night. On the third day we
resumed our march through Wimbourne and a line of pretty Dorsetshire
villages--the last English villages which most of us were destined to
see for many a long year to come. Late in the afternoon the spars and
rigging of the shipping in Poole Harbour rose up before us, and in
another hour we had descended the steep and craggy path which leads to
the town. Here we were drawn up upon the quay opposite the broad-decked,
heavy-sparred brig which was destined to carry us into slavery. Through
all this march we met with the greatest kindness from the common people,
who flocked out from their cottages with fruit and with milk, which
they divided amongst us. At other places, at, the risk of their lives,
Dissenting ministers came forth and stood by the wayside, blessing us as
we passed, in spite of the rough jeers and oaths of the soldiers.

We were marched aboard and led below by the mate of the vessel, a tall
red-faced seaman with ear-rings in his ears, while the captain stood on
the poop with his legs apart and a pipe in his mouth, checking us off
one by one by means of a list which he held in his hand. As he looked
at the sturdy build and rustic health of the peasants, which even their
long confinement had been unable to break down, his eyes glistened, and
he rubbed his big red hands together with delight.

'Show them down, Jem!' he kept shouting to the mate. 'Stow them safe,
Jem! There's lodgings for a duchess down there, s'help me, there's
lodgings for a duchess! Pack 'em away!'

One by one we passed before the delighted captain, and down the steep
ladder which led into the hold. Here we were led along a narrow passage,
on either side of which opened the stalls which were prepared for us. As
each man came opposite to the one set aside for him he was thrown into
it by the brawny mate, and fastened down with anklets of iron by the
seaman armourer in attendance. It was dark before we were all secured,
but the captain came round with a lanthorn to satisfy himself that all
his property was really safe. I could hear the mate and him reckoning
the value of each prisoner, and counting what he would fetch in the
Barbadoes market.

'Have you served out their fodder, Jem?' he asked, flashing his light
into each stall in turn. 'Have you seen that they had their rations?'

'A rye bread loaf and a pint o' water,' answered the mate.

'Fit for a duchess, s'help me!' cried the captain. 'Look to this one,
Jem. He is a lusty rogue. Look to his great hands. He might work for
years in the rice-swamps ere the land crabs have the picking of him.'

'Aye, we'll have smart bidding amid the settlers for this lot. 'Cod,
captain, but you have made a bargain of it! Od's bud! you have done
these London fools to some purpose.'

'What is this?' roared the captain. 'Here is one who hath not touched
his allowance. How now, sirrah, art too dainty in the stomach to eat
what your betters have eaten before you?'

'I have no hairt for food, zur,' the prisoner answered.

'What, you must have your whims and fancies! You must pick and you must
choose! I tell you, sirrah, that you are mine, body and soul! Twelve
good pieces I paid for you, and now, forsooth, I am to be told that you
will not eat! Turn to it at this instant, you saucy rogue, or I shall
have you triced to the triangles!'

'Here is another,' said the mate, 'who sits ever with his head sunk upon
his breast without spirit or life.'

'Mutinous, obstinate dog!' cried the captain. 'What ails you then? Why
have you a face like an underwriter in a tempest?'

'If it plaize you, zur,' the prisoner answered, 'Oi do but think o' m'
ould mother at Wellington, and woonder who will kape her now that Oi'm
gone!'

'And what is that to me?' shouted the brutal seaman. 'How can you arrive
at your journey's end sound and hearty if you sit like a sick fowl upon
a perch? Laugh, man, and be merry, or I will give you something to weep
for. Out on you, you chicken-hearted swab, to sulk and fret like a babe
new weaned! Have you not all that heart could desire? Give him a touch
with the rope's-end, Jem, if ever you do observe him fretting. It is but
to spite us that he doth it.'

'If it please your honour,' said a seaman, coming hurriedly down from
the deck, 'there is a stranger upon the poop who will have speech with
your honour.'

'What manner of man, sirrah?'

'Surely he is a person of quality, your honour. He is as free wi' his
words as though he were the captain o' the ship. The boatswain did but
jog against him, and he swore so woundily at him and stared at him so,
wi' een like a tiger-cat, that Job Harrison says we have shipped the
devil himsel.' The men don't like the look of him, your honour!'

'Who the plague can this spark be?' said the skipper. 'Go on deck, Jem,
and tell him that I am counting my live stock, and that I shall be with
him anon.'

'Nay, your honour! There will trouble come of it unless you come up. He
swears that he will not bear to be put off, and that he must see you on
the instant.'

'Curse his blood, whoever he be!' growled the seaman. 'Every cock on
his own dunghill. What doth the rogue mean? Were he the Lord High Privy
Seal, I would have him to know that I am lord of my own quarter-deck!'
So saying, with many snorts of indignation, the mate and the captain
withdrew together up the ladder, banging the heavy hatchways down as
they passed through.

A single oil-lamp swinging from a beam in the centre of the gangway
which led between the rows of cells was the only light which was
vouchsafed us. By its yellow, murky glimmer we could dimly see the great
wooden ribs of the vessel, arching up on either side of us, and crossed
by the huge beams which held the deck. A grievous stench from foul bilge
water poisoned the close, heavy air. Every now and then, with a squeak
and a clutter, a rat would dart across the little zone of light and
vanish in the gloom upon the further side. Heavy breathing all round
me showed that my companions, wearied out by their journey and their
sufferings, had dropped into a slumber. From time to time one could hear
the dismal clank of fetters, and the start and incatching of the breath,
as some poor peasant, fresh from dreams of his humble homestead amid the
groves of the Mendips, awoke of a sudden to see the great wooden coffin
around him, and to breathe the venomous air of the prison ship.

I lay long awake full of thought both for myself and for the poor souls
around me. At last, however, the measured swash of the water against
the side of the vessel and the slight rise and fall had lulled me into
a sleep, from which I was suddenly aroused by the flashing of a light
in my eyes. Sitting up, I found several sailors gathered about me, and
a tall man with a black cloak swathed round him swinging a lanthorn over
me.

'That is the man,' he said.

'Come, mate, you are to come on deck!' said the seaman armourer. With a
few blows from his hammer he knocked the irons from my feet.

'Follow me!' said the tall stranger, and led the way up the hatchway
ladder. It was heavenly to come out into the pure air once more. The
stars were shining brightly overhead. A fresh breeze blew from the
shore, and hummed a pleasant tune among the cordage. Close beside us
the lights of the town gleamed yellow and cheery. Beyond, the moon was
peeping over the Bournemouth hills.

'This way, sir,' said the sailor, 'right aft into the cabin, sir.'

Still following my guide, I found myself in the low cabin of the brig.
A square shining table stood in the centre, with a bright swinging
lamp above it. At the further end in the glare of the light sat the
captain--his face shining with greed and expectation. On the table stood
a small pile of gold pieces, a rum-flask, glasses, a tobacco-box, and
two long pipes.

'My compliments to you, Captain Clarke,' said the skipper, bobbing his
round bristling head. 'An honest seaman's compliments to you. It seems
that we are not to be shipmates this voyage, after all.'

'Captain Micah Clarke must do a voyage of his own,' said the stranger.

At the sound of his voice I sprang round in amazement. 'Good Heavens!' I
cried, 'Saxon!'

'You have nicked it,' said he, throwing down his mantle and showing the
well-known face and figure of the soldier of fortune. 'Zounds, man! if
you can pick me out of the Solent, I suppose that I may pick you out of
this accursed rat-trap in which I find you. Tie and tie, as we say at
the green table. In truth, I was huffed with you when last we parted,
but I have had you in my mind for all that.'

'A seat and a glass, Captain Clarke,' cried the skipper. 'Od's bud! I
should think that you would be glad to raise your little finger and wet
your whistle after what you have gone through.'

I seated myself by the table with my brain in a whirl. 'This is more
than I can fathom,' said I. 'What is the meaning of it, and how comes it
about?'

'For my own part, the meaning is as clear as the glass of my binnacle,'
quoth the seaman. 'Your good friend Colonel Saxon, as I understand his
name to be, has offered me as much as I could hope to gain by selling
you in the Indies. Sink it, I may be rough and ready, but my heart is in
the right place! Aye, aye! I would not maroon a man if I could set him
free. But we have all to look for ourselves, and trade is dull.'

'Then I am free!' said I.

'You are free,' he answered. 'There is your purchase-money upon the
table. You can go where you will, save only upon the land of England,
where you are still an outlaw under sentence.'

'How have you done this, Saxon?' I asked. 'Are you not afraid for
yourself?'

'Ho, ho!' laughed the old soldier. 'I am a free man, my lad! I hold my
pardon, and care not a maravedi for spy or informer. Who should I meet
but Colonel Kirke a day or so back. Yes, lad! I met him in the street,
and I cocked my hat in his face. The villain laid his hand upon his
hilt, and I should have out bilbo and sent his soul to hell had they not
come between us. I care not the ashes of this pipe for Jeffreys or any
other of them. I can snap this finger and thumb at them, so! They would
rather see Decimus Saxon's back than his face, I promise ye!'

'But how comes this about?' I asked.

'Why, marry, it is no mystery. Cunning old birds are not to be caught
with chaff. When I left you I made for a certain inn where I could count
upon finding a friend. There I lay by for a while, en cachette, as the
Messieurs call it, while I could work out the plan that was in my head.
Donner wetter! but I got a fright from that old seaman friend of yours,
who should be sold as a picture, for he is of little use as a man. Well,
I bethought me early in the affair of your visit to Badminton, and of
the Duke of B. We shall mention no names, but you can follow my meaning.
To him I sent a messenger, to the effect that I purposed to purchase my
own pardon by letting out all that I knew concerning his double dealing
with the rebels. The message was carried to him secretly, and his
answer was that I should meet him at a certain spot by night. I sent my
messenger instead of myself, and he was found in the morning stiff and
stark, with more holes in his doublet than ever the tailor made. On
this I sent again, raising my demands, and insisting upon a speedy
settlement. He asked my conditions. I replied, a free pardon and a
command for myself. For you, money enough to land you safely in some
foreign country where you can pursue the noble profession of arms. I got
them both, though it was like drawing teeth from his head. His name hath
much power at Court just now, and the King can refuse him nothing. I
have my pardon and a command of troops in New England. For you I have
two hundred pieces, of which thirty have been paid in ransom to the
captain, while twenty are due to me for my disbursements over the
matter. In this bag you will find the odd hundred and fifty, of which
you will pay fifteen to the fishermen who have promised to see you safe
to Flushing.'

I was, as you may readily believe, my dear children, bewildered by this
sudden and most unlooked-for turn which events had taken. When Saxon had
ceased to speak I sat as one stunned, trying to realise what he had said
to me. There came a thought into my head, however, which chilled the
glow of hope and of happiness which had sprung up in me at the thought
of recovering my freedom. My presence had been a support and a comfort
to my unhappy companions. Would it not be a cruel thing to leave them in
their distress? There was not one of them who did not look to me in his
trouble, and to the best of my poor power I had befriended and consoled
them. How could I desert them now?

'I am much beholden to you, Saxon,' I said at last, speaking slowly and
with some difficulty, for the words were hard to utter. 'But I fear that
your pains have been thrown away. These poor country folk have none to
look after or assist them. They are as simple as babes, and as little
fitted to be landed in a strange country. I cannot find it in my heart
to leave them!'

Saxon burst out laughing, and leaned back in his seat with his long legs
stretched straight out and his hands in his breeches pockets.

'This is too much!' he said at last. 'I saw many difficulties in my way,
yet I did not foresee this one. You are in very truth the most contrary
man that ever stood in neat's leather. You have ever some outlandish
reason for jibbing and shying like a hot-blooded, half-broken colt. Yet
I think that I can overcome these strange scruples of yours by a little
persuasion.'

'As to the prisoners, Captain Clarke,' said the seaman, 'I'll be as good
as a father to them. S'help me, I will, on the word of an honest sailor!
If you should choose to lay out a trifle of twenty pieces upon their
comfort, I shall see that their food is such as mayhap many of them
never got at their own tables. They shall come on deck, too, in watches,
and have an hour or two o' fresh air in the day. I can't say fairer!'

'A word or two with you on deck!' said Saxon. He walked out of the cabin
and I followed him to the far end of the poop, where we stood leaning
against the bulwarks. One by one the lights had gone out in the town,
until the black ocean beat against a blacker shore.

'You need not have any fear of the future of the prisoners,' he said,
in a low whisper. 'They are not bound for the Barbadoes, nor will this
skinflint of a captain have the selling of them, for all that he is so
cocksure. If he can bring his own skin out of the business, it will be
more than I expect. He hath a man aboard his ship who would think no
more of giving him a tilt over the side than I should.'

'What mean you, Saxon?' I cried.

'Hast ever heard of a man named Marot?'

'Hector Marot! Yes, surely I knew him well. A highwayman he was, but a
mighty stout man with a kind heart beneath a thief's jacket.'

'The same. He is as you say a stout man and a resolute swordsman, though
from what I have seen of his play he is weak in stoccado, and perhaps
somewhat too much attached to the edge, and doth not give prominence
enough to the point, in which respect he neglects the advice and
teaching of the most noteworthy fencers in Europe. Well, well, folk
differ on this as on every other subject! Yet it seems to me that I
would sooner be carried off the field after using my weapon secundum
artem, than walk off unscathed after breaking the laws d'escrime.
Quarte, tierce, and saccoon, say I, and the devil take your estramacons
and passados!'

'But what of Marot?' I asked impatiently.

'He is aboard,' said Saxon. 'It appears that he was much disturbed in
his mind over the cruelties which were inflicted on the country folk
after the battle at Bridgewater. Being a man of a somewhat stern and
fierce turn of mind, his disapproval did vent itself in actions rather
than words. Soldiers were found here and there over the countryside
pistolled or stabbed, and no trace left of their assailant. A dozen or
more were cut off in this way, and soon it came to be whispered about
that Marot the highwayman was the man that did it, and the chase became
hot at his heels.'

'Well, and what then?' I asked, for Saxon had stopped to light his pipe
at the same old metal tinder-box which he had used when first I met
him. When I picture Saxon to myself it is usually of that moment that I
think, when the red glow beat upon his hard, eager, hawk-like face, and
showed up the thousand little seams and wrinkles which time and care had
imprinted upon his brown, weather-beaten skin. Sometimes in my dreams
that face in the darkness comes back to me, and his half-closed eyelids
and shifting, blinky eyes are turned towards me in his sidelong fashion,
until I find myself sitting up and holding out my hand into empty space,
half expecting to feel another thin sinewy hand close round it. A bad
man he was in many ways, my dears, cunning and wily, with little scruple
or conscience; and yet so strange a thing is human nature, and so
difficult is it for us to control our feelings, that my heart warms when
I think of him, and that fifty years have increased rather than weakened
the kindliness which I hear to him.

'I had heard,' quoth he, puffing slowly at his pipe, 'that Marot was a
man of this kidney, and also that he was so compassed round that he was
in peril of capture. I sought him out, therefore, and held council with
him. His mare, it seems, had been slain by some chance shot, and as he
was much attached to the brute, the accident made him more savage and
more dangerous than ever. He had no heart, he said, to continue in his
old trade. Indeed, he was ripe for anything--the very stuff out of which
useful tools are made. I found that in his youth he had had a training
for the sea. When I heard that, I saw my way in the snap of a petronel.'

'What then?' I asked. 'I am still in the dark.'

'Nay, it is surely plain enough to you now. Marot's end was to baffle
his pursuers and to benefit the exiles. How could he do this better than
by engaging as a seaman aboard this brig, the _Dorothy Fox_, and sailing
away from England in her? There are but thirty of a crew. Below hatches
are close on two hundred men, who, simple as they may be, are, as you
and I know, second to none in the cut-and-thrust work, without order or
discipline, which will be needed in such an affair. Marot has but to go
down amongst them some dark night, knock off their anklets, and fit them
up with a few stanchions or cudgels. Ho, ho, Micah! what think you? The
planters may dig their plantations themselves for all the help they are
like to get from West countrymen this bout.'

'It is, indeed, a well-conceived plan,' said I. 'It is a pity, Saxon,
that your ready wit and quick invention hath not had a fair field. You
are, us I know well, as fit to command armies and to order campaigns as
any man that ever bore a truncheon.'

'Mark ye there!' whispered Saxon, grasping me by the arm. 'See where
the moonlight falls beside the hatchway! Do you not see that short squat
seaman who stands alone, lost in thought, with his head sunk upon his
breast? It is Marot! I tell you that if I were Captain Pogram I would
rather have the devil himself, horns, hoofs, and tail, for my first
mate and bunk companion, than have that man aboard my ship. You need not
concern yourself about the prisoners, Micah. Their future is decided.'

'Then, Saxon,' I answered, 'it only remains for me to thank you, and to
accept the means of safety which you have placed within my reach.'

'Spoken like a man,' said he; 'is there aught which I may do for thee in
England? though, by the Mass, I may not be here very long myself, for,
as I understand, I am to be entrusted with the command of an expedition
that is fitting out against the Indians, who have ravaged the
plantations of our settlers. It will be good to get to some profitable
employment, for such a war, without either fighting or plunder, I have
never seen. I give you my word that I have scarce fingered silver since
the beginning of it. I would not for the sacking of London go through
with it again.'

'There is a friend whom Sir Gervas Jerome did commend to my care,' I
remarked; 'I have, however, already taken measures to have his wishes
carried out. There is naught else save to assure all in Havant that a
King who hath battened upon his subjects, as this one of ours hath done,
is not one who is like to keep his seat very long upon the throne of
England. When he falls I shall return, and perhaps it may be sooner than
folk think.'

'These doings in the West have indeed stirred up much ill-feeling all
over the country,' said my companion. 'On all hands I hear that there is
more hatred of the King and of his ministers than before the outbreak.
What ho, Captain Pogram, this way! We have settled the matter, and my
friend is willing to go.'

'I thought he would tack round,' the captain said, staggering towards us
with a gait which showed that he had made the rum bottle his companion
since we had left him. 'S'help me, I was sure of it! Though, by the
Mass, I don't wonder that he thought twice before leaving the _Dorothy
Fox_, for she is fitted up fit for a duchess, s'help me! Where is your
boat?'

'Alongside,' replied Saxon; 'my friend joins with me in hoping that you,
Captain Pogram, will have a pleasant and profitable voyage.'

'I am cursedly beholden to him,' said the captain, with a flourish of
his three-cornered hat.

'Also that you will reach Barbadoes in safety.'

'Little doubt of that!' quoth the captain.

'And that you will dispose of your wares in a manner which will repay
you for your charity and humanity.'

'Nay, these are handsome words,' cried the captain. 'Sir, I am your
debtor.'

A fishing-boat was lying alongside the brig. By the murky light of the
poop lanterns I could see the figures upon her deck, and the great brown
sail all ready for hoisting. I climbed the bulwark and set my foot upon
the rope-ladder which led down to her.

'Good-bye, Decimus!' said I.

'Good-bye, my lad! You have your pieces all safe?'

'I have them.'

'Then I have one other present to make you. It was brought to me by a
sergeant of the Royal Horse. It is that, Micah, on which you must now
depend for food, lodging, raiment, and all which you would have. It
is that to which a brave man can always look for his living. It is the
knife wherewith you can open the world's oyster. See, lad, it is your
sword!'

'The old sword! My father's sword!' I cried in delight, as Saxon drew
from under his mantle and handed to me the discoloured, old-fashioned
leathern sheath with the heavy brass hilt which I knew so well.

'You are now,' said he, 'one of the old and honourable guild of soldiers
of fortune. While the Turk is still snarling at the gates of Vienna
there will ever be work for strong arms and brave hearts. You will find
that among these wandering, fighting men, drawn from all climes and
nations, the name of Englishman stands high. Well I know that it will
stand none the lower for your having joined the brotherhood. I would
that I could come with you, but I am promised pay and position which it
would be ill to set aside. Farewell, lad, and may fortune go with you!'

I pressed the rough soldier's horny hand, and descended into the
fishing-boat. The rope that held us was cast off, the sail mounted up,
and the boat shot out across the bay. Onward she went and on, through
the gathering gloom--a gloom as dark and impenetrable as the future
towards which my life's bark was driving. Soon the long rise and fall
told us that we were over the harbour bar and out in the open channel.
On the land, scattered twinkling lights at long stretches marked the
line of the coast. As I gazed backwards a cloud trailed off from the
moon, and I saw the hard lines of the brig's rigging stand out against
the white cold disk. By the shrouds stood the veteran, holding to a
rope with one hand, and waving the other in farewell and encouragement.
Another groat cloud blurred out the light, and that lean sinewy figure
with its long extended arm was the last which I saw for a weary time of
the dear country where I was born and bred.



Chapter XXXVI. Of the End of it All

And so, my dear children, I come to the end of the history of a
failure--a brave failure and a noble one, but a failure none the less.
In three more years England was to come to herself, to tear the fetters
from her free limbs, and to send James and his poisonous brood flying
from her shores even as I was flying then. We had made the error of
being before our time. Yet there came days when folk thought kindly of
the lads who had fought so stoutly in the West, and when their limbs,
gathered from many a hangman's pit and waste place, were borne amid the
silent sorrow of a nation to the pretty country burial-grounds where
they would have chosen to lie. There, within the sound of the bell which
from infancy had called them to prayer, beneath the turf over which they
had wandered, under the shadow of those Mendip and Quantock Hills which
they loved so well, these brave hearts lie still and peaceful, like
tired children in the bosom of their mother. Requiescant-requiescant in
pace!

Not another word about myself, dear children. This narrative doth
already bristle with I's, as though it were an Argus which is a flash
of wit, though I doubt if ye will understand it. I set myself to tell ye
the tale of the war in the West, and that tale ye have heard, nor will
I be coaxed or cajoled into one word further. Ah! ye know well how
garrulous the old man is, and that if you could but get to Flushing with
him he would take ye to the wars of the Empire, to William's Court, and
to the second invasion of the West, which had a better outcome than the
first. But not an inch further will I budge. On to the green, ye young
rogues! Have ye not other limbs to exercise besides your ears, that ye
should be so fond of squatting round grandad's chair? If I am spared to
next winter, and if the rheumatiz keeps away, it is like that I may take
up once more the broken thread of my story.

Of the others I can only tell ye what I know. Some slipped out of my
ken entirely. Of others I have heard vague and incomplete accounts.
The leaders of the insurrection got off much more lightly than their
followers, for they found that the passion of greed was even stronger
than the passion of cruelty. Grey, Buyse, Wade, and others bought
themselves free at the price of all their possessions. Ferguson escaped.
Monmouth was executed on Tower Hill, and showed in his last moments
some faint traces of that spirit which spurted up now and again from his
feeble nature, like the momentary flash of an expiring fire.

My father and my mother lived to see the Protestant religion regain its
place once more, and to see England become the champion of the reformed
faith upon the Continent. Three years later I found them in Havant much
as I had left them, save that there were more silver hairs amongst the
brown braided tresses of my mother, and that my father's great shoulders
were a trifle bowed and his brow furrowed with the lines of care. Hand
in hand they passed onwards down life's journey, the Puritan and the
Church woman, and I have never despaired of the healing of religious
feud in England since I have seen how easy it is for two folks to retain
the strongest belief in their own creeds, and yet to bear the heartiest
love and respect for the professor of another. The days may come when
the Church and the Chapel may be as a younger and an elder brother,
each working to one end, and each joying in the other's success. Let
the contest between them be not with pike and pistol, not with court and
prison; but let the strife be which shall lead the higher life, which
shall take the broader view, which shall boast the happiest and best
cared-for poor. Then their rivalry shall be not a curse, but a blessing
to this land of England.

Reuben Lockarby was ill for many months, but when he at last recovered
he found a pardon awaiting him through the interest of Major Ogilvy.
After a time, when the troubles were all blown over, he married the
daughter of Mayor Timewell, and he still lives in Taunton, a well-to-do
and prosperous citizen. Thirty years ago there was a little Micah
Lockarby, and now I am told that there is another, the son of the first,
who promises to be as arrant a little Roundhead as ever marched to the
tuck of drum.

Of Saxon I have heard more than once. So skilfully did he use his hold
over the Duke of Beaufort, that he was appointed through his interest to
the command of an expedition which had been sent to chastise the savages
of Virginia, who had wrought great cruelties upon the settlers. There
he did so out-ambush their ambushes, and out-trick their most cunning
warriors, that he hath left a great name among them, and is still
remembered there by an Indian word which signifieth 'The long-legged
wily one with the eye of a rat.' Having at last driven the tribes far
into the wilderness he was presented with a tract of country for his
services, where he settled down. There he married, and spent the rest of
his days in rearing tobacco and in teaching the principles of war to a
long line of gaunt and slab-sided children. They tell me that a great
nation of exceeding strength and of wondrous size promises some day to
rise up on the other side of the water. If this should indeed come to
pass, it may perhaps happen that these young Saxons or their children
may have a hand in the building of it. God grant that they may never
let their hearts harden to the little isle of the sea, which is and must
ever be the cradle of their race.

Solomon Sprent married and lived for many years as happily as his
friends could wish. I had a letter from him when I was abroad, in which
he said that though his consort and he had started alone on the voyage
of wedlock, they were now accompanied by a jolly-boat and a gig. One
winter's night when the snow was on the ground he sent down for my
father, who hurried up to his house. He found the old man sitting up in
bed, with his flask of rumbo within reach, his tobacco-box beside him,
and a great brown Bible balanced against his updrawn knees. He was
breathing heavily, and was in sore distress.

'I've strained a plank, and have nine feet in the well,' said he. 'It
comes in quicker than I can put it out. In truth, friend, I have not
been seaworthy this many a day, and it is time that I was condemned and
broken up.'

My father shook his head sadly as he marked his dusky face and laboured
breathing. 'How of your soul?' he asked.

'Aye!' said Solomon, 'that's a cargo that we carry under our hatches,
though we can't see it, and had no hand in the stowing of it. I've been
overhauling the sailing orders here, and the ten articles of war, but I
can't find that I've gone so far out of my course that I may not hope to
come into the channel again.'

'Trust not in yourself, but in Christ,' said my father.

'He is the pilot, in course,' replied the old seaman. 'When I had a
pilot aboard o' my ship, however, it was my way always to keep my own
weather eye open, d'ye see, and so I'll do now. The pilot don't think
none the worse of ye for it. So I'll throw my own lead line, though I
hear as how there are no soundings in the ocean of God's mercy. Say,
friend, d'ye think this very body, this same hull o' mine, will rise
again?'

'So we are taught,' my father answered.

'I'd know it anywhere from the tattoo marks,' said Solomon. 'They was
done when I was with Sir Christopher in the West Indies, and I'd be
sorry to part with them. For myself, d'ye see, I've never borne ill-will
to any one, not even to the Dutch lubbers, though I fought three wars
wi' them, and they carried off one of my spars, and be hanged to them!
If I've let daylight into a few of them, d'ye see, it's all in good
part and by way of duty. I've drunk my share--enough to sweeten my
bilge-water--but there are few that have seen me cranky in the
upper rigging or refusing to answer to my helm. I never drew pay or
prize-money that my mate in distress was not welcome to the half of it.
As to the Polls, the less said the better. I've been a true consort
to my Phoebe since she agreed to look to me for signals. Those are my
papers, all clear and aboveboard. If I'm summoned aft this very night by
the great Lord High Admiral of all, I ain't afeared that He'll clap me
into the bilboes, for though I'm only a poor sailor man, I've got His
promise in this here book, and I'm not afraid of His going back from
it.'

My father sat with the old man for some hours and did all that he could
to comfort and assist him, for it was clear that he was sinking rapidly.
When he at last left him, with his faithful wife beside him, he grasped
the brown but wasted hand which lay above the clothes.

'I'll see you again soon,' he said.

'Yes. In the latitude of heaven,' replied the dying seaman. His
foreboding was right, for in the early hours of the morning his wife,
bending over him, saw a bright smile upon his tanned, weather-beaten
face. Raising himself upon his pillow he touched his forelock, as is
the habit of sailor-men, and so sank slowly and peacefully back into the
long sleep which wakes when the night has ceased to be.

You will ask me doubtless what became of Hector Marot and of the strange
shipload which had set sail from Poole Harbour. There was never a word
heard of them again, unless indeed a story which was spread some months
afterwards by Captain Elias Hopkins, of the Bristol ship _Caroline_, may
be taken as bearing upon their fate. For Captain Hopkins relates that,
being on his homeward voyage from our settlements, he chanced to meet
with thick fogs and a head wind in the neighbourhood of the great cod
banks. One night as he was beating about, with the weather so thick that
he could scarce see the truck of his own mast, a most strange passage
befell him. For as he and others stood upon the deck, they heard to
their astonishment the sound of many voices joined in a great chorus,
which was at first faint and distant, but which presently waxed and
increased until it appeared to pass within a stone-throw of his vessel,
when it slowly died away once more and was lost in the distance. There
were some among the crew who set the matter down as the doing of the
evil one, but, as Captain Elias Hopkins was wont to remark, it was a
strange thing that the foul fiend should choose West-country hymns for
his nightly exercise, and stranger still that the dwellers in the pit
should sing with a strong Somersetshire burr. For myself, I have little
doubt that it was indeed the _Dorothy Fox_ which had swept past in the
fog, and that the prisoners, having won their freedom, were celebrating
their delivery in true Puritan style. Whether they were driven on to the
rocky coast of Labrador, or whether they found a home in some desolate
land whence no kingly cruelty could harry them, is what must remain for
ever unknown.

Zachariah Palmer lived for many years, a venerable and honoured old man,
before he, too, was called to his fathers. A sweet and simple village
philosopher he was, with a child's heart in his aged breast. The very
thought of him is to me as the smell of violets; for if in my views of
life and in my hopes of the future I differ somewhat from the hard and
gloomy teaching of my father, I know that I owe it to the wise words
and kindly training of the carpenter. If, as he was himself wont to
say, deeds are everything in this world and dogma is nothing, then his
sinless, blameless life might be a pattern to you and to all. May the
dust lie light upon him!

One word of another friend--the last mentioned, but not the least
valued. When Dutch William had been ten years upon the English throne
there was still to be seen in the field by my father's house a tall,
strong-boned horse, whose grey skin was flecked with dashes of white.
And it was ever observed that, should the soldiers be passing from
Portsmouth, or should the clank of trumpet or the rattle of drum break
upon his ear, he would arch his old neck, throw out his grey-streaked
tail, and raise his stiff knees in a pompous and pedantic canter. The
country folk would stop to watch these antics of the old horse, and then
the chances are that one of them would tell the rest how that charger
had borne one of their own village lads to the wars, and how, when the
rider had to fly the country, a kindly sergeant in the King's troops
had brought the steed as a remembrance of him to his father at home. So
Covenant passed the last years of his life, a veteran among steeds, well
fed and cared for, and much given, mayhap, to telling in equine language
to all the poor, silly country steeds the wonderful passages which had
befallen him in the West.



APPENDIX


Note A.--Hatred of Learning among the Puritans.

In spite of the presence in their ranks of such ripe scholars as John
Milton, Colonel Hutchinson, and others, there was among the Independents
and Anabaptists a profound distrust of learning, which is commented upon
by writers of all shades of politics. Dr. South in his sermons remarks
that 'All learning was cried down, so that with them the best preachers
were such as could not read, and the best divines such as could not
write. In all their preachments they so highly pretended to the Spirit,
that some of them could hardly spell a letter. To be blind with them was
a proper qualification of a spiritual guide, and to be book-learned, as
they called it, and to be irreligious, were almost convertible terms.
None save tradesmen and mechanics were allowed to have the Spirit, and
those only were accounted like St. Paul who could work with their hands,
and were able to make a pulpit before preaching in it.'

In the collection of loyal ballads reprinted in 1731, the Royalist bard
harps upon the same characteristic:

          'We'll down with universities
            Where learning is professed,
           Because they practise and maintain
            The language of the beast.
           We'll drive the doctors out of doors,
            And parts, whate'er they be,
           We'll cry all parts and learning down,
            And heigh, then up go we!'


Note B.--On the Speed of Couriers.

It is difficult for us in these days of steam and electricity to realise
how long it took to despatch a message in the seventeenth century, even
when the occasion was most pressing. Thus, Monmouth landed at Lyme on
the morning of Thursday, the 11th of June. Gregory Alford, the Tory
mayor of Lyme, instantly fled to Honiton, whence he despatched a
messenger to the Privy Council. Yet it was five o'clock in the morning
of Saturday, the 13th, before the news reached London, though the
distance is but 156 miles.


Note C.--On the Claims of the Lender of a Horse.

The difficulty touched upon by Decimus Saxon, as to the claim of the
lender of a horse upon the booty gained by the rider, is one frequently
discussed by writers of that date upon the usages of war. One
distinguished authority says: Praefectus turmae equitum Hispanorum, cum
proelio tuba caneret, unum ex equitibus suae turmae obvium habuit; qui
questus est quod paucis ante diebus equum suum in certamine amiserat,
propter quod non poterat imminenti proelio interesse; unde jussit
Praefectus ut unum ex suis equis conscenderet et ipsum comitaretur.
Miles, equo conscenso, inter fugandum hostes, incidit in ipsum ducem
hostilis exercitus, quem cepit et consignavit Duci exercitus Hispani,
qui a captivo vicena aureorum millia est consequutus. Dicebat Praefectus
partem pretii hujus redemptionis sibi debere, quod miles equo suo
dimicaverat, qui alias proelio interesse non potuit. Petrinus Bellus
affirmat se, cum esset Bruxellis in curia Hispaniarum Regis de hac
quaestione consultum, et censuisse, pro Praefecto facere aequitatem quae
praecipue respicitur inter milites, quorum controversiae ex aequo et
bono dirimendae sunt; unde ultra conventa quis obligatur ad id quod
alterum alteri prasstare oportet.' The case, it appears, ultimately went
against the horse-lending praefect.


Note D.--On the Pronunciation of Exquisites.

The substitution of the a for the o was a common affectation in
the speech of the fops of the period, as may be found in Vanbrugh's
_Relapse_. The notorious Titus Oates, in his efforts to be in the mode,
pushed this trick to excess, and his cries of 'Oh Lard! Oh Lard!' were
familiar sounds in Westminster Hall at the time when the Salamanca
doctor was at the flood of his fortune.


Note E.--Hour-glasses in Pulpits.

In those days it was customary to have an hour-glass stationed in
a frame of iron at the side of the pulpit, and visible to the whole
congregation. It was turned up as soon as the text was announced, and a
minister earned a name as a lazy preacher if he did not hold out until
the sand had ceased to run. If, on the other hand, he exceeded that
limit, his audience would signify by gapes and yawns that they had
had as much spiritual food as they could digest. Sir Roger L'Estrange
(_Fables_, Part II. Fab. 262) tells of a notorious spin-text who, having
exhausted his glass and being half-way through a second one, was at
last arrested in his career by a valiant sexton, who rose and departed,
remarking as he did so, 'Pray, sir, be pleased when you have done to
leave the key under the door.'


Note F.--Disturbances at the old Gast House of Little Burton.

The circumstances referred to by the Mayor of Taunton in his allusion
to the Drummer of Tedsworth are probably too well known to require
elucidation. The haunting of the old Gast House at Burton would,
however, be fresh at that time in the minds of Somersetshire folk,
occurring as it did in 1677. Some short account from documents of that
date may be of interest.

'The first night that I was there, with Hugh Mellmore and Edward Smith,
they heard as it were the washing of water over their heads. Then,
taking the candle and going up the stairs, there was a wet cloth thrown
at them, but it fell on the stairs. They, going up further, there was
another thrown as before. And when they were come up into the chamber
there stood a bowl of water, looking white, as though soap had been used
in it. The bowl just before was in the kitchen, and could not be carried
up but through the room where they were. The next thing was a terrible
noise, like a clap of thunder, and shortly afterwards they heard a great
scratching about the bedstead, and after that great knocking with a
hammer against the bed's-head, so that the two maids that were in bed
cried out for help. Then they ran up the stairs, and there lay the
hammer on the bed, and on the bed's-head there were near a thousand
prints of the hammer. The maids said that they were scratched and
pinched with a hand which had exceeding long nails.

'The second night that James Sherring and Thomas Hillary were there,
James Sherring sat down in the chimney to fill a pipe of tobacco. He
used the tongs to lift a coal to light his pipe, and by-and-by the tongs
were drawn up the stairs and were cast upon the bed. The same night one
of the maids left her shoes by the fire, and they were carried up into
the chamber, and the old man's brought down and set in their places.
As they were going upstairs there were many things thrown at them which
were just before in the low room, and when they went down the stairs the
old man's breeches were thrown down after them.

'On another night a saddle did come into the house from a pin in the
entry, and did hop about the place from table to table. It was very
troublesome to them, until they broke it into small pieces and threw
it out into the roadway. So for some weeks the haunting continued,
with rappings, scratching, movements of heavy articles, and many other
strange things, as are attested by all who were in the village, until at
last they ceased as suddenly as they had begun.'


Note G.--Monmouth's Progress in the West.

During his triumphal progress through the western shires, some years
before the rebellion, Monmouth first ventured to exhibit upon his
escutcheon the lions of England and the lilies of France, without the
baton sinister. A still more ominous sign was that he ventured to touch
for the king's evil. The appended letter, extracted from the collection
of tracts in the British Museum, may be of interest as first-hand
evidence of the occasional efficacy of that curious ceremony.

'His Grace the Duke of Monmouth honoured in his progress in the West of
England, in an account of an extraordinary cure of the king's evil.

'Given in a letter from Crewkhorn, in Somerset, from the minister of the
parish and many others.

'We, whose names are underwritten, do certify the miraculous cure of
a girl of this town, about twenty, by name Elizabeth Parcet, a poor
widow's daughter, who hath languished under sad affliction from that
distemper of the king's evil termed the joint evil, being said to be
the worst evil. For about ten or twelve years' time she had in her right
hand four running wounds, one on the inside, three on the back of her
hand, as well as two more in the same arm, one above her hand-wrist,
the other above the bending of her arm. She had betwixt her arm-pits a
swollen bunch, which the doctors said fed those six running wounds. She
had the same distemper also on her left eye, so she was almost blind.
Her mother, despairing of preserving her sight, and being not of ability
to send her to London to be touched by the king, being miserably poor,
having many poor children, and this girl not being able to work, her
mother, desirous to have her daughter cured, sent to the chirurgeons for
help, who tampered with it for some time, but could do no good. She
went likewise ten or eleven miles to a seventh son, but all in vain. No
visible hopes remained, and she expected nothing but the grave.

'But now, in this the girl's great extremity, God, the great physician,
dictates to her, then languishing in her miserable, hopeless condition,
what course to take and what to do for a cure, which was to go and touch
the Duke of Monmouth. The girl told her mother that, if she could
but touch the Duke she would be well. The mother reproved her for her
foolish conceit, but the girl did often persuade her mother to go to
Lackington to the Duke, who then lay with Mr. Speaks. "Certainly," said
she, "I should be well if I could touch him." The mother slighted these
pressing requests, but the more she slighted and reproved, the more
earnest the girl was for it. A few days after, the girl having noticed
that Sir John Sydenham intended to treat the Duke at White Lodge in
Henton Park, this girl with many of her neighbours went to the said
park. She being there timely waited the Duke's coming. When first she
observed the Duke she pressed in among a crowd of people and caught
him by the hand, his glove being on, and she likewise having a glove to
cover her wounds. She not being herewith satisfied at the first attempt
of touching his glove only, but her mind was she must touch some part
of his bare skin, she, weighing his coming forth, intended a second
attempt. The poor girl, thus between hope and fear, waited his motion.
On a sudden there was news of the Duke's coming on, which she to be
prepared rent off her glove, that was clung to the sores, in such haste
that she broke her glove, and brought away not only the sores but the
skin. The Duke's glove, as Providence would have it, the upper part hung
down, so that his hand-wrist was bare. She pressed on, and caught him
by the bare hand-wrist with her running hand, crying, "God bless your
highness!" and the Duke said "God bless you!" The girl, not a little
transported at her good success, came and assured her friends that she
would now be well. She came home to her mother in great joy, and told
her that she had touched the Duke's hand. The mother, hearing what she
had done, reproved her sharply for her boldness, asked how she durst
do such a thing, and threatened to beat her for it. She cried out, "Oh,
mother, I shall be well again, and healed of my wounds!" And as God
Almighty would have it, to the wonder and admiration of all, the six
wounds were speedily dried up, the eye became perfectly well, and the
girl was in good health. All which has been discovered to us by the
mother and daughter, and by neighbours that know her.

'Henry Clark, minister; Captain James Bale, &c &c. Whoever doubts the
truth of this relation may see the original under the hands of the
persons mentioned at the Amsterdam Coffee House, Bartholomew Lane, Royal
Exchange.'

In spite of the uncouth verbiage of the old narrative, there is a touch
of human pathos about it which makes it worthy of reproduction.


Note H.--Monmouth's Contention of Legitimacy.

Sir Patrick Hume, relating a talk with Monmouth before his expedition,
says: 'I urged if he considered himself as lawful son of King Charles,
late deceased. He said he did. I asked him if he were able to make out
and prove the marriage of his mother to King Charles, and whether he
intended to lay claim to the crown. He answered that he had been able
lately to prove the marriage, and if some persons are not lately dead,
of which he would inform himself, he would yet be able to prove it.
As for his claiming the crown, he intended not to do it unless it were
advised to be done by those who should concern themselves and join for
the delivery of the nations.'

It may be remarked that in Monmouth's commission to be general, dated
April 1668, he is styled 'our most entirely beloved and natural son.'
Again, in a commission for the government of Hull, April 1673, he is
'our well-beloved natural son.'


Note I.--Dragooners and Chargers.

The dragoons, being really mounted infantry, were provided with very
inferior animals to the real cavalry. From a letter of Cromwell's
('Squire Correspondence,' April 3, 1643), it will be seen that a
dragooner was worth twenty pieces, while a charger could not be obtained
under sixty.

Note J.--Battle of Sedgemoor.

A curious little sidelight upon the battle is afforded by the two
following letters exhibited to the Royal Archaeological Institute by the
Rev. C. W. Bingham.

'To Mrs. Chaffin at Chettle House.'

'Monday, about ye forenoon, July 6, 1685.'

'My dearest creature,--This morning about one o'clock the rebbells fell
upon us whilest we were in our tents in King's Sedgemoor, with their
whole army.... We have killed and taken at least 1000 of them. They are
fled into Bridgewater. It is said that we have taken all their cannon,
but sure it is that most are, if all be not. A coat with stars on 't is
taken. ''Tis run through the back. By some 'tis thought that the Duke
rebbell had it on and is killed, but most doe think that a servant wore
it. I wish he were called, that the wars may be ended. It's thought
he'll never be able to make his men fight again. I thank God I am very
well without the least hurt, soe are our Dorsetshire friends. Prythee
let Biddy know this by the first opportunity. I am thyne onely deare,
TOSSEY.'

BRIDGEWATER: July 7, 1685.

'We have totally routed the enemies of God and the King, and can't hear
of fifty men together of the whole rebel army. We pick them up every
houre in cornfields and ditches. Williams, the late Duke's valet de
chambre, is taken, who gives a very ingenious account of the whole
affair, which is too long to write. The last word that he said to him
was at the time when his army fled, that he was undone and must shift
for himself. We think to march with the General this day to Wells, on
his way homeward. At present he is 3 miles off at the camp, soe I can't
certainly tell whether he intends for Wells. I shall be home certainly
on Saturday at farthest. I believe my deare Nan would for 500 pounds
that her Tossey had served the King to the end of the war.

I am thyne, my deare childe, for ever.'


Note K.--Lord Grey and the Horse at Sedgemoor.

It is only fair to state that Ferguson is held by many to have been
as doughty a soldier as he was zealous in religion. His own account of
Sedgemoor is interesting, as showing what was thought by those who were
actually engaged on the causes of their failure.

'Now besides these two troops, whose officers though they had no great
skill yet had courage enough to have done something honourably, had they
not for want of a guide met with the aforesaid obstruction, there was
no one of all the rest of our troops that ever advanced to charge or
approached as near to the enemy as to give or receive a wound. Mr.
Hacker, one of our captains, came no sooner within view of their camp
than he villainously fired a pistol to give them notice of our approach,
and then forsook his charge and rode oft with all the speed he could, to
take the benefit of a proclamation emitted by the King, offering pardon
to all such as should return home within such a time. And this he
pleaded at his tryal, but was answered by Jeffreys "that he above all
other men deserved to be hanged, and that for his treachery to Monmouth
as well as his treason to the King." And though no other of our officers
acted so villainously, yet they were useless and unserviceable, as never
once attempting to charge, nor so much as keeping their men in a body.
And I dare affirm that if our horse had never fired a pistol, but only
stood in a posture to have given jealousy and apprehension to the enemy,
our foot alone would have carried the day and been triumphant. But our
horse standing scattered and disunited, and flying upon every approach
of a squadron of theirs, commanded by Oglethorpe, gave that body of
their cavalry an advantage, after they had hovered up and down in the
field without thinking it necessary to attack those whom their own fears
had dispersed, to fall in at last in the rear of our battalions, and to
wrest that victory out of their hands which they were grasping at, and
stood almost possessed of. Nor was that party of their horse above
three hundred at most, whereas we had more than enough had they had any
courage, and been commanded by a gallant man, to have attacked them
with ease both in front and flank. These things I can declare with
more certainty, because I was a doleful spectator of them; for having
contrary to my custom left attending upon the Duke, who advanced with
the foot, I betook myself to the horse, because the first of that
morning's action was expected from them, which was to break in and
disorder the enemy's camp. Against the time that our battalions should
come up, I endeavoured whatsoever I was capable of performing, for I
not only struck at several troopers who had forsaken their station, but
upbraided divers of the captains for being wanting in their duty. But I
spoke with great warmth to my Lord Grey, and conjured him to charge, and
not suffer the victory, which our foot had in a manner taken hold of,
to be ravished from us. But instead of hearkening, he not only as an
unworthy man and cowardly poltroon deserted that part of the field and
forsook his command, but rode with the utmost speed to the Duke, telling
him that all was lost and it was more than time to shift for himself.
Wherebye, as an addition to all the mischief he had been the occasion
of before, he drew the easy and unfortunate gentleman to leave the
battalions while they were courageously disputing on which side the
victory should fall. And this fell most unhappily out, while a certain
person was endeavouring to find out the Duke to have begged of him to
come and charge at the head of his own troops. However, this I dare
affirm, that if the Duke had been but master of two hundred horse,
well mounted, completely armed, personally valiant, and commanded
by experienced officers, they would have been victorious. This is
acknowledged by our enemies, who have often confessed they were ready
to fly through the impressions made upon them by our foot, and must have
been beaten had our horse done their part, and not tamely looked on
till their cavalry retrieved the day by falling into the rear of our
battalions. Nor was the fault in the private men, who had courage
to have followed their leaders, but it was in those who led them,
particularly my Lord Grey, in whom, if cowardice may be called
treachery, we may safely charge him with betraying our cause.'

Extract from MS. of Dr. Ferguson, quoted in 'Ferguson the Plotter,' an
interesting work by his immediate descendant, an advocate of Edinburgh.


Note L.--Monmouth's Attitude after Capture.

The following letter, written by Monmouth to the Queen from the Tower,
is indicative of his abject state of mind.

'Madam,--I would not take the boldness of writing to your Majesty till
I had shown the King how I do abhor the thing that I have done, and how
much I desire to live to serve him. I hope, madam, by what I have said
to the King to-day will satisfy how sincere I am, and how much I detest
all those people who have brought me to this. Having done this, madam,
I thought I was in a fitt condition to beg your intercession, which I am
sure you never refuse to the distressed, and I am sure, madam, that I
am an object of your pity, having been cousened and cheated into this
horrid business. Did I wish, madam, to live for living sake I would
never give you this trouble, but it is to have life to serve the
King, which I am able to doe, and will doe beyond what I can express.
Therefore, madam, upon such an account as I may take the boldness to
press you and beg of you to intersaid for me, for I am sure, madam, the
King will hearken to you. Your prairs can never be refused, especially
when it is begging for a life only to serve the King. I hope, madam, by
the King's generosity and goodness, and your intercession, I may hope
for my life which if I have shall be ever employed in showing to your
Majesty all the sense immaginable of gratitude, and in serving of the
King like a true subject. And ever be your Majesty's most dutiful and
obedient servant, MONMOUTH.'

THE END





MY FRIEND THE MURDERER

By A. Conan Doyle


"Number 481 is no better, doctor," said the head-warder, in a slightly
reproachful accent, looking in round the corner of my door.

"Confound 481" I responded from behind the pages of the _Australian
Sketcher_.

"And 61 says his tubes are paining him. Couldn't you do anything for
him?"

"He is a walking drug-shop," said I. "He has the whole British
pharmacopaæ inside him. I believe his tubes are as sound as yours are."

"Then there's 7 and 108, they are chronic," continued the warder,
glancing down a blue slip of paper. "And 28 knocked off work
yesterday--said lifting things gave him a stitch in the side. I want you
to have a look at him, if you don't mind, doctor. There's 81, too--him
that killed John Adamson in the Corinthian brig--he's been carrying on
awful in the night, shrieking and yelling, he has, and no stopping him
either."

"All right, I'll have a look at him afterward," I said, tossing my paper
carelessly aside, and pouring myself out a cup of coffee. "Nothing else
to report, I suppose, warder?"

The official protruded his head a little further into the room. "Beg
pardon, doctor," he said, in a confidential tone, "but I notice as 82
has a bit of a cold, and it would be a good excuse for you to visit him
and have a chat, maybe."

The cup of coffee was arrested half-way to my lips as I stared in
amazement at the man's serious face.

"An excuse?" I said. "An excuse? What the deuce are you talking about,
McPherson? You see me trudging about all day at my practise, when I'm
not looking after the prisoners, and coming back every night as tired as
a dog, and you talk about finding an excuse for doing more work."

"You'd like it, doctor," said Warder McPherson, insinuating one of his
shoulders into the room. "That man's story's worth listening to if you
could get him to tell it, though he's not what you'd call free in his
speech. Maybe you don't know who 82 is?"

"No, I don't, and I don't care either," I answered, in the conviction
that some local ruffian was about to be foisted upon me as a celebrity.

"He's Maloney," said the warder, "him that turned Queen's evidence after
the murders at Bluemansdyke."

"You don't say so?" I ejaculated, laying down my cup in astonishment. I
had heard of this ghastly series of murders, and read an account of
them in a London magazine long before setting foot in the colony. I
remembered that the atrocities committed had thrown the Burke and Hare
crimes completely into the shade, and that one of the most villainous
of the gang had saved his own skin by betraying his companions. "Are you
sure?" I asked.

"Oh, yes, it's him right enough. Just you draw him out a bit, and
he'll astonish you. He's a man to know, is Maloney; that's to say, in
moderation;" and the head grinned, bobbed, and disappeared, leaving me
to finish my breakfast and ruminate over what I had heard.

The surgeonship of an Australian prison is not an enviable position. It
may be endurable in Melbourne or Sydney, but the little town of Perth
has few attractions to recommend it, and those few had been long
exhausted. The climate was detestable, and the society far from
congenial. Sheep and cattle were the staple support of the community;
and their prices, breeding, and diseases the principal topic of
conversation. Now as I, being an outsider, possessed neither the one nor
the other, and was utterly callous to the new "dip" and the "rot" and
other kindred topics, I found myself in a state of mental isolation,
and was ready to hail anything which might relieve the monotony of my
existence. Maloney, the murderer, had at least some distinctiveness and
individuality in his character, and might act as a tonic to a mind sick
of the commonplaces of existence. I determined that I should follow the
warder's advice, and take the excuse for making his acquaintance. When,
therefore, I went upon my usual matutinal round, I turned the lock of
the door which bore the convict's number upon it, and walked into the
cell.

The man was lying in a heap upon his rough bed as I entered, but,
uncoiling his long limbs, he started up and stared at me with an
insolent look of defiance on his face which augured badly for our
interview. He had a pale, set face, with sandy hair and a steely-blue
eye, with something feline in its expression. His frame was tall and
muscular, though there was a curious bend in his shoulders, which almost
amounted to a deformity. An ordinary observer meeting him in the street
might have put him down as a well-developed man, fairly handsome, and
of studious habits--even in the hideous uniform of the rottenest convict
establishment he imparted a certain refinement to his carriage which
marked him out among the inferior ruffians around him.

"I'm not on the sick-list," he said, gruffly. There was something in the
hard, rasping voice which dispelled all softer illusions, and made me
realize that I was face to face with the man of the Lena Valley and
Bluemansdyke, the bloodiest bushranger that ever stuck up a farm or cut
the throats of its occupants.

"I know you're not," I answered. "Warder McPherson told me you had a
cold, though, and I thought I'd look in and see you."

"Blast Warder McPherson, and blast you, too!" yelled the convict, in
a paroxysm of rage. "Oh, that's right," he added in a quieter voice;
"hurry away; report me to the governor, do! Get me another six months or
so--that's your game."

"I'm not going to report you," I said.

"Eight square feet of ground," he went on, disregarding my protest, and
evidently working himself into a fury again. "Eight square feet, and I
can't have that without being talked to and stared at, and--oh, blast
the whole crew of you!" and he raised his two clinched hands above, his
head and shook them in passionate invective.

"You've got a curious idea of hospitality," I remarked, determined not
to lose my temper, and saying almost the first thing that came to my
tongue.

To my surprise the words had an extraordinary effect upon him. He seemed
completely staggered at my assuming the proposition for which he had
been so fiercely contending--namely, that the room in which he stood was
his own.

"I beg your pardon," he said; "I didn't mean to be rude. Won't you
take a seat?" and he motioned toward a rough trestle, which formed the
head-piece of his couch.

I sat down, rather astonished at the sudden change. I don't know that
I liked Maloney better under this new aspect. The murderer had, it is
true, disappeared for the nonce, but there was something in the smooth
tones and obsequious manner which powerfully suggested the witness of
the queen, who had stood up and sworn away the lives of his companions
in crime.

"How's your chest?" I asked, putting on my professional air.

"Come, drop it, doctor--drop it!" he answered, showing a row of white
teeth as he resumed his seat upon the side of the bed. "It wasn't
anxiety after my precious health that brought you along here; that story
won't wash at all. You came to have a look at Wolf Tone Maloney, forger,
murderer, Sydney-slider, ranger, and government peach. That's about my
figure, ain't it? There it is, plain and straight; there's nothing mean
about me."

He paused as if he expected me to say something; but as I remained
silent, he repeated once or twice, "There's nothing mean about me."

"And why shouldn't I?" he suddenly yelled, his eyes gleaming and his
whole satanic nature reasserting itself. "We were bound to swing, one
and all, and they were none the worse if I saved myself by turning
against them. Every man for himself, say I, and the devil take the
luckiest. You haven't a plug of tobacco, doctor, have you?"

He tore at the piece of "Barrett's" which I handed him, as ravenously as
a wild beast. It seemed to have the effect of soothing his nerves, for
he settled himself down in the bed and re-assumed his former deprecating
manner.

"You wouldn't like it yourself, you know, doctor," he said: "it's enough
to make any man a little queer in his temper. I'm in for six months this
time for assault, and very sorry I shall be to go out again, I can tell
you. My mind's at ease in here; but when I'm outside, what with the
government and what with Tattooed Tom, of Hawkesbury, there's no chance
of a quiet life."

"Who is he?" I asked.

"He's the brother of John Grimthorpe, the same that was condemned on my
evidence; and an infernal scamp he was, too! Spawn of the devil, both of
them! This tattooed one is a murderous ruffian, and he swore to have my
blood after that trial. It's seven year ago, and he's following me yet;
I know he is, though he lies low and keeps dark. He came up to me in
Ballarat in '75; you can see on the back of my hand here where the
bullet clipped me. He tried again in '76, at Port Philip, but I got the
drop on him and wounded him badly. He knifed me in '79, though, in a bar
at Adelaide, and that made our account about level. He's loafing round
again now, and he'll let daylight into me--unless--unless by some
extraordinary chance some one does as much for him." And Maloney gave a
very ugly smile.

"I don't complain of _him_ so much," he continued. "Looking at it in
his way, no doubt it is a sort of family matter that can hardly be
neglected. It's the government that fetches me. When I think of what
I've done for this country, and then of what this country has done for
me, it makes me fairly wild--clean drives me off my head. There's no
gratitude nor common decency left, doctor!"

He brooded over his wrongs for a few minutes, and then proceeded to lay
them before me in detail.

"Here's nine men," he said; "they've been murdering and killing for
a matter of three years, and maybe a life a week wouldn't more than
average the work that they've done. The government catches them and the
government tries them, but they can't convict; and why?--because the
witnesses have all had their throats cut, and the whole job's been very
neatly done. What happens then? Up comes a citizen called Wolf Tone
Maloney; he says, 'The country needs me, and here I am.' And with that
he gives his evidence, convicts the lot, and enables the beaks to hang
them. That's what I did. There's nothing mean about me! And now what
does the country do in return? Dogs me, sir, spies on me, watches me
night and day, turns against the very man that worked so very hard for
it. There's something mean about that, anyway. I didn't expect them to
knight me, nor to make me colonial secretary; but, damn it! I did expect
that they would let me alone!"

"Well," I remonstrated, "if you choose to break laws and assault people,
you can't expect it to be looked over on account of former services."

"I don't refer to my present imprisonment, sir," said Maloney, with
dignity. "It's the life I've been leading since that cursed trial that
takes the soul out of me. Just you sit there on that trestle, and I'll
tell you all about it, and then look me in the face and tell me that
I've been treated fair by the police."

I shall endeavor to transcribe the experience of the convict in his own
words, as far as I can remember them, preserving his curious perversions
of right and wrong. I can answer for the truth of his facts, whatever
may be said for his deductions from them. Months afterward, Inspector H.
W. Hann, formerly governor of the jail at Dunedin, showed me entries in
his ledger which corroborated every statement Maloney reeled the story
off in a dull, monotonous voice, with his head sunk upon his breast and
his hands between his knees. The glitter of his serpentlike eyes was the
only sign of the emotions which were stirred up by the recollection of
the events which he narrated.

*****

You've read of Bluemansdyke (he began, with some pride in his tone).
We made it hot while it lasted; but they ran us to earth at last, and a
trap called Braxton, with a damned Yankee, took the lot of us. That was
in New Zealand, of course, and they took us down to Dunedin, and there
they were convicted and hanged. One and all they put up their hands
in the dock, and cursed me till your blood would have run cold to hear
them--which was scurvy treatment, seeing that we had all been
pals together; but they were a blackguard lot, and thought only of
themselves. I think it is as well that they were hung.

They took me back to Dunedin Jail, and clapped me into the old cell.
The only difference they made was, that I had no work to do and was
well fed. I stood this for a week or two, until one day the governor was
making his rounds, and I put the matter to him.

"How's this?" I said. "My conditions were a free pardon, and you're
keeping me here against the law."

He gave a sort of a smile. "Should you like very much to get out?" he
asked.

"So much," said I, "that unless you open that door I'll have an action
against you for illegal detention."

He seemed a bit astonished by my resolution.

"You're very anxious to meet your death," he said.

"What d'ye mean?" I asked.

"Come here, and you'll know what I mean," he answered. And he led me
down the passage to a window that overlooked the door of the prison.
"Look at that!" said he.

I looked out, and there were a dozen or so rough-looking fellows
standing outside the street, some of them smoking, some playing cards
on the pavement. When they saw me they gave a yell and crowded round the
door, shaking their fists and hooting.

"They wait for you, watch and watch about," said the governor. "They're
the executive of the vigilance committee. However, since you are
determined to go, I can't stop you."

"D'ye call this a civilized land," I cried, "and let a man be murdered
in cold blood in open daylight?"

When I said this the governor and the warder and every fool in the place
grinned, as if a man's life was a rare good joke.

"You've got the law on your side," says the governor; "so we won't
detain you any longer. Show him out, warder."

He'd have done it, too, the black-hearted villain, if I hadn't begged
and prayed and offered to pay for my board and lodging, which is
more than any prisoner ever did before me. He let me stay on those
conditions; and for three months I was caged up there with every
larrikin in the township clamoring at the other side of the wall. That
was pretty treatment for a man that had served his country!

At last, one morning up came the governor again.

"Well, Maloney," he said, "how long are you going to honor us with your
society?"

I could have put a knife into his cursed body, and would, too, if we had
been alone in the bush; but I had to smile, and smooth him and flatter,
for I feared that he might have me sent out.

"You're an infernal rascal," he said; those were his very words, to a
man that had helped him all he knew how. "I don't want any rough justice
here, though; and I think I see my way to getting you out of Dunedin."

"I'll never forget you, governor," said I; "and, by God! I never will."

"I don't want your thanks nor your gratitude," he answered; "it's
not for your sake that I do it, but simply to keep order in the town.
There's a steamer starts from the West Quay to Melbourne to-morrow, and
we'll get you aboard it. She is advertised at five in the morning, so
have yourself in readiness."

I packed up the few things I had, and was smuggled out by a back door,
just before daybreak. I hurried down, took my ticket under the name
of Isaac Smith, and got safely aboard the Melbourne boat. I remember
hearing her screw grinding into the water as the warps were cast loose,
and looking back at the lights of Dunedin as I leaned upon the bulwarks,
with the pleasant thought that I was leaving them behind me forever.
It seemed to me that a new world was before me, and that all my troubles
had been cast off. I went down below and had some coffee, and came up
again feeling better than I had done since the morning that I woke
to find that cursed Irishman that took me standing over me with a
six-shooter.

Day had dawned by that time, and we were steaming along by the coast,
well out of sight of Dunedin. I loafed about for a couple of hours, and
when the sun got well up some of the other passengers came on deck and
joined me. One of them, a little perky sort of fellow, took a good long
look at me, and then came over and began talking.

"Mining, I suppose?" says he.

"Yes," I says.

"Made your pile?" he asks.

"Pretty fair," says I.

"I was at it myself," he says; "I worked at the Nelson fields for three
months, and spent all I made in buying a salted claim which busted up
the second day. I went at it again, though, and struck it rich; but when
the gold wagon was going down to the settlements, it was stuck up by
those cursed rangers, and not a red cent left."

"That was a bad job," I says.

"Broke me--ruined me clean. Never mind, I've seen them all hanged for
it; that makes it easier to bear. There's only one left--the villain
that gave the evidence. I'd die happy if I could come across him. There
are two things I have to do if I meet him."

"What's that?" says I, carelessly.

"I've got to ask him where the money lies--they never had time to make
away with it, and it's _cachéd_ somewhere in the mountains--and then
I've got to stretch his neck for him, and send his soul down to join the
men that he betrayed."

It seemed to me that I knew something about that _caché_, and I felt
like laughing; but he was watching me, and it struck me that he had a
nasty, vindictive kind of mind.

"I'm going up on the bridge," I said, for he was not a man whose
acquaintance I cared much about making.

He wouldn't hear of my leaving him, though. "We're both miners," he
says, "and we're pals for the voyage. Come down to the bar. I'm not too
poor to shout."

I couldn't refuse him well, and we went down together; and that was the
beginning of the trouble. What harm was I doing any one on the ship?
All I asked for was a quiet life, leaving others alone and getting left
alone myself. No man could ask fairer than that. And now just you listen
to what came of it.

We were passing the front of the ladies' cabin, on our way to
the saloon, when out comes a servant lass--a freckled currency
she-devil--with a baby in her arms. We were brushing past her, when she
gave a scream like a railway whistle, and nearly dropped the kid. My
nerves gave a sort of a jump when I heard that scream, but I turned and
begged her pardon, letting on that I thought I might have trod on her
foot. I knew the game was up, though, when I saw her white face, and her
leaning against the door and pointing.

"It's him!" she cried; "it's him! I saw him in the court-house. Oh,
don't let him hurt the baby!"

"Who is it?" asked the steward and half a dozen others in a breath.

"It's him--Maloney--Maloney, the murderer--oh, take him away--take him
away!"

I don't rightly remember what happened just at that moment. The
furniture and me seemed to get kind of mixed, and there was cursing,
and smashing, and some one shouting for his gold, and a general stamping
round. When I got steadied a bit, I found somebody's hand in my mouth.
From what I gathered afterward, I concluded that it belonged to that
same little man with the vicious way of talking. He got some of it out
again, but that was because the others were choking me. A poor chap can
get no fair play in this world when once he is down--still, I think he
will remember me till the day of his death--longer, I hope.

They dragged me out on to the poop and held a damned court-martial--on
_me_, mind you; _me_, that had thrown over my pals in order to serve
them. What were they to do with me? Some said this, some said that; but
it ended by the captain deciding to send me ashore. The ship stopped,
they lowered a boat, and I was hoisted in, the whole gang of them
hooting at me from over the bulwarks, I saw the man I spoke of tying up
his hand, though, and I felt that things might be worse.

I changed my opinion before we got to the land. I had reckoned on the
shore being deserted, and that I might make my way inland; but the ship
had stopped too near the Heads, and a dozen beach-combers and such like
had come down to the water's edge and were staring at us, wondering what
the boat was after. When we got to the edge of the surf the cockswain
hailed them, and after singing out who I was, he and his men threw me
into the water. You may well look surprised--neck and crop into ten feet
of water, with sharks as thick as green parrots in the bush, and I heard
them laughing as I floundered to the shore.

I soon saw it was a worse job than ever. As I came scrambling out
through the weeds, I was collared by a big chap with a velveteen coat,
and half a dozen others got round me and held me fast. Most of them
looked simple fellows enough, and I was not afraid of them; but there
was one in a cabbage-tree hat that had a very nasty expression on his
face, and the big man seemed to be chummy with him.

They dragged me up the beach, and then they let go their hold of me and
stood round in a circle.

"Well, mate," says the man with the hat, "we've been looking out for you
some time in these parts."

"And very good of you, too," I answers.

"None of your jaw," says he. "Come, boys, what shall it be--hanging,
drowning, or shooting? Look sharp!"

This looked a bit too like business. "No, you don't!" I said. "I've got
government protection, and it'll be murder."

"That's what they call it," answered the one in the velveteen coat, as
cheery as a piping crow.

"And you're going to murder me for being a ranger?"

"Ranger be damned!" said the man. "We're going to hang you for peaching
against your pals; and that's an end of the palaver."

They slung a rope round my neck and dragged me up to the edge of the
bush. There were some big she-oaks and blue-gums, and they pitched on
one of these for the wicked deed. They ran the rope over a branch, tied
my hands, and told me to say my prayers. It seemed as if it was all up;
but Providence interfered to save me. It sounds nice enough sitting here
and telling about it, sir; but it was sick work to stand with nothing
but the beach in front of you, and the long white line of surf, with the
steamer in the distance, and a set of bloody-minded villains round you
thirsting for your life.

I never thought I'd owe anything good to the police; but they saved
me that time. A troop of them were riding from Hawkes Point Station to
Dunedin, and hearing that something was up, they came down through the
bush and interrupted the proceedings. I've heard some bands in my time,
doctor, but I never heard music like the jingle of those traps' spurs
and harness as they galloped out on to the open. They tried to hang me
even then, but the police were too quick for them; and the man with the
hat got one over the head with the flat of a sword. I was clapped on
to a horse, and before evening I found myself in my old quarters in the
city jail.

The governor wasn't to be done, though. He was determined to get rid of
me, and I was equally anxious to see the last of him. He waited a week
or so until the excitement had begun to die away, and then he smuggled
me aboard a three-masted schooner bound to Sydney with tallow and hides.

We got far away to sea without a hitch, and things began to look a bit
more rosy. I made sure that I had seen the last of the prison, anyway.
The crew had a sort of an idea who I was, and if there'd been any rough
weather, they'd have hove me overboard, like enough; for they were a
rough, ignorant lot, and had a notion that I brought bad luck to the
ship. We had a good passage, however, and I was landed safe and sound
upon Sydney Quay.

Now just you listen to what happened next. You'd have thought they would
have been sick of ill-using me and following me by this time--wouldn't
you, now? Well, just you listen. It seems that a cursed steamer started
from Dunedin to Sydney on the very day we left, and got in before
us, bringing news that I was coming. Blessed if they hadn't called a
meeting--a regular mass-meeting--at the docks to discuss about it, and
I marched right into it when I landed. They didn't take long about
arresting me, and I listened to all the speeches and resolutions. If I'd
been a prince there couldn't have been more excitement. The end of all
was that they agreed that it wasn't right that New Zealand should be
allowed to foist her criminals upon her neighbors, and that I was to be
sent back again by the next boat. So they posted me off again as if
I was a damned parcel; and after another eight-hundred-mile journey I
found myself back for the third time moving in the place that I started
from.

By this time I had begun to think that I was going to spend the rest of
my existence traveling about from one port to another. Every man's
hand seemed turned against me, and there was no peace or quiet in any
direction. I was about sick of it by the time I had come back; and if
I could have taken to the bush I'd have done it, and chanced it with my
old pals. They were too quick for me, though, and kept me under lock and
key; but I managed, in spite of them, to negotiate that _caché_ I told
you of, and sewed the gold up in my belt. I spent another month in jail,
and then they slipped me aboard a bark that was bound for England.

This time the crew never knew who I was, but the captain had a pretty
good idea, though he didn't let on to me that he had any suspicions.
I guessed from the first that the man was a villain. We had a fair
passage, except a gale or two off the Cape; and I began to feel like
a free man when I saw the blue loom of the old country, and the saucy
little pilot-boat from Falmouth dancing toward us over the waves. We ran
down the Channel, and before we reached Gravesend I had agreed with the
pilot that he should take me ashore with him when he left. It was at
this time that the captain showed me that I was right in thinking him a
meddling, disagreeable man. I got my things packed, such as they were,
and left him talking earnestly to the pilot, while I went below for my
breakfast. When I came up again we were fairly into the mouth of the
river, and the boat in which I was to have gone ashore had left us. The
skipper said the pilot had forgotten me; but that was too thin, and I
began to fear that all my old troubles were going to commence once more.

It was not long before my suspicions were confirmed. A boat darted out
from the side of the river, and a tall cove with a long black beard came
aboard. I heard him ask the mate whether they didn't need a mud-pilot to
take them up in the reaches, but it seemed to me that he was a man who
would know a deal more about handcuffs than he did about steering, so
I kept away from him. He came across the deck, however, and made
some remark to me, taking a good look at me the while. I don't like
inquisitive people at any time, but an inquisitive stranger with glue
about the roots of his beard is the worst of all to stand, especially
under the circumstances. I began to feel that it was time for me to go.

I soon got a chance, and made good use of it. A big collier came athwart
the bows of our steamer, and we had to slacken down to dead slow. There
was a barge astern, and I slipped down by a rope and was into the barge
before any one missed me. Of course I had to leave my luggage behind me,
but I had the belt with the nuggets round my waist, and the chance of
shaking the police off my track was worth more than a couple of boxes.
It was clear to me now that the pilot had been a traitor, as well as the
captain, and had set the detectives after me. I often wish I could drop
across those two men again.

I hung about the barge all day as she drifted down the stream. There was
one man in her, but she was a big, ugly craft, and his hands were too
full for much looking about. Toward evening, when it got a bit dusky, I
struck out for the shore, and found myself in a sort of marsh place, a
good many miles to the east of London. I was soaking wet and half
dead with hunger, but I trudged into the town, got a new rig-out at a
slop-shop, and after having some supper, engaged a bed at the quietest
lodgings I could find.

I woke pretty early--a habit you pick up in the bush--and lucky for me
that I did so. The very first thing I saw when I took a look through a
chink in the shutter was one of these infernal policemen standing right
opposite and staring up at the windows. He hadn't epaulets nor a sword,
like our traps, but for all that there was a sort of family likeness,
and the same busybody expression. Whether they followed me all the time,
or whether the woman that let me the bed didn't like the looks of me,
is more than I have ever been able to find out. He came across as I was
watching him, and noted down the address of the house in a book. I was
afraid that he was going to ring at the bell, but I suppose his orders
were simply to keep an eye on me, for after another good look at the
windows he moved on down the street.

I saw that my only chance was to act at once. I threw on my clothes,
opened the window softly, and, after making sure that there was nobody
about, dropped out onto the ground and made off as hard as I could run.
I traveled a matter of two or three miles, when my wind gave out; and
as I saw a big building with people going in and out, I went in too,
and found that it was a railway station. A train was just going off
for Dover to meet the French boat, so I took a ticket and jumped into a
third-class carriage.

There were a couple of other chaps in the carriage, innocent-looking
young beggars, both of them. They began speaking about this and that,
while I sat quiet in the corner and listened. Then they started on
England and foreign countries, and such like. Look ye now, doctor, this
is a fact. One of them begins jawing about the justice of England's
laws. "It's all fair and above-board," says he; "there ain't any secret
police, nor spying, like they have abroad," and a lot more of the same
sort of wash. Rather rough on me, wasn't it, listening to the damned
young fool, with the police following me about like my shadow?

I got to Paris right enough, and there I changed some of my gold, and
for a few days I imagined I'd shaken them off, and began to think of
settling down for a bit of rest. I needed it by that time, for I was
looking more like a ghost than a man. You've never had the police after
you, I suppose? Well, you needn't look offended, I didn't mean any harm.
If ever you had you'd know that it wastes a man away like a sheep with
the rot.

I went to the opera one night and took a box, for I was very flush. I
was coming out between the acts when I met a fellow lounging along
in the passage. The light fell on his face, and I saw that it was the
mud-pilot that had boarded us in the Thames. His beard was gone, but I
recognized the man at a glance, for I've a good memory for faces.

I tell you, doctor, I felt desperate for a moment. I could have knifed
him if we had been alone, but he knew me well enough never to give me
the chance. It was more than I could stand any longer, so I went right
up to him and drew him aside, where we'd be free from all the loungers
and theater-goers.

"How long are you going to keep it up?" I asked him.

He seemed a bit flustered for a moment, but then he saw there was no use
beating about the bush, so he answered straight:

"Until you go back to Australia," he said.

"Don't you know," I said, "that I have served the government and got a
free pardon?"

He grinned all over his ugly face when I said this.

"We know all about you, Maloney," he answered. "If you want a quiet
life, just you go back where you came from. If you stay here, you're a
marked man; and when you are found tripping it'll be a lifer for you,
at the least. Free trade's a fine thing but the market's too full of men
like you for us to need to import any."

It seemed to me that there was something in what he said, though he had
a nasty way of putting it. For some days back I'd been feeling a sort of
homesick. The ways of the people weren't my ways. They stared at me in
the street; and if I dropped into a bar, they'd stop talking and edge
away a bit, as if I was a wild beast. I'd sooner have had a pint of old
Stringybark, too, than a bucketful of their rot-gut liquors. There
was too much damned propriety. What was the use of having money if you
couldn't dress as you liked, nor bust in properly? There was no sympathy
for a man if he shot about a little when he was half-over, I've seen a
man dropped at Nelson many a time with less row than they'd make over a
broken window-pane. The thing was slow, and I was sick of it.

"You want me to go back?" I said.

"I've my order to stick fast to you until you do," he answered.

"Well," I said, "I don't care if I do. All I bargain is that you keep
your mouth shut and don't let on who I am, so that I may have a fair
start when I get there."

He agreed to this, and we went over to Southampton the very next
day, where he saw me safely off once more. I took a passage round to
Adelaide, where no one was likely to know me; and there I settled, right
under the nose of the police. I'd been there ever since, leading a quiet
life, but for little difficulties like the one I'm in for now, and for
that devil, Tattooed Tom, of Hawkesbury. I don't know what made me
tell you all this, doctor, unless it is that being lonely makes a man
inclined to jaw when he gets a chance. Just you take warning from me,
though. Never put yourself out to serve your country; for your country
will do precious little for you. Just you let them look after their own
affairs; and if they find difficulty in hanging a set of scoundrels,
never mind chipping in, but let them alone to do as best they can. Maybe
they'll remember how they treated me after I'm dead, and be sorry for
neglecting me, I was rude to you when you came in, and swore a trifle
promiscuous: but don't you mind me, it's only my way. You'll allow,
though, that I have cause to be a bit touchy now and again when I think
of all that's passed. You're not going, are you? Well, if you must, you
must; but I hope you will look me up at odd times when you are going
your rounds. Oh, I say, you've left the balance of that cake of tobacco
behind you, haven't you? No; it's in your pocket--that's all right.
Thank ye, doctor, you're a good sort, and as quick at a hint as any man
I've met.

A couple of months after narrating his experiences, Wolf Tone Maloney
finished his term, and was released. For a long time I neither saw him
nor heard of him, and he had almost slipped from my memory, until I
was reminded, in a somewhat tragic manner, of his existence. I had been
attending a patient some distance off in the country, and was riding
back, guiding my tired horse among the boulders which strewed the
pathway, and endeavoring to see my way through the gathering darkness,
when I came suddenly upon a little wayside inn. As I walked my horse up
toward the door, intending to make sure of my bearings before proceeding
further, I heard the sound of a violent altercation within the little
bar.

There seemed to be a chorus of expostulation or remonstrance, above
which two powerful voices rang out loud and angry. As I listened, there
was a momentary hush, two pistol shots sounded almost simultaneously,
and with a crash the door burst open and a pair of dark figures
staggered out into the moonlight. They struggled for a moment in a
deadly wrestle, and then went down together among the loose stones.
I had sprung off my horse, and, with the help of half a dozen rough
fellows from the bar, dragged them away from one another.

A glance was sufficient to convince me that one of them was dying fast.
He was a thick-set burly fellow, with a determined cast of countenance.
The blood was welling from a deep stab in his throat, and it was evident
that an important artery had been divided. I turned away from him in
despair, and walked over to where his antagonist was lying. He was shot
through the lungs, but managed to raise himself up on his hand as I
approached, and peered anxiously up into my face. To my surprise, I
saw before me the haggard features and flaxen hair of my prison
acquaintance, Maloney.

"Ah, doctor!" he said, recognizing me. "How is he? Will he die?"

He asked the question so earnestly that I imagined he had softened at
the last moment, and feared to leave the world with another homicide
upon his conscience. Truth, however, compelled me to shake my head
mournfully, and to intimate that the wound would prove a mortal one.

Maloney gave a wild cry of triumph, which brought the blood welling
out from between his lips. "Here, boys," he gasped to the little group
around him. "There's money in my inside pocket. Damn the expense! Drinks
round. There's nothing mean about me. I'd drink with you, but I'm going.
Give the doc my share, for he's as good--" Here his head fell back
with a thud, his eye glazed, and the soul of Wolf Tone Maloney, forger,
convict, ranger, murderer, and government peach, drifted away into the
Great Unknown.

I cannot conclude without borrowing the account of the fatal quarrel
which appeared in the column of the _West Australian Sentinel_. The
curious will find it in the issue of October 4,1881:

     "Fatal Affray.--W. T. Maloney, a well-know citizen of New
     Montrose, and proprietor of the Yellow Boy gambling saloon,
     has met with his death under rather painful circumstances.
     Mr. Maloney was a man who had led a checkered existence, and
     whose past history is replete with interest. Some of our
     readers may recall the Lena Valley murders, in which he
     figured as the principal criminal. It is conjectured that
     during the seven months that he owned a bar in that region,
     from twenty to thirty travelers were hocussed and made away
     with.   He succeeded, however, in evading the vigilance of
     the officers of the law, and allied himself with the
     bushrangers of Bluemansdyke, whose heroic capture and
     subsequent execution are matters of history. Maloney
     extricated himself from the fate which awaited him by
     turning Queen's evidence. He afterward visited Europe, but
     returned to West Australia, where he has long played a
     prominent part in local matters. On Friday evening he
     encountered an old enemy, Thomas Grimthorpe, commonly known
     as Tattooed Tom, of Hawkesbury.

     "Shots were exchanged, and both were badly wounded, only
     surviving a few minutes. Mr. Maloney had the reputation of
     being not only the most wholesale murderer that ever lived,
     but also of having a finish and attention to detail in
     matters of evidence which has been unapproached by any
     European criminal. _Sic transit gloria mundi!_"





